Table of Contents
Praise
Title Page
Copyright Page
Dedication
Acknowledgements
Introduction
CHAPTER ONE - An Overview of Training for Climbing
Training for Climbing: A Brief History
Genetics and Climbing Performance
Limits to Climbing Performance
Training for Climbing
CHAPTER TWO - Self-Assessment and Goal Setting
Self-Assessment: The Breakfast of Champions
The Cycle of Improvement
CHAPTER THREE - Mental Training
Mental Wings for Improving Performance
Controlling Your Emotions
Dealing with Fear
Relaxation Training and Centering
Visualization Training
Creating Laserlike Focus
Mental Wings Strategies to Enhance Problem Solving and Learning
CHAPTER FOUR - Training Technique and Skill
An Overview of Motor Learning and Effective Skill Practice
Fundamental Techniques

Smart Training Drills for Enhanced Learning of Motor Skills and
Strategy
CHAPTER FIVE - Theory and Methodology of Strength Training
Overview of Strength and Fitness Training for Climbing
A Primer on Exercise Physiology
Training Principles
Training Methods
CHAPTER SIX - General Conditioning Exercises
Optimizing Body Composition
Flexibility Training
Training the Core Muscles
Training the Antagonist Muscles
An Overview of Stamina Training for Climbing
CHAPTER SEVEN - Climbing-Specific Exercises
An Overview of Sport-Specific Strength Training
Finger and Forearm Training
Pull-Muscle Training
Complex Training
CHAPTER EIGHT - Designing Your Training Program
Keys to an Effective Training Program
Designing an Effective Personal Training Program
Training Considerations for Female, Over-Fifty, and Junior
Climbers
CHAPTER NINE - Performance Nutrition
Macronutrients
Micronutrients and Sports Supplements

CHAPTER TEN - Accelerating Recovery
The Basics of Fatigue and Recovery
Accelerating Short-Term or Intraclimb Recovery
Accelerating Medium-Term or Intraday Recovery
Accelerating Long-Term or Interday Recovery
CHAPTER ELEVEN - Injury Treatment and Prevention
Overview of Climbing Injuries
Common Injuries and Treatment
Preventing Injuries
AFTERWORD
APPENDIX A - Muscular Anatomy
APPENDIX B - Training Charts
APPENDIX C - Self-Assessment Test Comments and Training Tips
APPENDIX D - Fitness Evaluation
GLOSSARY
SUGGESTED READING
REFERENCES
INDEX
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
OTHER BOOKS BY ERIC J. HÖRST

Training for Climbing

“Training for Climbing is a great resource. Whether you’re just starting out or already ticking
5.13, you’ll find valuable information here to help you climb harder. This is the most complete
and up-to-date training guide available. Better yet, it’s presented in a clean and easily
understandable format, with inspiring and illustrative photos.”
—Rock and Ice magazine

“Eric Hörst has taken complex scientific training concepts and integrated these with
contemporary research on climbing to produce a very readable and useful training guide. This
book will lead the climber to new heights of performance.”
—Phillip B. Watts, PhD, exercise physiologist
and climbing researcher, Northern Michigan University

“Hörst is uniquely positioned to bring current methods in sports psychology and exercise
science to the world of climbing, and he has hit the mark in superb style! If you are passionate
about climbing and getting better, Training for Climbing will become your dog-eared
companion!”
—Richard K. Fleming, PhD, assistant professor
of psychology, University of Massachusetts Medical School

“With comprehensive textbook-like descriptions of nutrition, recovery, weight training, and
structured workouts, Training for Climbing is a crucial addition to your climbing library. Use
this book to make 5.13 a reality instead of just a dream.”
—Michelle Hurni, author of Coaching Climbing

Reader Reviews from Around the World

“I want to tell you that Training for Climbing is clearly the best and most comprehensive book
on climbing training methodology I have ever read. In particular, the chapters on mental
training and skills/strategy training have inspired me and given me extremely valuable insights
for my future workouts. Thanks for such a great work!”
—Guido (Switzerland)

“I have just read your book Training for Climbing, and I think it is great!”
—Sven (Croatia)

“Eric, just wanted to say thanks for writing Training for Climbing. Since I started reading it
and training, I have improved tremendously. I am having a great time doing the strengthtraining exercises and just enjoying the process of climbing with a different mentality.”
—Carlos (California)

“Thank you, Mr. Hörst, for helping me achieve my first 5.12a just a few days ago!”
—Hiroyasu (Japan)

“Hi Eric, I’ve just finished reading Training for Climbing—great work! Over the last 14 years
I have studied climbing and to date your book is by far the most accessible to average
climbers.”
—Paul (Australia)

“I read a quote from your training book and consequently bought it. This book has changed
my whole attitude in climbing and life due to your mental training chapter. Just wanted to say
thank you!”
—Scott (Pennsylvania)

“Thanks for your great books, Eric. I have read them all—they are the best!”
—Ofer (Israel)

“What a great book! Your HIT workout definitely gave me much more strength. Thank you
very much for your great work, Eric!”
—Andre (California)

“Hi Eric, I read your book Training for Climbing. I think it is the best book in the field.”
—Roberto (Ecuador)

To buy books in quantity for corporate use or incentives, call (800) 962-0973 or e-mail
premiums@GlobePequot.com.

Copyright © 2003, 2008 by Eric J. Hörst
Portions of this book are based on information from Flash Training by Eric J. Hörst, previously
published by Falcon Publishing and Chockstone Press.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, except as may be expressly permitted in writing from the publisher.
Requests for permission should be addressed to The Globe Pequot Press, Attn: Rights and
Permissions Department, P.O. Box 480, Guilford CT 06437.
Falcon, FalconGuides, and Chockstone are registered trademarks of The Globe Pequot Press.
All interior photos are by the author unless otherwise noted.
Exercise photos depicting the author are by Lisa Ann Hörst.
Text design: Casey Shain
Chart design: Mary Ballachino
Illustrations: Judy Newhouse unless otherwise noted
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Hörst, Eric J.
Training for climbing : the definitive guide to improving your performance / Eric Horst.—2nd ed.
p. cm.—(A Falcon guide)
ISBN: 978-0-7627-4692-7
1. Rock climbing—Training. I. Title.
GV200.2.H685 2008
796.522′3—dc22
2008006490
Printed in China
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Warning: Climbing is a dangerous sport. You
can be seriously injured or die. Read the
following before you use this book.
This is an instruction book about rock climbing, a sport that is
inherently dangerous. Do not depend solely on information from this
book for your personal safety. Your climbing safety depends on your
own judgment based on competent instruction, experience, and a
realistic assessment of your climbing ability.
The training and nutritional advice given in this book are the
author’s opinions. Consult your physician before engaging in any part
of the training and nutritional program described by the author.
There are no warranties, either expressed or implied, that this
instruction book contains accurate and reliable information. There are
no warranties as to fitness for a particular purpose or that this book is
merchantable. Your use of this book indicates your assumption of the
risk of death or serious injury as a result of climbing’s risks and is an
acknowledgment of your own sole responsibility for your safety in
climbing or in training for climbing.
The Globe Pequot Press and the author assume no liability for
accidents happening to, or injuries sustained by, readers who engage in
the activities described in this book.

To two of the strongest, most innovative
and humble men ever to pull down
on rock: the “Master of Rock” John Gill
and the late, great Wolfgang Güllich.

The author on Welcome to Conditioning (5.12d/5.13a), New River
Gorge, West Virginia. ERIC McCALLISTER

Speed climbing on the classic East Buttress of El Capitan,Yosemite,
California ERIC J. McCALLISTER

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Writing a book is an Everest-like undertaking. It is a team effort that takes
many months or years to plan and execute, but getting to the summit still
takes an immense individual effort and an indomitably singular focus.
Having completed this climb, I reflect on all that has brought me to this
point—the thousands of wonderful days I’ve spent on the rock, the
countless climbers from around the world I’ve had the pleasure to meet, and
the dozens of partners I am grateful to have shared a rope with. Learning to
climb is a long, continuous process with no end, and I thank all the people
who have influenced me from my days as a wide-eyed teenage rock jock to
a forty-something veteran climber. I must thank directly John Gill, the late
Wolfgang Güllich, Lynn Hill, John Long, Jim McCarthy, Pat Ament,
Richard Goldstone, John Bachar, Mark Robinson, the late and legendary
Todd Skinner, and Tony Yaniro—all of you, knowingly or unknowingly,
have inspired me and contributed to this book in some way.
Though I continue to view myself as a student of rock climbing, I enjoy
more every year the role of teacher. I am humbled by all the letters and emails received from climbers in more than fifty countries who have read my
books and articles. I appreciate all the feedback, the suggestions, and, most
of all, the success stories of those who have benefited from my works.
Writing climbing books is certainly not a lucrative endeavor; still, knowing
that I’ve helped thousands of people from around the world climb better is
priceless.
Creating this second edition turned out to be another massive undertaking
as I tried to integrate the generous feedback and suggestions of countless
climbers from around the world who read the first edition. Furthermore, I
sequestered myself for days at a time to uncover and digest the latest
research in sports science, nutrition, and sports medicine. And what would I
do without input of my PhD’d friends Rick Fleming, Richard Schmidt, Jim
Sullivan, and Phil Watts? Thanks for sharing your unique insights and
knowledge!
I’d like to extend a sincere thank you to Scott Adams, John Burbidge,
Jeff Serena, Shelley Wolf, Jan Cronan, Casey Shain and everyone at Falcon
Press and Globe Pequot who helped bring this book to fruition. I am also

very appreciative of all the climbing companies that support me and my
many projects, including Nicros, La Sportiva, Verve, and Sterling. Many
thanks to my close friends Eric McCallister and Jim Sullivan, my wife, Lisa
Ann, and my family for their support and tolerance given my obsessive
tendencies toward work and climbing. I am most grateful for the input and
participation of Matt Bosley, Kyle Hörst, Charlotte Jouett, Crystal Norman,
Jessica Rohm, Lorin Teres, and the gyms Earth Treks and MetroRock.
Mega kudos to Thomas Ballenberger, Phil Bard, Danno Brayack, Stewart
Green, Gerd Heidorn, Keith Ladzinski, Eric McCallister, Tyler Stableford,
and Rich Wheater, whose photography is featured throughout the book.
And I must thank my sons, Cameron and Jonathan, for joining me in my
training and climbing and for teaching me so much—I love you both more
than you can imagine.
Finally, I am sincerely thankful for my original climbing partner and reallife hero, Jeff Batzer. Despite losing five fingers and half a leg, you still
possess—and show by example—the power of climbing. Jeff, you are a true
inspiration—thanks, man!

INTRODUCTION

Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by the things that you didn’t do than by
the ones you did do. So throw off the bowlines. Sail away from the safe harbor. Catch the trade
winds in your sails. Explore. Dream. Discover.
—Mark Twain

Training for Climbing is a unique synthesis of thirty-plus years of studying,
imagining, and experimenting with ways to increase climbing performance.
Building on the foundation laid out in my first two books, Flash Training
and How to Climb 5.12, the dozens of magazine and Inter-net articles that
I’ve authored, and the first edition of Training for Climbing, this second
edition of TFC establishes a new benchmark for cutting-edge,
comprehensive, expert instruction on the subject of elevating climbing
performance.
Training for Climbing blends leading-edge sports science, powerful
practice and training techniques used by Olympic athletes (but unknown to
many climbers), and potent mental-training and success strategies into a
single text that will help you climb better regardless of your present ability.
By faithfully applying just 50 percent of the methods contained herein, you
will surely grow to outperform the mass of climbers. And if you integrate
most of the material into your training, climbing, and daily ways of living,
you may very well progress to levels beyond your current comprehension!
Training for Climbing is as much about developing new ways of thinking
as it is about engaging in new ways of training. A common thread that
weaves throughout this book is that “intelligence in climbing is not
measured by IQ, but instead by the quality of your thoughts and actions.”
The thoughts you carry and the things you do (or don’t do) are ultimately
what separate you from the mass of climbers. Whether you flash or fall,
become superstrong or get injured, or feel happy or frustrated, springs forth
from subtle differences in the ways you think, feel, and act compared with
other climbers. Therefore, the primary goal of this book is to help guide you

to more deliberate and effective ways of thinking and acting in your pursuit
of peak climbing performance.
Since climbing is all about an intimate dance between you and the rock,
it’s vital to recognize that your climbing performance evolves from the
inside out, and that you only trip and fall when you blow a move. Goethe
wrote, “Nature understands no jesting; she is always true, always serious,
always severe; she is always right, and the errors and faults are always
those of man. The man incapable of appreciating her, she despises; and only
to the apt, the pure, and the true, does she resign herself and reveal her
secrets.” From this perspective it becomes obvious that we must always
look inside ourselves to see what’s holding us back. Looking outward for
the reason or to place blame is a loser’s game.
This book begins with a logical progression of self-analysis, goal setting,
mental training, and technique training before you ever lift a weight.
Chapters 1 through 4 are focused on helping you learn, most quickly, the
vital mental and technical skills that separate the best from the rest in this
sport. After a brief review of the history of training for climbing, you’ll get
started on the road to better climbing by taking a self-evaluation test that
will reveal your true strengths and weaknesses as a climber. Armed with
this information, you can apply more effectively the material that follows
on the subjects of training your mind and developing better climbing
technique and strategy.
Chapters 5 through 8 present the most in-depth look at strength training
for climbing ever published. As an intensely practical person with a
background in math and science, I have always felt it important to delve
into the theory and application of cutting-edge sports science. Transferring
this technology to training for climbing is vital to unlocking the most
effective training methods and strategies. As you read these chapters, I trust
you will gain new insight into the physiology of climbing performance and
thus become a more physiologically effective student of training for
climbing.
The concluding chapters 9 through 11 cover the often overlooked (or
ignored) subjects of performance nutrition, recovery, and proper treatment
and prevention of climbing injuries. Becoming a complete climber requires
that you embrace these subjects with the same fervor as you would in
executing your training program or plotting your next climb. Throughout
the text, I have footnoted the relevant scientific literature so you can peruse

the nitty-gritty details if you are so impassioned. These references and other
useful information can be found in the back of the book.
To glean the greatest benefit from Training for Climbing, you are
encouraged to employ active reading techniques such as underlining key
passages, putting a star next to the most meaningful strategies, and taking
notes for later review. Try lifting the most powerful phrases and posting
them in places where you will see them throughout the day. Review these
highlighted passages and your notes at least once a week, then reread the
entire book in three months and, again, in one year. Not only will this
reinforce your understanding and mastery of the concepts, but you also will
gain new insight and distinctions as you become a different person at each
read-through.
As you cast off into the depths of this book, I want to wish you success
and happiness climbing through this world of wonder. Though we may
never meet, we are connected through our shared passion for climbing. I am
grateful for you taking the time to read this book, and I hope you find the
material entertaining and immensely beneficial. I welcome your feedback,
and look forward to hearing from you after some grand success that
undoubtedly awaits you. Here’s wishing you many safe and wonderful days
on the rock!

Technique Photos: A User’s Guide
Climbing is a vertical dance requiring precise hand and foot “steps,”
body positions, and movement. Unfortunately, this dance is sometimes
difficult to illustrate on the static pages of a book. In Training for
Climbing I’ve adopted, from college biomechanics texts, a method of
labeling instructional photos with words and symbols that depict the
application of force on hand- and footholds. I hope these enhanced
photos will underscore the importance of body awareness and help you
learn proper technique. Here are the three classes of symbols to look
for:
1. Center of Gravity and Line of Gravity
The earth’s gravitational pull is most concentrated at your center of
gravity—the theoretical point at which gravity’s pull acts on you.

Standing with your arms by your sides, the center of gravity for males
is about an inch above the navel, while for females it averages an inch
or two below the navel. (The changing arm and leg positions of a
climber in motion, however, can cause the center of gravity to shift
side to side and up and down.) Center of gravity is designated here by
a bullet or circle, and the earth’s gravitational pull, or line of gravity, is
indicated by a dashed line and arrow pointing downward.
2. Force Vectors
When you climb, you ascend by contracting your muscles to generate
force—a push or pull—that is applied to the rock via the hand and foot
points of contact. The direction and amount of force applied at a point
of contact is called a force vector. Force vectors are represented in this
book diagrammatically by arrows. Each arrow’s head depicts the
direction you should apply force, while the size of the arrow is scaled
to the amount of force—a larger arrow means more force, a smaller
one less. You’ll find small, medium, and large arrows here.
3. Finesse and Dynamic Moves
Of course the purpose of climbing is to go up. Still, sometimes the
most efficient way to do that is by twisting—or flagging, deadpointing,
lunging, or other angular and dynamic movements. Such finesse
movements are illustrated with a dotted line and an arrow.

Photo Symbols
Photo Key

The symbols applied to this photo indicate that the climber uses both
of his hands—as well as his right foot—to apply minimal force (note
the small arrows, or vectors) to the hold. Meanwhile his left foot
carries the bulk of his weight, applying maximal force (indicated by
the large arrow, or vector). This positioning is achieved by shifting
the center of gravity near—or better yet, over—the left foot.

This climber is using her hands and feet to apply nearly equal force
(note the medium vectors). She twists her body (a movement
represented by a dotted line) to position her left hip and center of

gravity close to the overhanging wall. This shifts the line of gravity
closer to her feet, putting more of her body weight onto her feet.

Sarah Marvez on My 15 Minutes, Hueco Tanks, Texas KEITH
LADZINSKI

CHAPTER ONE
An Overview of Training for Climbing

A man’s reach should exceed his grasp or what’s a heaven for?
—Robert Browning

Many words can describe the wonderful activity of rock climbing—elegant,
powerful, rewarding, and, sometimes, frustrating. While there may be
nothing more natural and intuitive than climbing (just watch how children
climb around on everything in sight!), rock climbing is indeed a complex
activity with demands unique from those of living and playing in the
everyday, horizontal world.
Performing in the vertical plane requires physical capabilities such as
strength, power, and endurance. It also demands the development of
technical skills such as balance and economic movement while gripping
and stepping in an infinite variety of ways, positions, and angles. Most
important, the inherent stress of climbing away from the safety of the
ground requires acute control of your thoughts, focus, anxiety, and fears. In
aggregate, the above factors dovetail into what may be one of the more
complex sporting activities on this third rock from the sun.
The goal of this book is to explore all the topics relevant to increasing the
effectiveness of your training and the quality of your climbing. As a climber
of more than thirty years (who’s been fortunate enough to meet and climb
with many brilliant individuals), I feel the journey should begin with a
primer on the history of training for rock climbing. Clearly, the
advancements we make today are possible only because we are standing on

the shoulders of the giants who preceded us. Next, we’ll explore the
interesting subject of genetics and the possible genetic limitations to
climbing performance. This leads us into an overview of training for
climbing and the things you should consider in your quest for the biggest
gains in performance in the shortest possible time.

Training for Climbing: A Brief History
Compared with many other sports, the science of performance rock
climbing is still quite young. Well over a hundred years of literature exists
on technical aspects of the golf swing, and Olympic sports have been the
subject of performance analysis for centuries. Far removed from the
mainstream of organized sports and an almost countercultural pursuit just a
generation ago, rock climbing was completely off the map in the emergence
of sports sciences. What little information did exist on the technical aspects
of climbing was mainly passed on by word of mouth in the form of tips on
technique and equipment.
Nevertheless, some climbers used basic gymnastics, weight training,
elementary bouldering, and buildering to either emulate actual climbing
moves or gain the strength to perform at higher levels of the sport. Oscar
Eckenstein, a Brit of Teutonic heritage and possibly the first documented
boulderer, climbed ropes in the gym, did one-arm pull-ups, and pushed
himself on small rocks during the 1890s; George Leigh Mallory was a highbar enthusiast and one of the first to do giant swings; E. A. Baker in Moors,
Caves, and Crags (1903) tells of a colleague who “ascends the outside of an
iron staircase on his fingers . . . and crosses in a sitting posture the tie-bars
of a lofty roof”; Claude E. Benson in British Mountaineering (1909) talks
of being “blessed with a basement staircase of stone . . . I am to be found
hanging by my fingertips to the outside thereof.” And a gymnastic exercise
of the nineteenth century involved climbing the underside of an oblique
ladder using arms only—a precursor of the Bachar Ladder.

John Gill’s amazing one-arm front lever. Don’t try this at home! JOHN
GILL COLLECTION
Given the extreme and run-out technical climbs being done on the Elbe
River sandstone near Dresden a century ago—the hardest of which are now
recognized as being near 5.10 difficulty—it is reasonable to conclude that
early German free climbers placed a high value on style and difficulty. It is
hard to conceive of such sustained routes being climbed without some
specific regime to build forearm and upper-body strength, although working
routes on toprope may have been their primary method of training.
The strongest climbers of the early and mid- 1900s included Oliver
Perry-Smith, Albert Ellingwood, Joe and Paul Stettner, Fritz Wiessner, Jack
Durrance, Hans Kraus, John Salathe, and Harold Goodro, as well as some
of the early Yosemite masters such as Warren Harding, Dave Rearick, Bob
Kamps, and Royal Robbins. All were natural athletes or competed in other
athletic activity prior to becoming climbers. More important, they all
possessed a great sense of adventure and daring—a hallmark trait of all
great climbers of this era. Mike Sherrick, Robbins’s companion on the first
ascent of the North-west Face of Half Dome, was an excellent gymnast who

often backflipped to the ground after finishing a boulder problem, much to
the chagrin of his tamer companions. Yet training as a rock climbing
discipline built on vision, specificity, and intention was the innovation of a
young man from Alabama who began climbing in the early 1950s.
Now one of the undisputed legends of American climbing, John Gill is
the first person known to engage in highly regimented training for climbing.
Unlike the others of his day who pushed themselves on vertical crags and
long rock routes in the mountains, Gill—although an alpinist and rock
climber—spent more of his time on short, overhanging faces on low
boulders at the base of mountains or in river valleys. Bagging summits and
climbing big walls had less aesthetic appeal for Gill; he instead sought the
kinesthetics of dynamic movement up overhanging rock and adroitly built a
novel training program to suit.
For more than fifteen years beginning in the mid- 1950s, Gill trained on a
gym rope, the still rings, and with weighted, fingertip pull-ups, one-arm and
one-finger pull-ups, and one-arm front levers, in preparation for his
powerful bouldering ascents throughout the Midwest, Southeast, and Rocky
Mountains. In the early years Gill’s gymnastic moves and the extremely
muscular problems they produced—even his use of gymnasts’ chalk—were
viewed by most climbers with bemusement, if not bewilderment. Today his
legacy as an innovator, visionary, and, in fact, the father of both modern
bouldering and training for climbing is the foundation that has allowed
route ratings to move into 5.13 and beyond. Gill’s technical ability was
years ahead of everyone else, as illustrated by his very bold 1961 free-solo
first ascent of The Thimble in South Dakota’s Black Hills, an overhanging
30-foot inspiration now rated V4 (5.12a), and his improbable center
problem (incredibly, grade V9 by modern standards!) up the Red Cross
Boulder in the Tetons two years before The Thimble. Unrecognized and
underappreciated at the time, Gill in establishing these standards was an
early prototype of today’s top-end rock gymnasts, characterized like them
by precise footwork, intense focus, and awesome power.
By the mid-1960s a number of other climbers, most with a background in
gymnastics, also began training specific to climbing. Pat Ament, a young
gymnast from Colorado, was an early training enthusiast and went on to
become a leading climber and prolific developer of hard boulder problems.
In 1967 Ament and Gill began a long friendship, and these two powerful

boulderers undoubtedly inspired countless climbers throughout the Front
Range and beyond.

Pat Ament, a trained gymnast and disciple of John Gill, introduced a new
level of hard bouldering—as well as chalk—to Yosemite Valley during his
numerous visits in the late 1960s.
PAT AMENT COLLECTION

At about the same time, famed ’Gunks hardman Richard Goldstone met
Gill during a summer trip out west and was enormously impressed with
Gill’s one-arm pull-ups, front levers, and stiff boulder problems. Goldstone
went back to the University of Chicago with an enthusiasm for training and
adapted the use of surgical tubing (long utilized by gymnasts to build
enough strength to do an Iron Cross) as a training aid for portions of his
workouts. A few years later Goldstone returned east and became a
significant presence during the rapid expansion of difficult free climbing at
the Shawangunks. Goldstone discovered that Dick Williams (another
former gymnast) was already training for climbing and incorporating
dynamic movements in his campaign to free climb the many steep aid
routes at the ’Gunks. Other Uberfall icons of the era such as Hans Kraus,
Bonnie Prudden, Jim McCarthy, and John Stannard also had great interest
and long personal histories in physical fitness. Kraus went on to form the
President’s Council on Physical Fitness, while Bonnie Prudden became a
nationally recognized fitness expert and the first female athlete to appear on
the cover of Sports Illustrated.

German climbing icon Wolfgang Güllich demonstrating his one-arm
power in Yosemite’s Camp 4, circa 1980. GERD HEIDORN
Meanwhile, out west, it seemed California climbers were more and more
toying with one form or another of climbing training. Dave Rearick and
Mike Sherrick were specifically oriented toward gymnastics and could do
presses into handstands and other gym stunts; Layton Kor was lifting
weights regularly for his many outstanding ascents around Colorado and in
Yosemite. Remarkably, three of the top Yosemite free climbers of the day—
Royal Robbins, Chuck Pratt, and Frank Sacherer—did very little training
other than the usual regimen of pull-ups and push-ups. Jim Bridwell and
Barry Bates followed in the spirit of their master-predecessors, training hard
at such things as pull-ups on tree limbs in the Valley. Bates quickly
developed the ability to do a one-finger pull-up with his middle finger on a
sling hanging from a tree. The main thrust of their training, however, was
simply to climb several days per week.
Bridwell, Bates, and others in the Camp 4 crowd were also likely
influenced, directly or otherwise, by visiting climbers such as Goldstone
and Ament. Rich Goldstone is believed to have installed the first pull-up bar
in Camp 4 while Ament brought the toughest bouldering discipline of the
time to the Valley with his first ascents of 1968. Pat Ament also brought the
slack chain to Yosemite, challenging climbers to develop refined balance
and focus. The revered tradition of chain and rope walking in Yosemite
began with the 40 feet of slack links that Ament strung between two Camp
4 trees. (Local legend has it that Chuck Pratt one day stood on the chain and
juggled three wine bottles, presumably empty!) Bridwell and others went on
to develop and deploy an array of training stations around Camp 4 so
impressive that Warren Harding, the Yosemite Generation’s sharpest wit,
soon dubbed the area the “Olympic Training Village.” Harding himself
preferred to build stamina for his epic multiday big-wall adventures by
running to the top of Half Dome and back, a 17-mile round trip with nearly
1 mile of elevation change (and also, by his own admission, by refraining
from hard liquor in the weeks before an ascent). In the years that followed,
Camp 4 workout rigs introduced countless climbers from around the world
to the basic elements of the future science of training for climbing.
Still, sports scientists in academia and the European mountain heartland
had yet to view climbing as a subject worthy of serious and sustained study.

Though ascents of the world’s highest mountains were long a source of
national pride in Europe, there were no Olympic medals (nor commercial
sponsor-ships) to be won around which to build a culture of sport-specific
training and achievement aimed at visible rewards. Climbing remained a
rarefied pursuit, and research—where it pertained to climbing at all—was
narrowly focused on the effects of long exposure to low-oxygen
atmosphere. Still, the steadily growing popularity of climbing throughout
the 1970s eventually gave birth to the first European studies relating to the
physiological stresses and injuries associated with rock climbing.
In 1977 Pat Ament’s Master of Rock was published. This biography of
John Gill, though not focused specifically on training, served to document
Gill’s strength-training techniques and introduce them to a wider audience;
the book quickly became not just an American classic but a kind of sacred
writ for a new generation of climbers interested in pushing the absolute
technical limits. Master of Rock opened a new door of consciousness, so to
speak, of what it would take to be the best—not only in terms of physical
ability but in the broader context of per-formance, Gill being the epitome of
performance excellence in virtually all his pursuits.

One of the first climbers to train with weighted pull-ups, John Bachar,
could pull up with nearly 140 pounds hanging from his waist! Here he
trains with a “light” fifty pounds circa 1985. PHIL BARD

From the mid-1970s through the 1980s, the worldwide growth of
technical rock climbing and the first climbing competitions produced an
unprecedented exchange of ideas and innovations among European,
Russian and Caucasian, and American climbers. In Yosemite’s Camp 4;
Boulder, Colorado; and the Shawangunks of New York, small groups
trained and free climbed with increasing fervor, as energetic newcomers
such as John Bachar, Kevin Bein, Jim Collins, Christian Griffith, Lynn Hill,
Jim Holloway, John Long, Ron Kauk, Todd Skinner, Tobin Sorenson, Alan
Watts, Tony Yaniro, and others arrived on the scene. Similarly, small groups
of energetic climbers began to train in England, France, Italy, and Germany.
The boulders of Fontainebleau and the ubiquitous limestone crags of the
region became the proving grounds for first “sport climbers” in the early
1980s. The hard-training European climbers of the early sport-climbing era
were Brits Ron Fawcett, Jerry Moffat, and Ben Moon; French icons Jibé
Tribout, Antoine LeMénestral, and Patrick Edlinger; Italian’s Roberto Bossi
and Heinz Mariacher; and the powerful Germans Kurt Albert and Wolfgang
Güllich.

The author (circa 1986) on his version of the “death board,” a training
tool used by a handful of climbers in the pre-climbing-gym era. HÖRST
COLLECTION
In the United States no technique or aesthetic had a bigger impact on the
rapid development of extreme free climbing then the import of sportclimbing tactics from Europe. Rappel-bolted routes eliminated the

psychological stress and risks associated with marginal protection, and
through liberal use of hangdogging, the practitioner could safely work
extreme sequences and thus bring Gill-level difficulty (5.13 moves) to
roped climbing. At about this time, articles on physical performance and
training began to appear in American climbing magazines; academic
studies, too, began to proliferate, although initially focused on the subject of
injuries specific to rock climbers. Strength-training techniques remained
relatively unsophisticated, although a few key innovations such as the
Bachar Ladder and fingerboard jacked generic finger and pull-power
training up to a higher level of intensity and specificity.
In Europe’s sport-climbing culture, indoor walls had already taken hold,
but it was not until 1987 that the first commercial climbing gym opened in
the United States. Around the same time at the Campus Center—a weightlifting facility at the University of Nürnberg—a strong German climber
named Wolfgang Güllich developed a sport-specific form of reactive
training known today simply as campus training. Between 1985 and 1991
Güllich went on to establish the world’s hardest free climbs and wrote a
breakthrough training book, Sportklettern Heute (1986), and campus
training quickly became a staple of elite climbers around the world. Toward
the end of the century, as at its beginning, German climbers led the way to
new levels of technical difficulty and athletic achievement.
The 1990s saw climbing go mainstream with televised competitions and
dozens of well-sponsored full-time climbers in training year-round. The
first two books on training for climbing by American authors were
published in 1993 and 1994—Dale Goddard’s Performance Rock Climbing
and Flash Training by this author—and articles on training became regular
features of Climbing and Rock and Ice magazines. But the proliferation of
indoor walls was the real wild card that allowed the average climber to
practice more frequently and climb harder than ever before. All the abovementioned factors, along with improved equipment, made what was once
the maximum grade, 5.10, achievable by the masses; 5.13 quickly became
attainable by a handful of youngsters not even old enough to drive.

The legendary Todd Skinner cranking hard at his beloved Hueco Tanks in
1995. ERIC J. HÖRST
Beginning the new millennium, climbing is as popular as ever, and the
limits of quantified technical difficulty have stretched to 5.15a/b and V16.
The first edition of Training for Climbing, published in December 2002, has
spread to more than fifty countries and been translated into four languages.
The text introduced countless climbers to the concepts of comprehensive,
climbing-specific training, and it revealed new cutting-edge strengthtraining strategies, such as Hypergravity Isolation Training and complex
training, adapted to climbing by this author in the mid- and late 1990s.
Academic researchers, alert now to the unique physiological aspects of
climbing, have carried out and published the results of dozens of scientific
studies in the few years since this book first appeared. The body of
knowledge on the science of climbing performance has grown by leaps and
bounds since the introduction of Gill’s gymnasts’ chalk and Ament’s slack
chain; much more remains to be investigated and discovered. I trust that this
new and expanded edition of Training for Climbing will provide a solid
foundation from which the next generation of climbers and sports scientists
can extend their grasp.

While the climbers of my generation trained largely in accordance with
myth, anecdote, and trial and error, those entering the sport today have a
significant amount of quality information on the subject, if they choose to
use it. As I proclaimed at the beginning of How to Climb 5.12, “If you are
reading this book, chances are you have what it takes to climb 5.12.” As I
complete this book, I maintain this same sentiment—in fact, there’s a good
chance you have what it takes to climb 5.13! And if you’re genetically
blessed, maybe even 5.15 . . .

Genetics and Climbing Performance
Excuses are like parents—everybody has them. Ironically, your parents, or
more precisely the genetic material you inherited from them, might be the
best excuse why you or I may never climb 5.15. Still, your genetic makeup,
which substantially determines your height, flexibility, and natural strength,
among other things, is a poor excuse for not being able to climb 5.10 or
even 5.12. Yes, some specific 5.12 climb might require a long reach or high
step that you will never be capable of making, but numerous research
studies confirm my belief that the mass of climbers have the potential to
succeed at the lofty grade of 5.12, regardless of genetics.

The Role of Genetics in Sports Performance

All other things being equal, genes seem to determine the differences in
performance among individuals. In a sport as complex as climbing,
however, you could argue that “all other things are never equal”—making
the role of genetics in climbing performance hard to pin down. But let’s try!
The role of genetics in what we become has been a favorite subject of
scientists over the years—it’s the old “nature-versus-nurture” debate.
Certainly genetics would seem to play an underlying role in our natural
mental climate and personality. However, it’s in the physical realm of
strength and motor skill that genetics appear to play the largest role (or at
least this is where genetics seem most observable and measurable for
scientists). Interestingly, a review of the research on the role of genetics on
performance reveals an extremely complex subject with contradictory
theories and findings among academics. One study (Ericsson 1993)
suggested that hours of deliberate practice are the most important factor in
determining performance, while another (Fox 1996) found that genes are
responsible for half the variations in performance among individuals.
In the real, nonacademic world, it seems that neither of these studies is
unequivocally correct. It appears that genetics play the greatest role in
sports where the raw physical demands far outweigh the mental or technical
requirements. For example, excelling at the 100-meter dash requires
extreme explosive power but only basic mental and technical skill.
Conversely, golf requires mastery of a wide range of technical skills and a
well-cultivated mental calm, but the physical demands are much less
noteworthy. Therefore, while genetics clearly play a major role in
determining who makes it to the Olympics in the 100-meter dash, they
should have much less influence in determining who plays in this year’s
PGA Championship.
Summing up: Hours of deliberate practice are a requisite for performing
at a high level in complex (technical and mental) sports, whereas ideal
genetics are a prerequisite for achieving greatness in the most physical

pursuits, such as running and weight lifting. Rock climbing is unique
among sports, however, in that it requires a near-equal balance of mental,
technical, and physical prowess (see figure 1.1). So you can argue that
genetics do play a significant, though not primary, role in determining your
level of performance in this sport.

Figure 1.1 Relative Demands of Various Sports

Genetic Factors Relating to Climbing Performance

So just what genetic factors might be helping or hurting you? I bet they are
different and more subtle than you think. Height and weight seem to be
what most climbers consider their blessing or curse, but it’s likely a number
of less obvious attributes that help make possible the incredible 5.14/V14
ascents of climbers like David Graham, Chris Sharma, and the Nicole,
Huber, and LeMénestral brothers.
While the aforementioned climbers exhibit a variety of body shapes and
sizes, they all possess unusually high maximum grip strength, upper-body
power, and/or local (forearm) endurance—beyond that which can be
acquired by the average climber training “perfectly” for many years. The
genetic gifts enabling these feats probably relate to hard-to-observe factors
such as tendon insertions (where they originate from and insert into the
bones of the hand and arms), lever length (length of bones), muscle fiber
type, and hormone profiles.
With regard to tendon insertions, a slight shift in the location compared
with normal provides additional leverage that gives a few lucky folks more
grip strength (off the couch!) than others could achieve through years of
training. Similarly, your innate ratio of fast-twitch to slow-twitch muscle
fiber determines whether your natural aptitude tends toward high
endurance, high strength, or neither. Finally, we each have unique hormone
profiles (testosterone, cortisol, and so forth) that vary with age and sex, and
this plays an underlying role in our response to training and recovery ability
(Bloomfield 1994). Because of this, some people can climb hard three days
in a row or respond more dramatically to training, while most of us need far
more rest in order to perform well, and our training adaptations are more
gradual.
If you still aren’t convinced that genetics play a role in determining who
will be the very best climbers, consider the three pairs of brothers
mentioned earlier. Frederic and François Nicole, Alex and Thomas Huber,
and Marc and Antoine LeMénestral have all climbed at the fringe of

maximum difficulty. This is not coincidence, but instead a screaming
message that genetic makeup is a factor in climbing performance.

Your Genetic Potential as a Climber

If you’re beginning to sense that you might lack some or all of the above
genetic gifts, don’t be depressed! As I stated earlier, odds are that you’re
“normal enough” to climb 5.12 or even 5.13. Because of the large role that
mental and technical skill plays in climbing performance, you can push
very high up the grade scale by maximizing your capabilities in these areas.
The bell curve (see figure 1.2) shows that most of the population falls in the
middle of the bell, in the area representing near-average genetic
characteristics. A much smaller number of folks—call them outliers (say,
one in ten)—have somewhat better or worse genetics than average. Then
there are the extreme outliers (say, 1 in 1,000 or more) who have the
potential to be brilliant if they discover their gift and apply themselves
completely.

Figure 1.2 Genetic Potential
The fact that most of us fall somewhere in the middle of the bell curve
can be uplifting or depressing, depending on your perspective. If you dream
of climbing 5.15 or V15, the chart shows that even if you do everything

right and dedicate your entire life to it, the odds are low that you have the
genetic potential to make this dream a reality. But if you currently climb
5.5, 5.10, or what have you, you should be psyched that 5.12 is likely
within your reach!
A few recent studies support this idea. One study (Barss 1997) divided a
group of twenty-four recreational climbers into two groups based on
climbing ability. With the exception of a straight-armed hang endurance
test, there was no statistical difference in the performance of a wide variety
of general and sport-specific tests between the “less skilled” group (those
climbing 5.7 to 5.10a) and the “more skilled” group (those climbing 5.10b
to 5.11b). Therefore, at the intermediate levels (5.7 to 5.11b), there’s a poor
correlation between fitness and climbing ability. The stronger climbers were
not necessarily the better climbers, so mental and technical differences
account for the difference in ability.
Another, more complex study (Mermier 2000) looked at a larger group of
forty-four male and female climbers with a wider range of abilities (5.6 to
5.13c). The results showed that the variance in climbing performance
related primarily to trainable variables, and that anthropometric variables
(height, weight, arm and leg length, arm span, percent of body fat, and the
like) were not a statistically significant factor. So this study also supports
my sense that by optimizing technical and mental skills (the trainable
variables), the average climber should be able to progress to a high level of
climbing, possibly even as high as 5.13c. Note that no 5.14 climbers were
included in the study, so we don’t know if inclusion of these world-class
individuals would have yielded similar results (I suspect not).
In fact, a third, very similar study (Watts 1993) looked only at worldclass climbers (those competing in the semifinals at a World Cup event). It
found that these elite individuals exhibited a higher grip-strength-to-bodymass ratio, had a lower percentage of body fat, and were of a slightly
smaller stature when compared with other athletic groups. This study
supports the idea that those world-class 5.14 climbers are born, not made, in
that they are extreme outliers with just the right build to be able to climb at
the highest levels of difficulty.

Great Genetics Don’t Guarantee You’ll Be a Great Climber

Still, the premise that climbing requires equal mastery of mental, technical,
and physical abilities means that good genes aren’t enough to make you a
rock star. Just as genetically average individuals can progress to climbing
5.12 or 5.13 by perfecting their technical and mental skill sets, genetic
freaks who can crush bricks in their hands may forever remain 5.10
climbers due to poor technique or lack of mental skills.
Consider figure 1.3, which depicts the genetic potential (solid line) and
real-life ability (dashed line) of a climber with average genetic makeup
versus the brick-crushing genetic freak. Through dedicated, intelligent
training of all the elements under her control, the average climber has
pushed her ability almost the whole way out to her genetic potential. The
superstrong genetic freak, on the other hand, with his poor technique and
mental control, is an underachieving slacker when you compare his real-life
performance with his genetic potential. Comparatively, the genetically
average climber pushed the dashed line out farther and is, thus, the real
master of rock!
Next time you go to the gym or crag, observe all the men and women, of
all ages, shapes, and sizes, who are climbing 5.11, 5.12, and even 5.13. The
vast majority of these folks are of average genetic makeup (located near the
middle of the bell curve in figure 1.2), but through dedication and hard
work on all aspects of the climbing game, they have succeeded at pushing
their dashed line out toward the edge of their genetic limitations.

Limits to Climbing Performance
The top climbing grade exploded upward from 5.12d in the mid-1970s to
5.14b by the end of the 1980s. The primary reasons for this marked
improvement are equipment (better shoes, stickier shoe rubber, easy-toplace active camming devices, and bolt-protected routes), better training
(indoor walls, fin-gerboards, and so on), and more effective practice
methods (hangdogging). In 1991 Wolfgang Güllich upped the ante with his
ascent of Action Directe (5.14d). This route went unrepeated for five years
and has since seen only a handful of repeats, despite attempts by many of
the world’s best climbers.

Figure 1.3 Genetic Potential
Now, more than fifteen years after the first ascent of Action Directe, the
benchmark of maximum difficulty has been stretched to 5.15a/b and V16.
Given the length of time required to consolidate the 5.15a grade, we have to
wonder if we are approaching human limitations to free climbing. While we
can never rule out another breakthrough in technology (equipment), it’s
highly unlikely that we will see another grade explosion as occurred during
the 1980s. Instead, slow increases will occur over the time frame of
decades.
For a glimpse of what we might expect, let’s look at several “mature”
Olympic events. Over the last fifty years, improvements per decade have
been approximately: sprinting—1 percent; distance running—1.5 percent;
jumping—3 percent; pole vaulting—5 percent; swimming—5 percent;
skiing—10 percent (Seiler 2000). Improved equipment surely contributed to
the higher values for pole vaulting (fiberglass poles), swimming

(“frictionless” speed suits), and skiing (ski technology seems to be
constantly improving). Unfortunately, performance-enhancing drugs are
also a very real factor in the improvements in many Olympic events.

Wolfgang Güllich on his breakthrough route Action Directe, the world’s
first 5.14d.
THOMAS BALLENBERGER

Assuming no technological breakthroughs and no drugs, a good bet
would be that the top climbing level would increase by just a few percent
per decade. I believe these gains will result from identification of more
extreme outliers as participation in climbing increases and from better
matching of appropriate training on a more individual basis.
Ultimately, it appears that the achievement curve, which rose rapidly in
the 1970s and 1980s, is not linear (y = kt), but more like a logarithmic curve
[y = aLog(1 + bt)]: increasing, but less so as time goes on. Furthermore, our
current method of rating routes may be on the verge of breaking down—the
difference between 5.15a and 5.15b (or V15 and V16) may be purely a
function of anatomical variation in the context of a single move or
sequence. This argues for an entirely different system of assessing difficulty
at the top levels, such as a scale that counts the number of climbers able to
do a given move or problem. Interestingly, this is the essence of John Gill’s
B-scale for grading bouldering problems, developed back in the late 1950s.
Gill says, “My idea was to develop a personal system that allowed basic
differentiation for difficulty, but simultaneously imposed constraints on
such differentiation so that an endless, open-ended stream of numbers with
plusses and minuses would not result. Usually such fine differentiation
would reflect merely the anatomical attributes of various climbers. B1 was
to represent the highest levels of normal traditional roped climbing, and B2
was to represent a broad class of bouldering difficulty greater than B1. B3
was a (usually temporary) rating signifying a most severe route that had
been done by only one person, but tried by a number of climbers. When a
second climber succeeded, the route would downgrade to B2 or B1. I
thought this would appeal to the competitive spirit, but avoid
overcomplicating the whole process and turning it into a number-chasing
game” (Escalade 2001).

Training for Climbing
As discussed earlier, there are many trainable variables to work on as part
of your training for climbing program. In chapter 2 you will perform a selfassessment test to determine which of these trainable variables is most
holding you back. The best training program (for you) will concentrate on
the areas that can produce the greatest gain in performance output for a
given training input. Of course, the goal is to train most effectively, not
maximally.

A Definition of Training for Climbing

I define training for climbing as any practice, exercise, or discipline that
increases absolute climbing performance. Clearly, this represents a broad
spectrum of subjects—hence the wide range of topics covered in this book.
Through this paradigm you should recognize that training includes a
wide range of activities and practices such as bouldering (to learn problem
solving and develop power); climbing on a home wall or at a climbing gym
(to improve technique and strength); on-sighting, hangdogging, or for that
matter any climbing (to enhance your mental and physical skill sets); and
traveling to experience many different types of climbing (to gain experience
and a broad range of technical skills). Training also includes efforts made in
ancillary areas such as stretching and antagonist-muscle training (for
flexibility and injury prevention), eating properly (to enhance recovery and
maintain optimal body composition), visualization and targeted thinking (to
maximize mind programming and disconnect from bad habits), resting
sufficiently and listening to your body (to optimize training results and to
avoid injury), and evaluating yourself regularly (to determine your current
strengths and weaknesses). Finally, training of course includes proper
execution of various general and sport-specific exercises (to work toward
your physical genetic potential).
For the sake of discriminating among these many types of training
throughout the rest of the book, let’s define several training subtypes—
mental training, skill practice, fitness and strength training, and training
support activities—as shown in figure 1.4.
Mental training involves any thought control, discipline, or mindprogramming activity that will directly or indirectly impact your climbing
in a positive way. The best climbers train mentally 24/7—this is one activity
in which you can never overtrain—by targeting their thoughts only on
things that can, in some way, influence their climbing and by deleting
thoughts and habits that might hold them back. Unfortunately, many
individuals possess mental muscle that’s in an advanced stage of atrophy

from underuse. Visualization is just one of the many mental exercises that
can improve your climbing. Chapter 3 lays out an array of mental-training
methods and on-the-rock strategies that will have a combined effect similar
to unloading a heavy weight from your back (which you’ve unknowingly
been hauling up routes). Are you ready to spread your Mental Wings?

Figure 1.4 Subtypes of Training
Practice relates to time spent learning and refining actual sport skills and
strategies outside of a performance setting. Just as baseball, basketball, and
football players spend many hours practicing their skills outside of
competition, climbers must practice by climbing a lot with the sole
intention of improving climbing skill (and not worrying about an outcome
such as a flash, redpoint, or on-sight ascent). It’s my sense that many
climbers’ training programs are devoid of this vital subtype of training.
We’ll take an in-depth look at the subject of effective skill practice in
chapter 4.
Fitness and strength training covers a wide range of activities that are
performed with the primary intent of improving physiological capabilities.
This includes general conditioning activities such as running, stretching,
and light free-weight training as well as the more important sport-specific
activities such as fingerboard, campus training, and hypergravity training.
Many other activities can fall under this heading, as long as they somehow
help improve your climbing performance or prevent injury. It’s surprising,
however, how many things done in the name of training for climbing
actually have a negative effect on climbing performance. Get ready to sort
things out as we take a cutting-edge look at physical training for climbing in
chapters 5, 6, and 7. Then in chapter 8, you will be guided on developing an
effective and time-efficient personalized training program.

Finally, training support activities comprise a variety of crucial, yet often
overlooked (or ignored), issues outside of your actual physical practice and
training for climbing. Athletes in many other sports have known the vital
role that rest, nutrition, and recovery acceleration techniques play in their
ultimate level of performance. Serious climbers looking to press out their
ability level toward the genetic limit must act on these issues with utmost
discipline. Chapters 9 and 10 cover these important topics—applying the
material may be the key to succeeding on your own “personal Action
Directe”!

The Relationship Between Skill and Fitness

While the various subtypes of training for climbing will be discussed
separately, they clearly affect one another. This is especially true when it
comes to skill practice and fitness and strength training, so let’s dig a little
deeper.
For a beginning climber in the earliest stages of learning, a low level of
fitness can slow the learning of climbing skill. A certain level of strength is
necessary in order to practice enough (that is, climb) to develop the basic
skills of movement, hand- and footwork, and body positioning. Conversely,
too much strength enables a beginner to get by on easy to moderate routes
despite inefficient movement, poor footwork, and improper body position.
Obviously, this will also slow (or prevent) the development of good
technique—unless, that is, the strong person makes good technique the
primary goal, instead of just getting up the route no matter what.
The problem is further aggravated by the fact that people tend to develop
their talents disproportionately. Strong people are most likely into strength
training, flexible people probably stretch regularly, and skillful people
undoubtedly climb a lot. Sure, the drudgery of working on weak points isn’t
fun, and at times it can be discouraging. But if you really want to climb
harder, you must train smarter. That means knowing where to best invest
your time to get the most output for your training input. For the majority of
climbers, the best investment is on further development of climbing skills
and strategy (see figure 1.5).

Figure 1.5 Relative Gains
Elite climbers may have less to gain from practicing familiar forms of
climbing. These expert climbers are way out on the learning curve near
their ultimate skill potential, so fitness (and the mind) becomes the crucial
factor in performance. Hence, we commonly see magazine articles about
these rock stars that describe seemingly lethal or disastrously stressful
strength-training regimes that would surely send the ordinary climber into a
state of overtraining, the doctor’s office, or self-defeating over-reliance on
strength training as the key to improvement.
Focused fitness training is of greater importance for all climbers after a
layoff, whether due to injury, winter, or some other reason (see figure 1.6).
The rapid loss of strength that occurs when training or climbing ceases for a
period of weeks or months is best counteracted by several weeks of
dedicated fitness training (fortunately, you largely maintain climbing skill
once the motor programs are well established). While this short-term
training focus helps in regaining your old form, the long-term and most
significant improvements in climbing ability will still result from effective
skill practice until late in your career. Only at the lofty grades of 5.12 and
above does sport-specific strength become a major limiting factor.

Figure 1.6 Performance Losses

Specific Adaptation to Imposed Demands (SAID)

Serious climbers would be wise to train and climb in accordance with the
cornerstone principles of the field of exercise science. For example,
knowledge of the SAID Principle (specific adaptation to imposed demands)
can be leveraged to maximize the effectiveness of your training for a
specific climbing goal or dream climb.
The SAID Principle explains that a certain exercise or type of training
produces adaptations specific to the activity performed and only in the
muscles (and energy systems) that are stressed by the activity. For instance,
running produces favorable adaptations in the leg muscles and the
cardiovascular system. But the muscles and systems not stressed show no
adaptation, so even heroic amounts of running will produce no favorable
changes in, say, the arms. Of course, the adaptations that result from
running do transfer somewhat to other activities that depend on the same
body parts and systems (such as mountain biking or hiking). Bottom line:
The SAID Principle demands that effective training for climbing must
target your body in ways very similar to climbing (body position, muscles
used, energy systems trained, and so forth).

Figure 1.7 Continuum of
Subdisciplines of Climbing

Specific

Adaptations

for

Various

Similarly, your body adapts in a specific fashion to the specific demands
you place on it while climbing. If you boulder a lot, you will adapt to the
specific skill and strength demands of bouldering. If you climb mostly onepitch sport routes, you adapt to the unique demands of zipping up, say, 30
meters of rock before muscular failure. If you favor multipitch routes or big

walls, your body will adapt in accordance to the demands of these longer
climbs. Or if your outings are alpine in nature, your physiological response
will be specific to the very unique demands of climbing in the mountains.
The vitally important distinction here is that while all these activities fall
under the headline of “climbing,” they each have unique demands that
produce very specific physical adaptations. Therefore, the training effect
from regular bouldering will do very little to enhance your physical ability
for alpine climbing. Figure 1.7 shows that the specific demands of sport
climbing are much closer to those of bouldering. Consequently, the
adaptations incurred from frequent bouldering will largely carry over to
sport climbing (especially short sport climbs) and vice versa.
Due to the SAID Principle, your practice and training on the rocks should
be spent mostly on the type of climbing in which you wish to excel. It’s no
mistake that the best boulderers in the world rarely tie in to a rope.
Likewise, the best alpine climbers spend little time working 30-meter sport
routes. Targeting your training on the specific demands of your preferred
form of climbing is the essence of the SAID Principle.
In the end you must make a philosophical choice whether you want to
specialize—and therefore excel—in one or two of the climbing
subdisciplines, or become a moderately successful all-around climber.
Certainly there is merit and reward in both approaches.

Summary of Training for Climbing
1. Training for climbing is any practice, exercise, or discipline
that increases absolute climbing performance.
2. Mental training begins by increasing your commitment to all
things climbing (while reducing time, energy, and thought
invested in lower-value activities and hobbies) and continues
with the development of uncommon self-awareness, and
superior thought control and risk management skills.
3. Skill practice is paramount, since climbing skills and tactics are
distinctly unique from those of other sports. Only going
climbing will make you a more skilled climber.
4. Fitness training comprises both general and sport-specific
exercises and activities. Novice climbers should engage in a

period of general conditioning before advancing to the more
stressful sport-specific exercises.
5. Training support activities are essential for all serious climbers,
including scheduled rest days, proper nutrition, and use of
techniques to accelerate recovery.
6. Ultimately the most effective training-for-climbing program
will target limiting constraints in highly climbing-specific ways
(in accordance with the SAID Principle).

Jim Ewing on the classic Ridicullissima (5.10d), Shawangunks, New
York. ERIC J. HÖRST

CHAPTER TWO
Self-Assessment and Goal Setting

I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of
man to elevate his life by conscious endeavor.
—Henry David Thoreau

The first step to improving your situation—in anything—can be expressed
simply as “Know thyself.” You cannot progress beyond your current state
with the same thoughts and actions that brought you here. Therefore, only
through constant self-evaluation will you unlock the secrets to incremental
improvement. For instance, you must actively distinguish what works from
what does not work, as well as be able to recognize what you need to learn
versus what must be unlearned. Often the key elements are not obvious or
clear, but you must accept that life is subtle; only through improving on the
little things will you succeed in the big things.
In climbing, the process of improvement begins with getting to know
your patterns at the crags, in the gym, and in your everyday life. You must
become aware of your climbing-related strengths and weaknesses in each
area of the performance triad—technical, mental, and physical—and learn
to leverage your strengths and improve upon the weaknesses. Toward this
end, your prime directive must be to train intelligently—that is, to engage in
training activities that best address your weaknesses, while not getting
drawn into the trap of training as others do.
Of course, a clear understanding of your mega goals in this sport is
equally important to achieving success. Only with a clear goal in mind can

you take consistent actions that keep you on route, as well as have the sense
to recognize when you have wandered off route. Finally, at the very deepest
level, you must closely examine your level of commitment to climbing—
are you willing to make the sacrifices necessary for reaching your mega
goals? This chapter will guide you through the fundamental steps of selfassessment and goal setting that, in turn, will initiate your ascent to
becoming a better, more successful climber (no matter your gauge of
measuring success).

Self-Assessment: The Breakfast of Champions
Identifying personal weaknesses often requires a paradigm shift—a
dramatic change in the way we see things—because it’s human nature to
think about and practice the things at which we excel. Too many climbers
(myself included) have wasted precious years practicing and training the
things at which they already shine while the ball-and-chain of their
weaknesses holds them back. For instance, many climbers think “more
strength” is the panacea to their climbing woes; but as shown in figure 1.1,
it’s just one piece of the climbing performance puzzle. It requires an
awakening for most climbers to recognize the thoughts and life patterns that
are really holding them back and that their time and energy could be
invested more productively elsewhere.
Introspection and curiosity are key attributes you must foster because, at
least at the first superficial glance, your real-life experiences with failure on
a climb will almost always appear to result from a lack of strength. But
what about all the underlying causes that may have led to premature fatigue
—poor footwork, bad body positioning, overgripping of holds, climbing too
slowly, scattered focus, a missed rest, unreasonable fears, or a lack of
energy due to poor diet or dehydration? As you can see, the other two-thirds
of the climbing performance puzzle (technical and mental) determine how
effectively you use the physical strength and energy reserves you possess.
Consequently, it’s my belief that the average climber wastes 50 percent (or
more!) of his strength and energy due to flawed technique, inefficient
movement, and poor mental control. This is analogous to having a 30miles-per-gallon car that only gets 15 miles per gallon as the result of a
horrible tune-up and a heavy foot. Therefore, the average climber can
obtain a huge windfall of relative strength gains—and dramatically improve
performance—by training up technique, quality of movement, and mental
control.

The moral of the story, then, is that the best training program for
climbing must include lots of climbing and constant self-evaluation.
Spending three or four days a week on the rock (or an artificial wall)
deliberately practicing skills and refining your climber’s mind-set is far
more beneficial than spending those days strength training in the gym. This
is not to say that you can simply climb a lot and ignore all the other facets
of performance. The best climbers clearly focus on putting the complete
puzzle together, and this undoubtedly includes a targeted strength-training
program. Still, if you can do ten fingertip pull-ups, you are probably strong
enough to climb most 5.12a routes! So search vigilantly for the true but
often underlying causes of failure on routes. That’s the ultimate secret to
optimizing your training program and establishing new personal bests on
the rock.

Objective Evaluation

The best way to identify your weaknesses is to ask yourself a series of
detailed questions. To identify physical and technical weaknesses, ask
yourself targeted questions like: Do I fail on a route because I’m too weak
or do I overgrip and hang out too long in the midst of hard moves? Does my
footwork deteriorate in the moves prior to where I fall? Do I climb too
slowly through crux moves and consequently come up short on routes? Do I
lack the flexibility to step onto a crucial hold or do I miss a better, easier
foot placement? Am I really too short for this move or have I failed to find
the body position that makes it possible for someone my height?
Some questions for identifying mental errors are: Do I fail to see the
sequence or do I fail to try something new when the obvious doesn’t work?
Do I try too hard or give up too easily? Am I controlling my internal selftalk or is the critic within doing a hatchet job on me? Do I monitor and
control my body tension or does my perceived pressure of the situation run
the show? Do I sabotage myself before leaving the ground by doubting my
ability and pondering past failures?
In addition to investigating yourself, consider enlisting a coach to provide
an even more objective view of your performance or, at the least, have a
friend shoot some video of you on the rock. These detached perspectives
are especially useful in identifying obvious flaws in technique, tactics, and
your overall economy of effort. For example, feet skidding or popping off
footholds signals lack of attention to footwork, while constant stretching for
holds seemingly just out of reach is a sign you’re missing critical
intermediate holds or using less effective body positions. In more general
terms, evaluate whether your movement looks relaxed and fluid or appears
tight, mechanical, and hesitant. These outside perspectives can be a real
eye-opener, and you’ll probably be surprised at what you find. Still, some
fundamental mistakes and weaknesses are so subtle that they are not easily
observed by others or by viewing yourself on video. This is where a
detailed self-assessment test comes in handy.

Taking the Self-Assessment Test

A good self-assessment test takes the white light of your climbing
performance and, like a prism, disassembles it into the rainbow of colors
representing specific skills. The results will reveal your true (not perceived)
strengths and weaknesses—and possibly even an unknown Achilles’ heel
that must be addressed if you are to ever reach your potential (or break
through a long-term plateau). With this knowledge, you can create the most
effective training program for you!
In taking the assessment that follows, it’s important to read each question
once and then immediately answer it based on your recent experiences on
the rock. Don’t read anything into the questions; nor should you try to
figure out their focus and shade your answers in any way. Instead of
working in the book, consider making a photocopy of the test pages in order
to maintain an unmarked self-assessment test with which to work (or copy
again) in the future. Of course, it would be ideal to date your test and file it
for future reference. Comparing successive self-assessments is a powerful
way to track your long-term improvement in each area of the performance
triad.

Exercise: Self-Assessment Test
Answer each question by circling the number that best characterizes
your performance. To obtain the most accurate results, it’s essential
that you score each question according to your most recent experiences
on the rock. Pause for a moment and review recent climbs to determine
the correct answer for each question. Do not overanalyze the
questions, however, or try to read between the lines—you will have a
chance to ponder the meaning of your answers when you tally the final
results.
0 = almost always

1 = often
2 = about half the time
3 = occasionally
4 = seldom
5 = never
1. My footwork (use of feet) deteriorates during the hardest part
of a climb.
012345
2. My forearms balloon and my grip begins to fail even on routes
that are easy for me.
012345
3. On hard sequences, I have difficulty stepping onto critical
footholds.
012345
4. I get anxious and tight as I head into crux sequences.
012345
5. My biceps (upper arms) pump out before my forearms.
012345
6. I have difficulty hanging on small, necessary-to-use holds.
012345
7. I blow sequences I have wired and know by heart.
012345

8. I stall at the start of crux sequences. I end up having to hang on
the rope and rest before I can give it a good, solid try.
012345
9. I climb three or four days in a row.
012345
10. I get sewing-machine leg (“Elvis leg”).
012345
11. I pump out on overhanging climbs no matter how big the
holds.
012345
12. I get out of breath when I climb.
012345
13. I make excuses for why I might fail on a route before I even
begin to climb.
012345
14. I miss hidden holds on routes.
012345
15. I have difficulty hanging on to small sloping holds or pockets.
012345
16. I grab quick draws, the rope, or other gear instead of risking a
fall trying a hard move of which I am unsure.
012345

17. On a typical climb, I feel like much of my body weight is
hanging on my arms.
012345
18. I get very sore the day after climbing at the crags.
012345
19. I have difficulty visualizing myself successfully climbing the
route before I leave the ground.
012345
20. I cannot reach key holds on difficult routes.
012345
21. On overhanging routes and roofs, I have difficulty keeping my
feet from cutting loose and swinging out.
012345
22. While climbing, I get distracted by activity on the ground
and/or I think about whether the belayer is paying attention.
012345
23. I have difficulty reading sequences.
012345
24. I get a flash pump on the first climb of the day.
012345
25. I have more difficulty climbing when people are watching.

012345
26. My feet unexpectedly pop off footholds.
012345
27. I experience elbow pain when I climb on a regular basis.
012345
28. When lead climbing a safe route, I have difficulty pushing
myself to the complete limit.
012345
29. I have difficulty finding midroute rest positions and
shakeouts.
012345
30. My first attempt on a hard route is usually better than my
second or third attempts of the day.
012345

Looking at Your Test Results

Record the scores from each question in figure 2.1 (below), and then add up
each column to obtain a final score for each area of the performance triad.
Compare your mental, technical, and physical scores to gain a sense of
which area is your strong or weak aspect of the performance triad. If all
three areas are within five points of one another, congratulate yourself for
being a climber of balanced abilities. It is more common, however, to
discover that one aspect of performance is much lower scoring than the
other two. This area is your major weakness, and the most effective training
program for you is one that targets this area for improvement.

Figure 2.1 Score Yourself
Next, review each question of the self-assessment test and mark a star
next to those on which you scored a 3 or less. Each of these low-scoring
questions identifies a specific element of your climbing performance that is
holding you back. List on a separate piece of paper or in your training log a
brief description of each problem revealed. Sort and group them according
to the aspects of the performance triad. As you read through the remainder
of the book, keep this list of problem areas nearby and make notes of the
exercises and strategies presented that address these weaknesses. Creating
such a written “mind map” that displays both the problem areas and the
action-oriented solutions will keep these highly powerful keys to better

climbing in the forefront of your attention. Only with this awareness will
your training remain on track and effective in the weeks and months to
come.
As you move into the goal-setting exercises later in this chapter, refer
back to the self-assessment test or your summary mind map. Focus your
short- and medium-term training goals on the most dramatic weaknesses
identified (the five or six lowest-scoring items). As you recognize
improvement in these areas, shift your training focus onto other lowerscoring areas of the self-assessment or retake the entire test and develop a
new training strategy based on the new results. For additional training tips
that address each question of the self-assessment, see appendix C.

The Cycle of Improvement
Your completed self-assessment is your “boarding pass” to the Cycle of
Improvement. This process cycle has three stages: Set goals, take action,
and make course corrections (see figure 2.2).
A successful trip around the cycle gives birth to a new level of climbing
performance—the Cycle of Improvement, in fact, becomes a Spiral of
Improvement! Occasionally, reassessments are needed to update your goals
relative to the “new you” and whatever new issues are now responsible for
holding you back from further improvement. These new goals give birth to
new actions and even more spectacular results.

Figure 2.2 Cycle of Improvement

Depending on your desires, commitment, and skill level, one trip around
the cycle may take anywhere from a couple of months to a year. Signs that
you are ready for a reassessment and a new cycle include a plateau in
performance, training that feels flat, or a drop in motivation. If you
experience more than one of these signs, take a week or two off, then retake
the self-assessment test and start a new cycle.
Remember that there is a big difference between employing the Cycle of
Improvement and just going climbing year-round. The latter approach is
unfocused and will yield slow results and frequent plateaus in performance.
Conversely, a deliberate effort in all three stages—setting new goals, taking
intelligent action, and making appropriate course corrections—keeps the
spiral going upward toward your ultimate genetic potential.

Goal Setting

Defining specific goals enables you to perform a gap analysis of what
actions you must take to bridge the gap (or possibly chasm) between where
you are now and what you want to become or achieve. Effective goal
setting begins with a pen or pencil and a calendar, training log, or climbing
notebook. If you don’t write down your goals, chances are they will remain
intangible hopes and dreams that never materialize.
It’s best to set goals in three time frames: short term (daily), medium
term (weekly or monthly), and long term (yearly or “career” goals). Write
down the goals in precise terms and with realistic deadlines. And since
pictures are even more motivating than words on paper, it’s crucial to create
a mental picture (representing the goal) that you can recall in your mind’s
eye on demand. The more precise and focused your picture and written
goal, the easier it will be for you to zero in on the target and take actions
that will someday lead you to realize the goal.
Next, create a mission statement that summarizes the purpose of each
goal-setting time frame, such as “Short term, I strive for the most effective
ninety-minute workout possible” or “Medium term, I am committed to
redpointing my first 5.11 by the end of the summer.” Now share these goals
with your climbing partner, a close friend, or significant other—someone
who will hold you accountable and help remind you of the mission.
Finally, write down what one or two (or more) things you will give up in
order to reach your short-, medium-, and long-term goals. This vital step is
missing from most conventional goal-setting exercises, and it may be the
number one reason why so many people fail to achieve their big goals in
life. It’s a fact that you cannot add something new and achieve the ideal
outcome without sacrificing something else in its place. Ponder this
powerful idea. It may explain why some of your past or present goals
remain elusive.

SHORT-TERM GOALS
Short-term goals define your daily game plan. They help focus your
thoughts and actions so that you are not swayed by what others are doing
and don’t waste precious time on less important activities (TV, partying,
surfing the Net, excessive socializing). The more hectic your life, the more
crucial it is that you spend a few minutes before bed or first thing in the
morning doing some short-term goal setting. Folks with less difficult daily
schedules may only need to set short-term goals relating to the workout du
jour. Begin by writing down the primary mission of the workout, then list
the specific exercises, sets, and reps as well as the approximate amount of
time you will dedicate to each part of the workout (see “An Example of
Short-Term Goal Setting” below). Don’t forget to list what you will give up
(relative to previous days or your peers) in order to fulfill these short-term
commitments.

MEDIUM-TERM GOALS
Medium-term goals give shape and direction to your schedule over the
course of weeks and months. This planning is best done on a calendar so
you can effectively dovetail your workouts and climbing trips with your
other nonclimbing activities. Try to roughly plan things out a few months in
advance (see the “Setting Medium-Term Goals” exercise below).
First, block in the big events such as climbing trips, competitions, work
and family obligations, and the like. Next, write in your proposed workout
and climbing schedule, with special attention to maintaining enough rest
days in the game plan. With the most important items now in place, you can
fill in the many little, less important things in life where time allows (or this
can be done on an ad hoc basis). Remember to sum up your medium-term
goals with one overriding primary goal, as well as listing the activities you
will forfeit in order to attain this lofty goal.

LONG-TERM GOALS
Long-term goal setting is a fun and invaluable activity in which you
condense onto paper the numerous “dream” or “I wish” goals floating
around in your mind. If there is to be any chance of them ever becoming
reality, it’s vital that they be liberated from the dreamland of your mind and
put down in black and white (see the “Setting Long-Term Goals” exercise
below). A magical force begins to act in your life when you write down
these mega goals—your subconscious mind will go to work day and night
on achieving them, and your conscious mind will suddenly find them more
believable (and achievable).

An Example of Short-Term Goal Setting
TODAY’S MISSION
Focus on improving my footwork and conserving energy by practicing
skills and techniques.
WHAT I WILL GIVE UP TO ACHIEVE THIS GOAL
The usual bouldering games and competitions at the gym.
For today, I’ll stay off all routes that are beyond my on-site ability.
I won’t rush home to watch TV.
WHAT I WILL DO
1. Warm up with fifteen minutes of light bouldering, gentle
stretching, and two sets of pull-ups.
2. Perform fifteen minutes of the traverse-training drill with focus
on light grip, precise footwork, and smooth movement.
3. Toprope several climbs within one number grade of my limit
with the focus on practicing technique, not performance

outcome (whether or not I fall).
My practice goals are to concentrate on careful positioning and
use of each foothold; to climb as briskly, smoothly, and
decisively as possible between rests; to accurately read
sequences before leaving the ground and while at each rest
position; to remain positive, relaxed, and centered during each
climb.
4. Perform three sets of ten repetitions of the one-arm lunging
exercise.
5. Perform three sets of hypergravity pull-ups with ten pounds.
6. Cool down with five to ten minutes of stretching.
7. Eat a good meal within one to two hours after the workout.
8. Get seven to eight hours of sleep.
Exercise: Setting Medium-Term Goals
Your medium-term goals can include both climbing and nonclimbing items;
we’ll focus on the climbing-related goals here. Write down your top
training goals (mental, physical, and technical) for the next three months, as
well as a few climbing goals such as to-do routes or new areas to visit.
Distill these goals into a single primary goal for the period, and remember
to list a few things you will freely give up in order to reach these goals.

Exercise: Setting Long-Term Goals
Go somewhere quiet, allow yourself to relax for a few minutes, and ponder
what long-term mega goals would really energize you and make for an
exceptional journey. I call these mega goals because they are the few events
that you most want to achieve in your life given your current perspective.
For example, you might have an ultimate grade of climbing you’d like to
achieve, or possibly a specific dream climb to send or mountain to summit.
Think about where you’d go if time and money were not an issue—put it
down on paper and the odds increase a thousandfold that you will someday
be pulling down there! By all means write down a few of your nonclimbing
mega goals as well, but keep the total list down to between six and eight
items.

As in setting your short- and medium-term goals, it’s absolutely critical
that you write down a couple of major things that you will completely give
up in order to reach these mega goals. Consider the activities, possessions,
and people that drain your time, focus, and energy.

Taking Action and Making Course Corrections

The Cycle of Improvement will spiral you upward in ability as long as the
actions taken provide movement toward your goals. Sadly, taking
consistent, disciplined action in the direction of worthy goals is very
difficult for some people. The results of their misdirected actions always
seem to leave them in an all-too-familiar situation. The phrase same s___,
different day is born of this affliction.
If any of this sounds familiar (in climbing or life), it’s important to begin
taking notice of just who is directing the actions you take on a daily basis.
In many cases you’ll discover that outside forces are calling the shots for
you—that is, you are taking the actions someone else wants you to make,
not those congruent with your goals. This is what the multibillion-dollar
advertising industry is all about. Large companies spend millions with the
sole intent of directing your actions in their favor (to make them money and
drain your wallet). So while you might have a very worthy goal of, say,
“getting out of debt” or “saving for a house,” advertisers cleverly divert
your actions in their favor. Unless you are acutely aware of what’s going on
(and the power they wield over you), you will veer off your course and onto
theirs—and maybe never reach your goals.
This may sound negative, but the same thing often happens when you’re
training at the gym or climbing at the crag. Instead of doing the precise
exercises and drills you need to improve your weaknesses, you end up
climbing down the blind alley of someone else’s agenda. Consider how
many climbing days you’ve spent working on someone else’s dream project
(one that is either over your head or just not what you had planned) when
you would have gained more by getting on a different type of climb. Or
ponder how often you’ve gone to the gym and ended up socializing and just
climbing mindlessly with no goal or direction. Sure, these kinds of evenings
can be relaxing and fun once in a while, but on a regular basis they will not
make you a better climber.

The win-win solution is to find a partner equally motivated to taking
actions that will produce the fastest possible gains in ability. With this
person you can evenly split the climbing time, so that you each can work
effectively toward your goals. Unfortunately, in many partnerships one
person makes all the calls and gets most of the benefits of the time spent
training or climbing.
In summary, strive for hour-to-hour, day-to-day awareness of the “whats”
and “whys” of the actions you are taking. By formulating short-term goals,
as discussed earlier, you can best maintain your focus on the things you
need to do to improve short term and advance toward your meaningful
medium- and long-term goals. Finally, foster an acute awareness of the
results you are getting from your actions. Peak performers are those who
most rapidly recognize when they are off course, and respond with a
reassessment of the situation and an appropriate course correction toward
the desired goal.

Tips for Achieving Your Goals
1. Know yourself. Live your passion. What worthy goals will
drive you to excellence?
2. Regularly assess your strengths and weaknesses. What’s
holding you back in terms of action (or inaction) and selfdefeating thoughts and habits?
3. Take the self-assessment in this chapter at least once per year,
and consider getting the objective evaluation of a climbing
coach.
4. Regularly evaluate the effectiveness of your actions—are you
obtaining the intended results? If not, make course corrections
that will yield more effective actions.
5. Don’t be afraid to step away from the crowd and pursue your
own mega goals. Ally with like-minded individuals, and avoid
people with bad attitudes and unproductive behavior.
6. Set mega goals that will inspire and energize you from sunrise
to sunset, and make your life an amazing journey.

If it’s beginning to sound like becoming a better climber is a very mental
thing, you are right! So let’s dive into chapter 3, “Mental Training.”

Phil Hoffman deep-water soloing at Summersville Lake, West Virginia.
DAN BRAYACK

CHAPTER THREE
Mental Training

The wise man will be the master of his mind. A fool will be its slave.
—Publilius Syrus

The quickest way to enhance your performance in almost anything is to
improve the quality of your thinking. This is definitely true in climbing,
whether you’re working a highball boulder problem, sport route, multipitch
traditional line, or alpine route. All performance operates from the inside
out—your beliefs, focus, fears, confidence, preparation, and problemsolving abilities form the foundation from which you will either succeed or
fail.
Great performances begin with bulletproof confidence, singular focus,
positive emotions, and a tough yet agile mind-set. Conversely, setbacks and
failures result from the worry, doubts, tension, and uncertainties that are
born from a poorly harnessed brain running wild with fearful thoughts. It’s
my belief that whether you (or I) will succeed or fail on a climb is often
predetermined in your subconscious (or even conscious) before you ever
step off the ground.
While off-season strength training and year-round technique training are
paramount for progressing into the higher grades, during the climbing
season your biggest breakthroughs will come from toning and flexing your
mental muscle. Toward this end, this chapter details two dozen powerful
mental strategies and skills that will help elevate your performance and
enjoyment.

Practice these skills with the same dedication and resolve as you would a
new strength-training program, and you’ll be pleasantly surprised with the
results. Obtain the greatest payoff by applying these skills 24/7, not just
when you feel like it. For some, an almost instant breakthrough will follow
on the rock, while others will need to persist and let these mental skills
build to a critical value before they will produce a noticeable impact on
climbing. (This depends upon the current degree of tone or atrophy of your
mental muscle.)
Recognize that all these mental-training skills are interlaced and can
produce a powerful synergy when all are in practice. In aggregate they may
produce an effect similar to unloading a ten-pound weight (or more!) from
your back that you have unknowingly been hauling up climbs. I call this
using your Mental Wings.

Mental Wings for Improving Performance
The late, great Wolfgang Güllich was fond of saying that “the brain is the
most important muscle for climbing.” What makes this statement even more
provocative is the fact that Güllich was one of the strongest people to ever
pull down on stone. From the mid-1980s until his death in a car accident in
1992, he opened up several new grades of maximum difficulty by
leveraging the synergy of his physical and mental fortitude. I support
Wolfie’s sentiment not only because the mind is one-third of the climbing
performance triad (see figure 1.1) but also due to the fact that poor mental
control can instantly sabotage your physical and technical abilities.
Below are ten strategies that you can start using today in all aspects of
your life. Apply them faithfully with the knowledge that most truly
successful men and women in this sport possess these skills.

1. Separate your self-image from your performance.

If you are reading this book, then climbing surely plays a major role in your
life. However, if your self-image is tied too strongly or singularly to this
role, it leads to an obsessive need to perform perfectly every time you touch
the rock. The result is intense pressure, anxiety, and fear of failure—all of
which will make performing your best difficult, if not impossible.
The fact is, you will perform best in a process-oriented frame of mind,
where the outcome is accepted as unknown and allowed to unfold without
anticipation. Detaching your self-image from your climbing performance is
the first step to escaping an outcome-oriented mind-set. Strive to focus only
on things immediate to the act of climbing—your warm-up, mental
rehearsal, gear selection; when climbing, focus only on the move at hand,
never projecting ahead. Accept the feedback the route gives you without
frustration or judgment and liberate yourself to try new things, take
chances, and—most important—fall. Such process orientation and selfimage detachment will reduce pressure and anxiety; paradoxically, you’ll
climb better by not needing to!

2. Surround yourself with positive people.

There is an aura of influence that surrounds each of us, and its effects are
based on our personality and attitude toward life and its events. Your
thoughts and actions will affect the thoughts and actions of those around
you, and vice versa. As I see it, there are three options—either climb alone,
climb with upbeat and positive people, or climb with cynical and negative
people. But why would you ever want to climb with the negative, excusemaking complainers of the climbing world? Their negative aura will
adversely impact your climbing and enjoyment whether you recognize it or
not. The bottom line: Vow to either climb with positive individuals or climb
solo. Both approaches can be hugely rewarding.

3. Stretch your comfort zone.

To improve in anything, your goals must exceed your current grasp and you
must be willing to push beyond your comfort zone in your reach. In
performing on the vertical plane, this means climbing onward despite
mental and physical discomfort; it means challenging your fears head-on by
doing what you fear; and it means attempting what looks impossible to you
based on past experience. Through this process, you will stretch your
abilities to a new level, redefine your belief system, and reshape your
personal vision of what is possible.

4. Anticipate and proactively manage your risk.

Climbing is an activity with obvious inherent risks, and the desire to climb
harder often requires taking on even more. This can come in the form of
obvious physical danger such as a potentially injurious fall, or as less
tangible mental risk like opening yourself up to failure, criticism, and
embarrassment. It’s interesting to note that for some climbers, the physical
danger can feel more tolerable than the mental. As an example, consider a
climber who foolishly continues upward on a horrendously dangerous route
he’s not prepared for because of the fear of being dissed (by those standing
safely on the ground!) should he back off.
Make it your MO to carefully assess all the possible risks before starting
up every climb. Determine ways that you can reduce the risk of the climb
(such as rigging a belay differently than usual or getting an extra spotter or
crash pad), and anticipate how you will respond to new emerging risk as
you climb (for instance, discovering there are no protection placements
higher up the route). As for the mental risks you might face (like the fear of
failure), see Mental Strategy 1 on separating your self-image from your
performance.

5. Fortify your confidence.

Your degree of self-confidence is primarily based on your self-image and
the thoughts you possess minute by minute and day by day. For example,
pondering past failures, allowing free rein to demeaning self-talk, or
dwelling on the chance of falling will deflate self-confidence and sow the
seeds of failure.
Conversely, peak performers consciously narrow their thoughts and focus
onto things that will fortify and build confidence. You, too, can do this as
you prepare for an ascent, by taking a mental inventory of past successes,
reviewing and believing in your skills and strengths, and acknowledging
your preparation and investment in training. Do all this and you will grow
more energized and confident as you engage the rock, and most likely climb
your very best.

6. Use visualization to foster a peak performance zone.

“The zone” is that state where everything comes together for a perfect
ascent that seems almost effortless and automatic. The trick is being able to
create this state on demand, despite stressful conditions such as the heat of
competition or before a hard redpoint attempt. Here’s how.
First, use visualization to reenact the positive feelings of a good
performance in a past similar situation. Create about a sixty-second mental
movie of this past event using all your senses. Make the pictures crisp and
bright, and let the emotion and feeling of the success take over your body.
With the positive, confident emotions of this past event now internalized for
use in the present, you can begin mental rehearsal of the upcoming climb.
Begin by visualizing yourself climbing the route from a detached on-TV
perspective—it’s in this mode of visualization that you’d develop a
sequence and strategy for the ascent. Next, close your eyes and climb the
route in your mind’s eye—feel the moves play out successfully to create a
mental blueprint for action (you’ll find more detailed instruction on
visualization later in this chapter). Now open your eyes and take on the
route for real, one move at a time.

7. Use preclimb rituals to create an ideal performance state.

The things you think and do in the minutes and moments before you climb
form the foundation onto which your performance is built. A shaky
foundation generally leads to a shaky performance; a solid foundation
usually gives birth to a solid performance. The nature of your foundation
(sand or stone?) is influenced by the quality of your preclimb rituals. These
are things you do to best prepare for the ascent, including scoping the route,
visualizing the sequence, preparing your gear, warming up, and even your
way of putting on your shoes. Everything down to tiny details, such as
breathing rate, posture, and final thoughts, should be programmed into the
rituals that lead up to the moment you step onto the rock.
Develop your rituals based on past experience. What things did you think
or do before some of your best ascents in the past? What did you eat or
drink, how did you warm up, and how long did you rest between climbs?
Awareness of all the things (little and big) that led up to your best
performances is a key to being able to reproduce similar results in the
future. Once your rituals become tried and true, stick to them!

8. Control stress and tension before they control you.

This strategy is central to climbing your best, because tension kills
performance. Period. Tension is often a physical manifestation of mental
stress, although it can also develop in overstressed muscles or as the result
of an inadequate warm-up. Either way, the outcome is the same—poor
motor control (inefficient movement), unproductive emotions, and quite
often failure. Here are two ways to control tension and stress on the fly.
First, direct your thinking away from pressure-producing thoughts and
focus only on the process of climbing. Engage the route completely and
stay in the moment. Second, use rest positions to break from the process of
climbing and direct your thoughts inward for a tension check. Use the sixstep ANSWER sequence (described later in this chapter) to clear tension
and return to center in less than one minute—perfect for use at every
midroute rest position.

9. Engage in positive self-talk.

Inside our heads, each of us has a “critic” voice and a “doer” voice that gab
throughout our waking hours. While the critic voice can be useful in a few
situations (such as evaluating weaknesses or performance errors), it’s the
doer voice that compels action, keeps us positive, and, in fact, helps us
perform effectively. Controlling this internal self-talk is fundamental to
controlling our attitude and climbing our best.
Which voice—the critic or the doer—rules your mind? Hopefully you’ll
conclude that the doer’s voice rules your mental roost about 95 percent of
the time (or more). If not, you can surely improve your performance by
eliminating the self-destructive internal dialogue. The first step is to sever
your ties to negative, critical people: Their verbal and nonverbal
communication will absolutely pollute your thoughts and attitude.
Next, strive to heighten your awareness of your self-talk—the goal is to
think about what you are thinking about!—and allow the doer voice to run
the talk show. When you notice the critic voice speaking up, determine if it
is useful (for instance, to help with risk management) or just trash talk. Take
the critic’s non-useful comments and invert them into positive statements.
For example, change This route looks impossible to This route looks
challenging; replace I feel nervous with I feel energized; convert I’ll
probably fall into I think I can do this, but if I fall it’s okay because I’ll get it
next time. Direct such positive self-talk on every climb and throughout
every day and you will marshal psychic energy that enhances your
performance in all you do.

10. Love climbing, no matter what.

A common trait of successful people is resilience to criticism and bad
results, and an unwavering belief that success will come with time and
effort. Developing such a mind-set takes a disciplined effort to constantly
spin negative feedback into some kind of a positive—real winners never
dwell on the setbacks or accept defeat.
Remember, climbing is about the journey, not the summit. Vow to love
the process of climbing and all it entails, whether it is a perfect send or a
painful struggle. Sure, a perfect ascent is immensely gratifying; however,
it’s on the arduous journey that you actually become a better climber and
grow as a person. The bottom line: Love climbing unconditionally, and you
will always have a great day on the rocks!

Controlling Your Emotions
Your emotions have a direct effect on your body and mind. What you are
feeling exerts an influence over the quality of your actions and your ways of
thinking (see figure 3.1). Consider how nervousness before a climb can
derail your concentration as well as trigger preclimb jitters throughout your
body. We can then conclude that emotional control is essential for optimal
performance.

Figure 3.1 How Emotions Run the Show
Observe great climbers such as Chris Sharma and Lynn Hill at work and
you will notice either positive, productive emotions or no emotion at all.
Even when they fall, you sense little anger or angst—only love of the
process of climbing, which occasionally includes falling. Now consider
how your thoughts and emotions evolve when the going gets tough—do
they sometimes become negative, fearful, or even self-defeating? If so, then
your physical performance will absolutely suffer given the intimate mindemotion-body relationship shown in figure 3.1.

The following storyline illustrates how negative emotions can sabotage
performance.
1. The climber leaves the ground and moves cautiously through the
initial moves. He looks apprehensive, as if he’s trying not to make
any mistakes.
2. As he enters more difficult moves, his breathing becomes shallow
and irregular. He may even hold his breath on hard sequences.
3. Negative emotional energy rises, resulting in increased muscular
tension and mental stress.
4. This building stress disrupts his coordination, balance, and
footwork. Movements become tight, mechanical, and inefficient. He
begins to overgrip holds.
5. He begins to hold back on hard moves, afraid to fully commit, and
hangs out too long on marginal rests.
6. The fight-or-flight syndrome is triggered, adding some adrenaline to
the mix. This burst of energy may help the climber thrash through a
few more moves; more commonly, however, the jolt causes him to
grab the rope or a quick draw, and retreat from the route.
7. The death grip sets in and flames out his muscles.
8. He falls and lets loose a few expletives.
9. Hanging on the rope, he engages in critical thinking that further
raises the tide of negative emotions.
Does any part of this story sound familiar? If so, I have some good news.
You can learn to rein in your emotions and thus open up a whole new level
of climbing performance and enjoyment. If you have good emotional
control already, I bet you can still improve your climbing by modulating
your arousal level. Let’s explore this murky subject of emotions and discuss
how you can make some immediate positive changes.

Evaluating Your Emotional State

In evaluating your emotional state, the goal is to become aware of the
“sign” of your emotions—positive or negative—and the magnitude of your
arousal, high or low. Obviously, positive emotions have different effects on
the mind and body than negative emotions. Similarly, the intensity of these
emotions (the arousal level) plays a role in how you think and feel. To
better understand this relationship, consider the Energy-Emotion Matrix
(see figure 3.2).
The Energy-Emotion Matrix has four quadrants: high energy, positive
emotion (upper right); low energy, positive emotion (lower right); high
energy, negative emotion (upper left); and low energy, negative emotion
(lower left). The matrix represents a continuum of emotion and energy
across these four quadrants. Therefore, you can evaluate your present
location in the matrix by grading your current energy level on a scale from
0 to 10 (low to high) and scoring your current emotional state on a scale
from -5 (extremely negative) to +5 (extremely positive). Knowing where
you are in the matrix and having the ability to change this location if it’s not
optimal in the current situation is fundamental to becoming a peak
performer in any endeavor.

Figure 3.2 The Energy-Emotion Matrix
Obviously, your energy level and emotions fluctuate throughout the day
and over the course of a climb, so your place in the matrix changes hour by
hour and, maybe, minute to minute in extreme situations. I believe it’s
valuable to study your place in the matrix in everyday, nonclimbing
situations, since your most common daily state will heavily determine your
disposition when climbing (it’s unlikely you can be a negative person at
home and work, then become completely positive when you go climbing).
Use the blank energy-emotion time line contained in appendix B to plot
your changing energy-emotional state throughout the day, as shown in
figure 3.3. Begin upon waking in the morning, and score your state every
thirty minutes, or when some event causes your emotion or energy to
change in an instant.

Figure 3.3 Sample Chart of Energy-Emotion Levels
After evaluating your emotional state for a few days, see if you can
identify any patterns. What time(s) of the day is your energy high or low?
What events seem to trigger you becoming more positive or negative?
Recognizing these patterns (and effects) empowers you to make
modifications, such as striving to avoid negative triggers. Likewise, you
may be able to see what charges up your energy level (and when) and what
type of things make it tank. If you can’t avoid negative triggers, it’s vital
that you know how to turn your states around. Below we’ll discuss ways to
modify your emotional state.
It’s also beneficial to track how your state changes over the course of a
day at the crags, and especially during an attempt of a hard boulder problem
or route. While you certainly can’t write down your score while on a route,
you can mentally score yourself by simply asking yourself, What quadrant
am I in?

Before you can change your state, you must first determine the optimal
state for the present moment. Of course, beginning in a positive emotional
state is always ideal, but the optimal magnitude of your arousal (energy
level) will vary depending on the type of task you are involved in. For
instance, a low-positive (Quadrant IV) state is ideal for taking a test or
meeting with your boss, while a high-positive (Quadrant II) is best for
working out at the gym or playing a high-intensity sport. In climbing, it’s
almost always best to be in the low-energy, positive-emotion quadrant—
creative thinking, learning, and fine motor skills all demand a relaxed,
positive state. The exception would be when psyching up for a vicious
boulder problem or a short, powerful sport route. In these cases, a highenergy, positive state is ideal.

Changing Your Emotional States

You can rapidly change your emotional state by leveraging the known
relationships among the mind, emotions, and body (see figure 3.1). Just as
your emotions exert an influence over your mind and body, you can use
your mind and body to influence your emotions. In negative people the
process tends to be reactive and runs itself, whereas happy, productive
people are skilled at using their mind and body to produce positive
emotions. So if you make it habit to carry your body in a positive way
(good posture, head up, smiling) and think in a positive way (grateful for
what you have, reliving only good memories, focusing on future goals), you
will feel positive and, in fact, be a generally happy and successful person.
This is one of the most powerful distinctions in this book—live it!
You should now have a good sense of the things you can do to shift into a
more positive state. Physiologically, you can take on a more extended
posture and crack a smile, you can jump up and down or do anything
physical, you can pump your fist in the air and exclaim “Yeah!” All these
physical things will effect a rapid change in your emotions—try it now!
Mentally, you can replay great events or climbs from the past, think about
all you’ve accomplished in your life, ponder your good health or your
fortune to have been born in a first-world country (where you can actually
engage in a luxury activity like climbing), or visualize the medium- and
long-term goals that excite you.

Tips for Optimizing Your Emotions
1. Regularly tune into your thoughts and self-talk. Evaluate what
you are hearing. What quadrant are you in?
2. Supplant negative thinking with positive, productive thoughts.
Direct solution-oriented thinking and dwell on your goals.

3. Use your body to change your state. Roll your shoulders back,
take a few deep belly breaths, crack a big smile and laugh.
4. Leverage your emotional resources by reviewing past
successes. In your mind’s eye, vividly relive past great climbs
and other amazing life events—feel the positive emotions
charge you up in the present moment.
Hopefully you now recognize that either your emotions are controlling
you or you are in control of your emotions. Happy people and peak
performers (in sports and life) are those who are able to control their
emotions and adjust their arousal level on demand. In our frantic society,
and when participating in a potentially high-stress sport such as climbing,
these emotion-modulating skills are invaluable. Strive to monitor your
position in the matrix throughout the day and optimize your state when
needed, and you’ll discover a new quality of climbing and living!

Dealing with Fear
As I stated in How to Climb 5.12, “the ‘no fear’ mentality is for buffoons,
beer-guzzling frat boys, and couch potatoes.” In climbing, reasonable fears
keep you alive long enough to realize your potential and to send a long
lifetime’s worth of stellar routes. For example, fear of taking a ground fall
compels you to seek good protection on the lead and to drag a rope in the
first place.
It’s unreasonable fears that derail performance. Things such as fear of
falling on a well-protected route, fear of physical discomfort, fear of failure,
and fear of embarrassment must all be eliminated if you are to climb your
best. There are also preclimb fears such as I might be too tall, or too short,
or too weak to do the climb, which—left unchecked—give birth to reality.
Finally, there are subconscious, preprogrammed fears that are the root of
many of the “dumb things” that seem to just happen. Have you ever fallen
after the crux when the route is in the bag? Or have you slipped off a large
hold or botched a wired sequence even though you felt in control? It may be
that such mistakes are the result of unchallenged inner fears, not lack of
ability. The key is to deal with your fears head-on (and not to run from
them). Use the following exercise to identify and analyze your common
fears. As the fears reveal themselves, use logic and reason to specifically
counter each. If no logical counter is evident, however, the fear may be
reasonable and worth heeding.

Identify and Analyze Your Common Climbing Fears

Start by writing down recurrent fears that regularly hurt your performance.
If you can’t think of any on the spot, go for a climb and pay special
attention to every preclimb thought and while-you-climb concern. List your
fears down the left column, and then write an assessment of each fear in the
space to the right. Use logic and reason to counter each fear. Your
fraudulent fears should be easy to counter. If you identify that a fear is real
and useful (for saving your neck), however, then you want to write down
what action you can take to mitigate the fear.

Fear

Assessment
Dealing with fear is an ongoing process since our fears are always
changing. Review each poor performance and identify what fear(s) may
have contributed to your difficulties. To help you with this analysis, here’s a
primer on four basic climbing fears: fear of falling, fear of pain, fear of
failure, and fear of embarrassment.

Fear of Falling

Fear of falling is inherent to climbing. Interestingly enough, it’s not really
falling that we fear but not knowing what the fall will be like. This explains
why your first fall on a route is the scariest, while subsequent falls are often
much less stressful. Beginners probably need some hands-on proof that falls
can be safe. The best way for a would-be leader to gain trust in the system
is by taking some intentional falls. Find a steep climb with bomber
protection, use a good rope (and double-check your knot and buckle) and
belayer, and then take a few practice falls. Start off with 2-foot falls and
build up to about 12-footers (with the gear just a few feet below you). A
more experienced climber fearful of falling on an upcoming on-sight climb
can counter the fear during the preclimb warm-up. The tactic here is to
mentally replay some past inconsequential falls and to believe fully that
falls on this climb will be no different (if that is indeed the case—some falls
are obviously deadly, and only a fool would ignore that possibility).

Fear of Pain

When pushing your limits, fear of pain can become a critical weakness. It
causes you to give up long before your body has reached its physical
limitations. The pain of climbing a continuously strenuous route is akin to
that of running a mile at full speed—it freaking hurts! Fortunately, the pain
is brief and perseverance pays big dividends. Decide to push yourself a bit
further into the discomfort zone each time you’re on a hard route. Soon
your pain threshold will be redefined, as will your limits on the rock.

Fear of Failure

This deep-seated fear is often instilled during childhood when almost every
action is classified by our family, teachers, and friends as either a success or
a failure. We’ve all had childhood situations where the fear of failure was so
gripping that we became immobilized and time seemed to stop. Fortunately,
adults generally don’t react quite this intensely, but it’s still common for us
to imagine all the bad things that could possibly go wrong. Once triggered,
these negative thoughts can snowball and, more often than not, become
self-fulfilling prophecies.
In climbing, fear of failure causes you to hold back. As your attack on a
route becomes less aggressive than required, you’ll find yourself secondguessing sequences in the midst of doing them, your breathing will become
shallow, and you’ll begin to overgrip the rock. You may even fall prey to
paralysis by analysis.
Eliminate fear of failure in one of three ways. First, focus on what is
probable instead of what is possible. Sure, it’s human nature to always
consider the worst-case scenario, but this almost never comes to pass.
Counter these thoughts by considering what is probable and realistic based
on past experiences.
The second way to nix this fear is to focus all your attention on the
process of climbing, instead of pondering the possible outcomes.
Concentrate on the things immediate to your performance—precise foot
placements, relaxing your grip, moving quickly onto the next rest position,
and so on. Your limited supply of energy is too valuable to waste worrying
about how high you will climb or the eventual results. As William Levinson
points out in his book The Way of Strategy, “To succeed, we must not care if
we fail.”
Along this same line, you must adopt the attitude that It’s okay to fall
(assuming a safe fall) and that Falling won’t bother me. I’ll just get back up
and give it another go. By willingly accepting this fate (if it should even
happen), you totally dissolve the fear of failure that handcuffs so many

climbers. Therefore, by being okay with falling, it’s less likely you will.
This simple idea is one of the most powerful in this book.

Fear of Embarrassment

Finally, there is fear of embarrassment and being dissed. Get over this now
or you’ll never fully enjoy climbing, or reach your potential. Realize that
occasional bad-performance days are inevitable. Instead of trying to avoid
them, simply accept that they happen, analyze why they happened, then
bury them. With this attitude you will be free to try chancy moves and risk
an occasional mistake. In the long run you’ll often look like a hero, but
never like a zero. Surely this is better than embracing the critics and
accepting mediocrity all the time.
Don’t forget, your friends know how good a climber you are, and they
won’t think any worse of you because of a poor performance. Anyone else
critical of you really doesn’t matter. Work on improving your selfconfidence and don’t let the criticisms of others invade your thoughts.
In the end, embrace the attitude that there are no failures, only results.
The results might not be ideal, but they do in fact contain important clues
for improvement—do not overlook these guideposts for future success! The
bottom line: By challenging your fears and doubling your exposure to
fearful situations, you will double your rate of improvement and learn to
excel in the most difficult and stressful situations.

Tips for Managing Fear
1. Analyze your fears to determine if they are real or imagined.
Take action to mitigate the risk(s) associated with your
legitimate fears.
2. Overcome imagined fears with reason—know that these
phantom fears are bogus. Redirect your thinking in productive
ways and resolve to dismiss all other illusionary fears that
might surface.

3. Focus on the process of climbing, and detach from the possible
outcomes. Let the climb unfold one move at a time.
4. Predetermine that you will accept failure should it happen.
Recognize that you are not defined by your successes or
failures—however, you are defined by the way you react to
success and failure.

Relaxation Training and Centering
More than ever before, there are a multitude of things in our lives that can
result in high levels of stress. Our jobs, relationships, possessions, even
driving to the crag can trigger a stress response such as muscular tension or
negative thoughts. Interestingly, it’s not the events or things in our lives that
actually cause the stress, but instead our reaction to them. Knowing this,
you are empowered to control your reactions to everything you experience
and, in turn, regulate the total amount of stress in your life.
Recognizing that an event or situation is causing you to become stressed
is the first step toward controlling its effects. Foster an acute awareness of
your tension levels by regularly asking yourself things like, How do I feel?
or Are there any growing pockets of muscular tension? Make such tension
checks a regular part of your day. For instance, do a quick check of your
tension and stress levels every hour, and especially before any type of event
that requires an optimal physiological state (a big meeting or hard climb).
Keep an eye out for telltale signs of building tension such as a clenched jaw,
overgripping a pencil or the steering wheel, or tightness and burning in the
muscles of your neck, shoulders, or back.
On the rock, tension reveals itself in overgripping of holds, nervously
muscling through a crux move, or a general lack of fluid motion. Again,
your goal is to recognize and tone down the tension when it begins;
otherwise it will rapidly snowball and sabotage your performance. This, in
fact, is a common cause of blowing a sequence you thought you had wired,
or falling off a route that should be well within your ability. By killing your
economy of movement, building tension and stress may very well kill your
performance. And it’s probably been happening for so long that you don’t
even recognize its negative effects on your climbing.
The antidote to tension is, of course, relaxation. Following are two highly
effective relaxation strategies as well as a great on-the-rock centering
sequence that I call the ANSWER. Experiment with all three, and try to

incorporate their use throughout your daily activities. In a short time you
will become a master of stress and find yourself feeling much more relaxed
—and also climbing harder, thanks to an increase in apparent strength (a
result of reduced tension in the antagonist muscles and elimination of
overgripping).

Progressive Relaxation

In the early 1940s American physician Edmund Jacobson developed a
technique known as progressive relaxation, because he felt that by fully
relaxing the muscles, you would in turn relax the mind (Garfield 1984). He
found that relaxation could be best learned by deliberately tensing and
relaxing specific muscle groups (see the “Progressive Relaxation Sequence”
exercise that follows). This process results in a sharpened awareness of
tension levels in the different parts of your body, and the ability to release
the tension on demand. In time, you will be able to discern even small
increases in muscular tension and act to immediately eliminate the tension
before there’s any degradation in performance.

Progressive Relaxation Sequence

Perform the following procedure at least once a day. I find it most useful
during a midday break, as part of a long rest period at the crag, or last thing
before falling asleep. Initially, the process will take about fifteen minutes.
With practice, you’ll be able to move quickly through the sequence and
reach a state of complete relaxation in less than five minutes. Concentrate
on flexing only the muscle(s) specified in each step. This is an invaluable
skill you will find very handy when using the Differential Relaxation and
ANSWER Sequences that are discussed later.
1. Go to a quiet location and sit or lie in a comfortable position.
2. Close your eyes and take five deep belly breaths. Inhale slowly
through your nose to a slow, silent count to five, then gradually
exhale through your mouth to a slow, silent ten-count.
3. Keeping your eyes closed and maintaining slow, relaxed breathing,
tense the muscles in your right lower leg for five seconds. Feel the
tension in your right foot and calf muscles, then let go and relax the
muscles completely. Compare the difference in sensation between
the tense and relaxed states. Repeat this process with the left lower
leg. Now, with both lower leg areas relaxed, say to yourself, My feet
and lower legs feel warm and light. Upon saying this a few times,
the muscles in this area will drop into a deep state of relaxation.
4. Next, perform the same sequence in the muscles of the upper leg
(one leg at a time). Tense the muscles in your upper leg for five
seconds, then relax them. After doing this with both legs, finish up
by thinking, My upper legs feel warm and light. Feel all tension
dissolve as your upper legs drop into deep relaxation.
5. Repeat this process in your hands and lower arms. Tense the
muscles below your right elbow by making a tight fist for five
seconds; then relax these muscles completely. Repeat this with the

left hand and forearm, and conclude with the mantra, My hand and
forearm muscles feel warm and light.
6. Repeat this procedure on the muscles in the upper arm.
7. Next, shift the focus to the many muscles of the torso (including the
chest, abdominal, back, and shoulder areas). Repeat the process
exactly.
8. Conclude with the muscles of the face and neck.
9. You should now be in a deep state of relaxation (possibly, you will
have fallen asleep). Mentally scan yourself from head to toe for any
isolated pockets of remaining tension, and drain them with the warm
and light mantra.
10. At this point you can open your eyes and return to work or
climbing with a renewed sense of calm and focus. Or you can
leverage this relaxed state by performing some mind programming
—visualization of the process of reaching some goal or the act of
climbing some project route.

Using Differential Relaxation to Enhance Performance

Differential relaxation is used in active situations where you wish to relax
any muscle(s) not needed for the task at hand. I find this skill especially
useful in regaining an optimal state while hanging out and chalking at rest
positions on the rock. I scan for unnecessary muscular contractions or
pockets of tension and, with a few deep belly breaths, visualize the tension
draining from the muscle like air escaping from a balloon. Try this next
time you go climbing.
Many climbers shortchange themselves and reduce their apparent
strength because of undue tension in muscles not needed for upward motion
or stability. Unwanted contraction of the antagonist muscles or
overcontraction of the prime movers interferes with even the simplest
movements and wastes a tremendous amount of energy. Observe how
climbers who try too hard or get gripped on a route become extremely rigid
and mechanical, maybe even while moving through an easy sequence.
Instead of using their muscles optimally, they’re pitting one muscle against
another, resulting in stress, fatigue, and premature failure. Conversely, the
best climbers actively control undue tension (it’s a mainly unconscious
process in top climbers), move with grace and fluidity, and maximize
economy of motion and energy use. As masters of differential relaxation,
they can move smooth and fast like a Porsche but still get the high “milespergallon” of a Honda.
Skill in differential relaxation comes with increased sensitivity to various
degrees of relaxation and tension—something you will learn quickly
through daily use. Practice by releasing tension in unused muscles while in
the midst of common everyday activities like driving your car, sitting at
your desk, working around home, or even lying down for a quick nap. Scan
your body for pockets of tension or any contracting muscles that aren’t
critical for the task at hand. For me, it’s typically tension in the shoulders, a
clenched jaw (if I’m concentrating intensely), or unnecessary fidgeting by
my feet.

On the rock, strive for acute awareness of tension increases so you can
nip it in the bud before it results in a drop-off in performance. It’s my
practice to perform these “quality assurance checks” at all rest positions.
Sometimes I recognize things like general tightness in my shoulders,
unnecessary tension in my legs, or a little more contraction of my arm and
forearm muscles than is needed to stick the grip or body position.
Differential relaxation allows me to correct these problems almost instantly
—although I find centering and the ANSWER Sequence to be beneficial in
these situations as well.

The ANSWER Sequence

Perform the ANSWER Sequence before and during each climb and in
everyday situations where you need to control tension, anxiety, and focus.
Initially this six-step procedure will take a few minutes to perform. With
practice you’ll be able to go through the sequence in about ten seconds—
perfect for use at marginal rest positions where getting centered could make
the difference between success and failure.

A - AWARENESS
1. Awareness of rising tension, anxiety, or negative thoughts.
Acute awareness of unfavorable mental and physical changes is
fundamental to optimal performance. It takes a conscious effort to turn your
thoughts away from the outer world toward your inner world. Peak
performers habitually make these tension checks every few minutes, so they
can nix any negative changes before they snowball out of control. Make this
your goal.

N - NORMALIZE
2. Normalize breathing.
In climbing, your breathing should be as relaxed (basically involuntary or
unconscious) and regular as it would be while on a fast walk. Unfortunately,
many climbers breathe unevenly during hard sequences, thus creating

tension and degrading performance. Your goal is smooth, even, normal
breathing throughout the climb.

S - SCAN
3. Scan for specific areas of muscular tension.
In this step you perform a tension check. Scan all your muscles in a quick
sweep to locate pockets of tightness. Commonly tight areas are the forearms
(are you overgripping?), shoulders, upper back, chest, abdominals, and
calves. The best way to relax a specific muscle is to consciously contract
that muscle for a few seconds, then relax it and visualize the tension
draining from it like air from a balloon (the differential relaxation
technique).

W - WAVE
4. Wave of relaxation.
Upon completing the tension check above, take a single deep breath and
feel a wave of relaxation wash from your head to your toes.

E - ERASE
5. Erase thoughts of past events (or the possible future) and focus on the
present.
This step involves freeing your mind from the ball-and-chain of undesirable
past events. There is no benefit to pondering the last failed attempt or the
heinous sequence you just barely fought through. Let go of the past and do

not ponder the future—thoughts of the past and future are enemies of
excellence in the present. Refocus on and engage the present moment.

R - RESET
6. Reset posture and flash a smile.
It’s amazing how much positive energy you can generate simply by
resetting your posture and flashing a smile. This final step of the ANSWER
Sequence will leave you in a peak performance state and ready to climb into
the zone. Trust your skills, have fun, and let the outcome take care of itself.

Getting Centered

Centering is a simple, effective means of maintaining (or regaining)
complete control of your mind and body as you head up on a difficult climb
or into competition. When you’re centered, you feel balanced, relaxed, and
confident. Conversely, being out of center is characterized by feelings of
imbalance, tension, awkward movement, and sometimes even growing
stress and anxiety. And since it takes just one botched move, one piece of
gear to pop out, or one burst of adrenaline to knock you way out of center,
it’s essential that you are aware of this dynamic and able to respond quickly
with countermeasures.
The ANSWER Sequence is a powerful means for returning yourself to
center in just a few seconds. The ANSWER Sequence involves deliberately
redirecting your thoughts inward for a moment (usually at a rest on a climb)
to modulate your breathing, level of muscle tension, posture, and mental
attitude. Make its use as regular and automatic as chalking up, and you’ll
find yourself climbing more efficiently and consistently.

Tips for Controlling Tension and Anxiety
1. Practice progressive and differential relaxation to develop the
ability to relax individual muscles on demand.
2. Strive for constant awareness of growing tension and anxiety.
Take a tension check at each rest on a climb and intermittently
throughout the day.
3. Target relaxation in antagonist muscles—this will improve
your climbing economy and enhance flow and fluidity of
movement.
4. While you climb, employ the ANSWER Sequence at each rest
position to regain your center and optimal performance state.

Visualization Training
Let’s start off with an example of visualization. Sit back, relax, and vividly
imagine the following scene as if it were a movie playing out before your
eyes.
You are attempting to redpoint a route you have worked on before.
You have just successfully climbed to the rest position that precedes
the route’s crux sequence. You are relaxed, calm, and confident as you
shake out and rechalk. You feel a cool breeze blow across your body,
and it seems to enhance the light, centered feeling you already possess.
You gently grip the starting hold of the sequence, a sharp, positive
fingertip edge. With steady breathing, you flash a smile and continue
climbing.
You match hands and pull the fingertip edge to your chest. You then
high-step your right foot onto a tiny crescent-shaped flake. You’ve hit
it just right—it feels bomber. You rock over that glued right foot, spot,
and then grab a matchbook side-pull edge with your right hand. You
flag your left leg across and below your high right foot to shift your
center of gravity over the right foot. You then extend off the right foot
with a smooth, steady motion. Your left hand reaches up to snag a twofinger pocket—it feels solid. You move your left foot up to a high
smear on a small dish hold, and, with relaxed breathing, take aim on
the final lunge. Then, with your mind locked on to the next hold, you
throw the lunge and easily latch on to the mini bucket hold that’s been
so elusive. You clip the anchors and feel the rush of having ticked this
personal best route.
This sequence exemplifies a fundamental and important exercise used by
all the world’s top athletes. Although similar to the mental rehearsals
performed by some climbers, visualization goes beyond the simple task of
reviewing route sequences. As in the above example, visualization involves

making and playing a detailed mental movie, one with touch, sound, color,
and all the kinesthetic feel of doing the moves. These mental movies
enhance your climbing by helping to hardwire sequences (moves, body
positions, and “feel”), increasing memory, and fortifying confidence. For
this reason, use of visualization is as important to your success as your use
of climbing shoes and a chalk bag. Don’t leave the ground without doing it!
Many studies have shown that the brain is not always capable of
distinguishing between something that actually happened and something
that was vividly imagined (Kubistant 1986). (Déjà vu is such an experience
—you can’t always recall if the clear mental image that just surfaced is an
actual memory or simply something you’ve thought about or dreamed.)
Therefore, repeated visualization can trick the mind into thinking you’ve
been there and done that before. Think of these mental movies as a
blueprint for future actions—with this perspective, you should understand
why visualization must be as detailed and accurate as possible. Any bad
coding (wrong moves) or fuzzy detail (uncertain sequences) may lead to a
botched sequence or fall when you climb the route for real.

Types of Visualization

There are two primary modes of visualization: disassociated and associated.
Disassociated visualization provides an “on-TV” perspective, where you
see yourself climbing from an observer’s point of view. This mode of
visualization is best for reviewing some past poor performance that you
hope to improve upon. As a detached observer, you can replay the movie
and objectively view the mistakes or falls without reliving the possibly
unhappy emotions of the situation.
Associated visualization provides a “throughyour-own-eyes” perspective
and thus triggers small neurological reactions as if you were doing the
climb, as well as the feel and emotion of the movie you are playing. This
makes associated visualization ideal for preprogramming some future
ascent. As discussed above, repeated playing of a highly detailed, positive
mental movie helps trick the subconscious mind into thinking you’ve done
the climb before. Just make sure you are using the associated, not
disassociated, perspective when visualizing some future event.

DISASSOCIATED VISUALIZATION
If you are new to the practice of visualization, I suggest you begin with a
simple, nonclimbing example. Go to a quiet location, sit or lie down
comfortably, and relax. Using an observer’s point of view (disassociated),
play a mental movie of the following scene as it might appear in your
apartment or home.
Visualize yourself sitting on the couch and watching TV. Note the
clothes you are wearing in the scene. See yourself get up from the
couch, walk over to the refrigerator, and open it. See yourself reaching

in and grabbing a can of soda, then watch yourself close the fridge. See
yourself opening the can as you begin to walk back toward the couch.
Note the way you are walking and observe the exact instant that you
see yourself open the can. Now watch yourself sit back down on the
couch and take a sip of the soda.
In this disassociated example you watched the scene play out before your
eyes but you did not feel or sense, in any way, what it was like to go get the
soda and drink it. Reserve this perspective for reviewing negative events
from the past, climbing or nonclimbing, and for route finding, imagining
possible sequences, and risk management. Gather the basic information you
need to improve your performance or do the climb, and then engage in
associated visualization to preprogram the actual moves for a successful
future event.

ASSOCIATED VISUALIZATION
Now let’s reshoot the mental movie of the at-home scene from the
associated point of view. This time you will live the scene through your
own eyes. Feel the action play out in your imagination just as if you were
acting out the scene for real. Again, sit back, relax, and picture this scene
playing out in real-life detail.
As you sit on the couch, you laugh at the closing joke of a Seinfeld
rerun. You decide to go get a soda from the fridge, so you get up and
begin walking toward the kitchen. Look around the room at the various
pieces of furniture (or pictures on the wall) you pass on your way to
the fridge. Enter the kitchen and feel your arm tug the refrigerator door
open. Feel the cool air rush out and chill your face. As you reach into
the fridge for the soda, notice the colors and design of the can, then
sense the cold, damp feel of the can in your hand. Now feel your arm
slam the door shut and hear the sound it makes in closing. Conclude
the scene by tasting the soda as you gulp it down—what flavors do you
taste?

This example reveals the explicit detail you should try to build into your
associated visualization. Granted, it will take some practice to develop
Steven Spielberg-like detail into your mental movies, but that’s the goal.
Commit to making a short “film” for all your project routes, and don’t
hesitate to reshoot or edit the mental movie as you gain new information or
beta for the route. Quality mind programming will improve the quality of
your real-life performances. Guaranteed!

Uses of Visualization

I hope you now recognize that visualization is an immensely powerful tool
that can be used to enhance performance in all aspects of your life. I’m sure
you use simple visualization every day, maybe without even knowing it. For
example, when you think about the best way to drive across town, I’m sure
you see the key turns or landmarks along the way in your mind’s eye
beforehand. Visualization is also used “effectively” by people who worry a
lot—part of their worry ritual is wild visualization of some future event that
may or may not happen to them (or some loved one). This type of negative
visualization is most painful and depressing when done from an associated
perspective. Such negative visualization is pathological, since you are
putting yourself through the pain of some future event that may never
happen.
Some climbers become consumed in the same types of negative
moviemaking of future events. For instance, if you visualize yourself failing
on a route or in competition, you not only preprogram this possible outcome
but also destroy your self-confidence in the process. To avoid this, it’s vital
that you visualize only positive events and ideal outcomes when you project
into the future in the associated state. Switch to the disassociated mode if
you need to visualize things (from a risk management perspective) that
might go wrong—say, on an on-sight lead. See from the on-TV view the
possible falls you could take and what risks might be involved in the ascent.
Described below are several settings where you can use visualization to
improve your safety and mind-set (among other things), as well as the
chances of the ideal outcome coming true.

PREPROGRAMMING A REDPOINT ASCENT

Since you’ve been on the route before, you could begin with disassociated
visualization of your last attempt. See yourself climbing the route and note
what things need to be corrected or refined for the next attempt. Now use
the associated perspective to create a movie, as seen through your own
eyes, of the perfect ascent you plan to make. Imagine all the important
aspects of doing the route, including the crux moves, gear placements or
clips, rest positions, and such. Create all the feel of doing the moves as well
as the feeling of being relaxed and centered as you move into the crux.
Make the movie positive and perfect in every way, and always conclude
with the feeling of reaching the top.

PREPARING FOR AN ON-SIGHT ASCENT
Visualization is invaluable when applied to a climb you’ve never been on
before. Since you have no firsthand experience, it will be very hard to
create an accurate movie from the associated perspective. Therefore, you’ll
want to spend most of your time visualizing from a disassociated
perspective.
After studying the climb from below, create images or a movie of
yourself climbing the route from the on-TV perspective. See yourself
dropping in gear at the obvious placements as well as hanging out at what
appear to be good rest positions. As described above, you will want to
visualize any hazards unique to this climb—where a lead fall might be
dangerous, what you can do to minimize the risk, and so forth. Also, if you
can see enough detail from the ground, consider creating two movies of
possible sequences through the crux. This way, if you get up there and find
that one will obviously not work, you can call up the second movie and
continue climbing without delay.
You might finish up your visualization by moving into the associated
state and trying to imagine what you might feel and see as you climb the
sequence you came up with from the disassociated perspective. This is not
always possible but would be beneficial.

PREPARING FOR COMPETITION
In competition climbing, good visualization skills might mean the
difference between winning and finishing in the middle of the pack.
Depending on the competition format, you will want to employ the redpoint
and on-sight visualization strategies discussed above. Since many events
allow only a brief preview period, you will only be able to create a “roughcut” movie, including the basic route path, location of the obvious rests, and
whatever you can glean about the moves or sequence. Even if you can’t
decipher a sequence (or if you didn’t get a route preview), you can still take
a mental picture of the wall and project yourself climbing with grace and
confidence to the top. Most important, strive to eliminate any self-defeating
images that might cross your mind in the hours and minutes leading up to
your ascent of the wall.

“CLIMBING” INJURED OR TIRED
If you climb for enough years, you will at some point likely find yourself
laid up due to some type of injury. Whether you are out for a few weeks due
to a finger injury or out for the season with a more serious problem, you can
still keep climbing in your mind’s eye! While this may not sound like much
fun, it is an effective way to maintain your knowledge of a sequence on
your project route. Vivid, associated visualization has been shown to cause
low-level neuromuscular activity that helps enhance motor learning (Feltz
1983) and maintain the feel of performing some skill.
You can also use this effect to your advantage next time you pump out
while working a route. Instead of thrashing around on the climb for the
umpteenth time (and risking injury), call it a day and spend the time
pumping a few more “mental laps” on the route. This will help solidify your
knowledge of the sequence without the extra physical strain and risk of
injury.

Tips for Enhancing Performance with
Visualization
1. Use disassociated visualization (observer’s perspective) for
route finding, imagining possible sequences, risk management,
and to review failed attempts.
2. Use associated visualization to mentally climb the route
(climber’s perspective). Feel the ascent evolve, including all
physical movements and thought processes. The goal is to
mentally practice—virtual experience!—all aspects of doing
the climb.
3. Make associated visualization as bright and detailed as
possible. Avoid any negative visualization.
4. To get best results, engage in visualization in a quiet area.
Relax and don’t rush through it—your goal is to visualize the
complete ascent from bottom to top with no interruptions.

Creating Laserlike Focus
The ability to narrow and maintain focus is a crucial sports skill, especially
in an activity like climbing where elements of danger exert a constant pull
diverting the focus from the move at hand. Widely used, but often
misunderstood in the context of a climber’s lexicon, focus is a laserlike
concentration of mental energy aimed at the most important task at any
particular instant. Since every movement in climbing possesses a different
most-important task, it’s vital to be able to redirect your focus, in an instant,
to the finger or foot placement most critical at that moment.
Think of focus as a narrowing of your concentration, much like a zoom
lens on a camera. At any given moment you must zoom in on the single
task most critical to your performance—toeing down on a small pocket,
pulling on a manky finger jam, or shifting your center of gravity to just the
right balance point. Think about anything else and you may fail at this
critical task and fall.
The most difficult part of focusing is learning to zoom in and out quickly
from a pinpoint focus to a more wide-angle perspective. For example, a
quarterback starts a pass play with a broad focus (when in search for an
open receiver), but he instantly zooms in on a single player as he delivers
the pass. In climbing, you have to do much the same thing—use a broad
focus when hanging out looking for the next hold, then zoom in tight as you
reach toward the hold and latch on to it. Similarly, you must zoom in tight
when high-stepping on a dime edge, locking off and making a long reach,
or floating a deadpoint. If you focus on anything else—your gear, your
belayer, your pain, or spectators on the ground—you may as well add a tenpound weight to your back. Poor focus makes hard moves harder, maybe
even impossible.

Practicing Focus

Detailed below is a practice drill for developing focus and a preclimbing
strategy for gathering focus in preparation to climb. The Singular Focus
Drill is best used when you are climbing on toprope and well below your
maximum grade. The Pinpointing Your Focus for a Climb exercise can be
used before attempting any climb, though it’s especially effective when
preparing to start up a difficult route.

Singular Focus Drill

The best time to work on your focus is when climbing a route a couple of
grades below your maximum ability. Whether you’re at a gym or the crag,
on toprope or lead, attempt to climb a whole route by focusing solely on
one aspect of movement.
For instance, try to do a route with your complete focus on just hand
placements. Find the best way to grab each hold, use the minimum amount
of grip strength necessary to hang on, and feel how your purchase changes
as you pull on the hold. Place as little focus as is safely possible on other
areas such as your feet, balance, belayer, and the like. For now, let these
areas take care of themselves—allow your intuitive sense to determine
where your feet go and how your balance should shift.
Chances are, you’ll find this exercise quite difficult. Your thoughts will
naturally wander to other tasks or even be directed to distractions on the
ground. If this occurs, simply redirect your focus to the predetermined task
—in this case, the handholds. It is this process of becoming aware of your
lost focus and returning it to the critical task that you are after. Sharpened
awareness of lost focus is tantamount to gaining control of focus.
Repeat this exercise regularly but change the focus (onto, say, foot
placements or weight shifts) each time. Work on increasing the length of
time you can maintain a singular focus—this helps build mental endurance.
As you become more skilled, convert this singular focus drill into a
dynamic focus drill where your focus constantly shifts to the most critical
task at any moment. The goal is be able to shift your focus quickly among
the various tasks involved in doing a route, like the flickering beams of a
laser light show.
With practice, the process of directing and redirecting focus will become
largely subconscious. On the rare occasions when your focus does wander
away from the task of climbing, your well-trained mind will instantly
recognize this loss and redirect the focus onto the climb. In this way,

becoming constantly engaged and automatic on the climb helps in
achieving the highly desired flow state.

Pinpointing Your Focus for a Climb

This exercise will gather your focus into a single “beam” and quiet your
mind as you get ready to cast off up a climb. Perform it after you’ve gone
through your preclimb ritual and been put on belay.
Stand at the base of the climb, assume an extended posture (shoulders
back), close your eyes, and place the fingertips of your dominant hand
against the rock face. Your fingertips should be touching the wall lightly
(not gripping a hold), and your hand and arm should be completely relaxed.
Now take three deep belly breaths, inhaling through your nose to a count of
five and exhaling through your mouth to a count of ten. Let a wave of
relaxation wash across your body, and then narrow your focus to the tips of
your fingers touching the rock. Concentrate singly on the sensation of your
fingertips touching the rock—you should begin to feel the thermal energy
moving from your fingers to the rock (on rare occasions when the rock is
hotter than your body, you will feel thermal energy conducting into your
fingertips). Maintain a relaxed, singular focus on the energy exchange
between your fingertips and the rock for anywhere from thirty seconds to a
minute or two. If your focus ever wanders, simply redirect it to your
fingertips. Soon your mind will become completely still: All your attention
is pin-pointed on the tips of your fingers. On reaching this state, open your
eyes and begin climbing.

Using Preclimb Rituals to Create Focus

Preclimb rituals are a powerful way to narrow your focus in the hours and
minutes leading up to an ascent. Like a pilot’s preflight checklist, a
climber’s preclimb ritual should consist of every single activity, big or
small, that is necessary to ensure a safe, successful journey. For example,
my typical preclimb ritual begins with scoping the route to determine the
best path and, hopefully, figure out the key moves and rest positions. Next, I
perform a few minutes (or more) of mental rehearsal and visualization as I
try to feel the moves and preprogram in the sequence. Upon gaining a sense
of comfort and knowing about the route, I put on my shoes and tie in to the
rope. I complete my preclimb ritual by taking a few slow, deep breaths,
straightening my posture, and cracking a smile in anticipation of the great
fun that awaits me. This entire ritual typically takes between five and fifteen
minutes (depending on the difficulty and length of the climb), and it leaves
me in an ideal state to make my best effort.
Develop your own unique rituals based on what makes you feel most
prepared and psyched for a route. Think back to some of your best past
performances to gain some clues as to what to include. What did you think
and do in preparing for that climb? What did you eat or drink, how did you
warm up, and how long did you rest between climbs? Awareness of all the
factors—little and big—that lead up to your best performances is a key to
being able to reproduce similar results in the future.

Tips for Creating Focus
1. Train focus by using the Singular Focus Drill (page 45) while
leading climbing in the gym or toproping outside.
2. Develop detailed preclimb ritual that includes warming up,
scoping the route, analyzing risk, visualizing the ascent,
preparing your gear, putting on your shoes, and tying in to the

rope. Use this same ritual before every climb and you will
consistently create a high level of focus.
3. Use the Pinpointing Your Focus exercise (page 46) as your
final task before beginning up the route.
4. Strive for process-oriented thought, and avoid dwelling on past
outcomes or what’s ahead. Stay in the moment.
5. If you discover that your focus is scattered, simply
acknowledge this and redirect your attention to the move or
action at hand. Consider using the Pinpointing Your Focus
exercise again.
Experiment with different rituals and analyze what seems to work best.
An effective preclimb ritual doesn’t need to be extravagant or long. In fact,
a short, concise ritual that quickly gets you prepared and focused to climb is
best. Upon developing a ritual that works, stick to it!

Mental Wings Strategies to Enhance Problem
Solving and Learning
I conclude this chapter with six mental strategies to enhance your skills at
problem solving and learning of a difficult sequence or complex route.
Being able to quickly decipher perplexing cruxes while conserving mental
and physical energy is a master skill. Learn to utilize these skills effectively
and you’re on your way to becoming a grand master at flashing.

1. Focus on problem solving, not performance.

One thing I love about working a hard boulder problem or project route is
the challenge of studying a complex problem and gradually seeing a
beautiful, unique sequence take form. Just like piecing together a puzzle
when you were a kid, you can best solve a rock puzzle by remaining
focused on the task and having fun regardless of how the long the puzzle
takes to complete.
For instance, when working a boulder problem or crux sequence, ponder
the beauty of this rock puzzle and feel the joy of being engaged in this
challenging process. This disposition will shift you out of the must-not-fail
mind-set of frustration and help turn your focus away from the problem and
onto finding a solution. Remember, the brain naturally magnifies whatever
you focus on. Obviously you want to magnify the possible solution, not the
problem, so always be solution oriented.

2. Relax and remain positive.

Both problem solving and motor learning occur most rapidly in a stressand anxiety-free state. Therefore, controlling tension through deep
breathing, positive visualization, and remaining process-oriented is crucial
for accelerating these processes.
It’s also fundamental that you eliminate thoughts of need to flash the
route or have to redpoint the climb this attempt—these are both positions
that work against you. By entertaining such needs, you create stress and
anxiety that may prevent the very thing you desire. Instead, acknowledge
that falling is part of the learning process and accept each fall as providing a
clue for success—so don’t ignore it! Predetermine that you will accept a fall
(and find the clue) if it happens and believe completely that success will
come with creativity, effort, and patience. In doing so, you create the
optimal state for learning and succeeding most quickly.

3. Chunk down the route.

Chunking down a long, hard route into a series of short problems makes the
climb less overwhelming and easier to learn. Furthermore, these short
problems or chunks can each be viewed as a short-term goal to be reached
or accomplished. So, while you may fail for several days on the project as a
whole, you will experience short-term success as you solve each of the
individual chunks. This sense of success helps keep you energized, positive,
and on track to eventually succeeding on the route.
When working through the individual chunks, avoid becoming obsessed
on any one of them. Beating yourself up on, say, the second chunk of a sixchunk route is self-defeating: Even if you eventually solve this chunk,
you’ll be too mentally and physically wasted to put in meaningful work on
the others. Therefore, it’s best to move on to working the next chunk upon
the onset of frustration or any judgmental self-talk, such as I can’t do this or
I’ll never figure this out. If allowed to burrow into your subconscious, such
judgments form the basis for reality. You are much better off solving the
rest of the route before returning to the problem section.
Long-term achievement of a formidable goal (where short-term failures
are inevitable) demands mental agility as well as the ability to trick yourself
into persevering in the face of adversity. Breaking a climb into a series of
more manageable chunks and setting yourself up for several small wins is a
most effective strategy.

4. Engage both sides of the brain.

You may be familiar with the fact that the brain has two hemispheres—the
left hemisphere, which presides over logical, practical, language,
mathematical, and related matters, and the right hemisphere, which
dominates in creative, artistic, intuitive, situational, and imaginary matters.
The majority of people are “left-brained” and, even if you aren’t, intense
situations with lots of information—like climbing—tend to bring the left
brain into command. The result is that many climbers leave their right brain
on the ground and therefore handicap their problem-solving ability, big
time! I can think of countless times I’ve fallen on routes because I was
thinking in a linear fashion and with blinders on that prevented me from
finding a key hold, sequence, or rest. (Cut me a break, I’m a scientist, not
an artist!)
The right brain is best accessed when you are in a relaxed state (another
reason some climbers have a tough time freeing it up). Thus, bringing it into
play requires that you resist the Type A behavior of rushing up to a route
and quickly going for the send, and instead get comfortable at the base of
the climb, warm up slowly, and make a relaxed study of the climb before
tying in to the rope. Some severely left-brained people will need to force
themselves to think out of the box. Seeing the big picture and imagining all
the possible approaches and sequences on a climb is a habit you may need
to foster through your own initiative. Your goal should be a balanced
approach to problem solving in which you can think logically and
practically as well as intuitively and creatively. Being able to create (on
demand) and leverage this state is one of the hallmarks of brilliant climbers
such as Lynn Hill and Chris Sharma, who can perform at an exceedingly
high level in a wide range of styles and settings.

5. Employ multisensory learning.

Everything we learn comes through one of our five senses, and the more
senses we use in learning, the faster and easier it becomes. Climbers tend to
use primarily the sense of vision before they leave the ground, and feel once
they begin to climb. While the senses of smell and taste can’t contribute to
performance in this sport, the auditory sense can also be a powerful learning
tool (Knudson 1997), particularly when faced with a tricky boulder problem
or when working to memorize a difficult sequence. Climbers who give
names to key holds and moves and then create verbal beta are using this
trick. Remembering an obscure sequence of tiny holds by feel or vision can
be enhanced with descriptive verbal beta like high-step to the dime edge,
then deadpoint to the potato chip flake. It may sound funny, but it works.
Multisensory learning is a sign of the intelligent climber, so begin to talk
yourself through sequences in addition to visualizing and feeling the moves.
By talking the talk, you make it easier to climb the climb!

6. Try something ridiculous.

The biggest block to learning is judgment. Self-talk like Others use this
sequence, so that must be the best way, or discounting a novel or
improbable sequence that flashes into your mind without trying it first, is a
form of self-sabotage. It’s vital that you don’t limit yourself this way—your
brain doesn’t know what you can or cannot do until you tell it. Don’t
prejudge sequences or your capabilities!
The best problem solvers are both creative and uninhibited. They never
hesitate to try a novel solution that’s entirely different from the known
sequence. You can foster these skills by ignoring the obvious solution—the
one that’s not currently working for you—and attempting a few completely
different, even ridiculous sequences.
Regardless of how improbable a given technique looks—heel hook,
undercling, high step, knee bar—don’t pass judgment on it until you make a
few attempts with that technique. Try a variety of body positions, foot flags,
lunges, and don’t ignore less positive holds like Gastons, side pulls, and
pinches. Eliminate the seemingly must-use hold—or at least try using it
with the opposite hand. Search for unchalked holds that might unlock the
sequence, and keep a constant watch for footholds that are off the main line
of the route—a single missed foothold or high step can make the difference
between “impossible” and “possible.”
A common thread running through this chapter has been that the mental and
technical aspects of climbing are intimately connected. Ahead in chapter 4
you will find an in-depth study of motor learning and performance (how
you acquire skill) as well as a primer on the fundamental climbing
techniques and several powerful strategies for developing superior
technique. Let’s climb onward.

Problem-Solving Tips and Success Strategies

1. Focus on problem solving, not performance. View each climb
as a puzzle that you will enjoy and learn from, no matter what
the outcome.
2. Relax and remain confident. Use the ANSWER Sequence to
maintain a relaxed state, and direct positive, productive selftalk to fortify confident and sustain effective action in the face
of difficult climbing.
3. Chunk down the route into manageable sections. Work the
most difficult chunks first, then begin linking the sections from
the top down.
4. Engage both sides of the brain. Which side is more dominant
for you? Strive to bring both creative, intuitive (right brain) and
analytical, practical (left brain) power to work for you.
5. Employ multisensory learning by seeing, feeling, and talking
yourself through tough sequences.
6. When all else fails, try something ridiculous! Seemingly
impossible cruxes often require a trick move or non-intuitive
sequence, so experiment with a variety of moves and
techniques no matter how improbable or inappropriate they
seem to be.

Ines Papert on-sights the 5.11a first pitch of the North Face of Castleton
Tower, Utah. KEITH LADZINSKI

CHAPTER FOUR
Training Technique and Skill

We are what we do repeatedly. Excellence, then, is not an act but a
habit.
—Aristotle

Moving over stone is the essence of climbing and, therefore, no subject can
be more central to improving your climbing than this chapter on training
skill and developing technique. Despite this, the subject of strength training
tends to get all the attention and hype in conversations among climbers, and
getting stronger is the most popular topic of magazine articles about
climbing performance. In this book mental training and improving skill and
strategy come before the subject of strength training because I feel most
climbers can benefit more and improve more quickly on the rock with
focused training in these areas. If you want to put yourself on the fast track
to the higher grades, strive to understand and apply the information
contained in this chapter as much as or more than any other chapter in the
book. This will make you a better climber.
Ironically, the majority of climbers spend little, if any, time on dedicated
practice of the vast spectrum of techniques inherent to our sport. With little
coaching or guidance available, most climbers unknowingly service their
lust for ticking routes by constantly climbing for performance. Of course,
becoming proficient (or excellent) at any sport requires focused practice of
new skills and work on weaknesses that need improvement. Still, some
climbers just don’t want to spend time practicing on routes below their

maximum grade; others avoid routes that might highlight their weaknesses.
Can you imagine a baseball player who never took bat-ting or fielding
practice outside of the competition of a nine-inning game, or a quarterback
who never threw a pass except on game day?
In this chapter you will learn the three stages of motor learning involved
in acquiring a new climbing skill or move, as well as how the brain creates
motor programs to execute specific skilled movements and generates
“software” that can approximate solutions, on the fly, to unknown moves.
This is powerful information if you understand it, because it will empower
you to practice more effectively than the mass of climbers, rapidly develop
superior technique, and grow to become a true master of rock.
Next I present a primer on the fundamental techniques of efficient
climbing movement. Beginning climbers would be wise to read the
unabridged coverage of climbing technique presented in my book Learning
to Climb Indoors. Intermediate and advanced climbers can likewise benefit
by reviewing—and, if needed, shoring up their use of—the key techniques
detailed in this chapter.
The action portion of this chapter is a series of practice drills that you can
use year-round whether you climb indoors or out. Regardless of your tenure
in the sport, significant gains in your climbing technique and overall ability
will result from a commitment to regularly employing some of these drills
in your routine. Apply these drills to accelerate learning (or to unlearn bad
habits of movement) of the fundamental techniques outlined in this chapter.

An Overview of Motor Learning and Effective
Skill Practice
The importance of motor learning theory to the subject of training for
climbing became apparent to me in the early 1990s as a result of
conversations with Dr. Mark Robinson and thanks to ongoing input from
my wife, Lisa Ann. As an LPGA golf pro (and climber) with an education
in the field of kinesiology, Lisa Ann occasionally discussed the methods
used by elite golfers to learn very difficult skills (for me, impossible!). At
about the same time, Mark Robinson (former ’Gunks hardman and now an
orthopedic surgeon in California) turned me on to an excellent text on the
subject, Motor Learning and Performance by Dr. Richard Schmidt.
Robinson then penned a breakthrough piece on the application of motor
learning and performance to climbing for my first climbing book, Flash
Training (1994). Subsequently I’ve studied the subject in depth, and I’ve
even had the good fortune to engage Dr. Schmidt (the founder of schema
theory) and discuss motor learning and performance (MLP) and its
application to climbing. The result is a much-expanded section on MLP in
this edition, along with numerous powerful practice strategies to hone your
skills and technique.

Three Stages of Motor Learning

Motor learning is the process by which we acquire physical skills.
Regardless of the skill—walking, driving, climbing—learning occurs in
three identifiable and overlapping stages: the cognitive, motor, and
autonomous stages.

COGNITIVE STAGE
This stage involves thinking about the activity, listening to explanations of
it or comparisons to other familiar things, imaginative projection of what it
may be like to do it, visual or kinesthetic anticipation of action, and
formulation of the goals or desired results for future performance.
Early attempts in this stage are clumsy, inefficient, and jerky; they
expend energy and strength in wasteful ways. This is what you experience
when making the first few attempts on an unfamiliar type of climbing
(crack, slab, pocketed face, and such) or on a route that’s especially hard for
you. During practice sessions in this formative period, you examine the
route from the ground in an attempt to figure out the moves and rest
positions, and then attempt to climb via toprope or, perhaps, bolt to bolt on
lead. Typically the results of such early attempts are rough and imperfect.
With continued attempts (practice), however, the quality of performance
improves as proprioceptors in the muscles, tendons, joints, and inner ear
provide sensory feedback on movement and body position.
The underlying capacities involved in this stage are largely intellectual
and character related and, to a lesser extent, physical. Therefore, people
who enjoy early success—those who appear to have natural talent—are not
necessarily the strongest, but instead the most perceptive, agile, confident,
and relaxed. A real-life example of this is seen daily by climbing instructors

who observe a novice female climber outperform her equally novice, but
stronger, male partner during their first day on the rocks.

MOTOR STAGE
The motor stage is less a product of self-conscious effort and thought than
one of automatic increases in the efficiency and organization of the activity
by the nervous system and brain, as a response to continued practice. A
neurological “groove” develops as multiple attempts and feedback from
multiple sources (internal and external) produce more reliable and effective
execution. Energy expenditure decreases, and the natural inertia of the body
and limbs is used to advantage—this marked increase in economy of
movement is the hallmark of the motor stage of learning.
When working a climb, this stage is represented by the attempts at
redpoint when the moves and clips are known, and the goals are to develop
efficiency and to preserve power and endurance for the cruxes. The
underlying factors involved in this stage differ from those that lead to early
success. Here, they involve the sensitivity of internal movement sensors
(proprioception), the accuracy of limb movement, speed of detection and
correction of minor errors, and the sensitivity of the performance to anxiety,
doubt, and so on. These things are obviously less available to conscious
awareness or control and are thus acquired only through dedicated practice
and the chase of perfection.
In this stage the goal of action becomes more refined and demanding.
The moves must be done efficiently with strength to spare, not eked out in
desperation. Early, crude success should not be accepted as “good enough”
since this will not lead to the best ultimate development of technique and
efficiency. Having demanding goals has been shown experimentally to
produce both better performance and faster gains. The goal should be to
perfect movement and dominate at a certain grade (say, 5.10a or 5.12a), not
just get by at it.

AUTONOMOUS STAGE
The final stage of learning is called the autonomous stage. At this point the
actions are automatic and require almost no conscious attention, because
movement has reached a stable and polished form. You can often do other
things while in this state: For instance, you can carry on a conversation
while driving a car. Or, like a chess grandmaster thinking six moves ahead,
you can decipher and send a crux sequence in perfect form, on-sight. This is
also the elusive flow state or zone so often touted by elite athletes. In
climbing, it is reached only through dedicated, disciplined, long-term
practice.
On the rock this stage can be experienced on a successful redpoint, but it
more often occurs on the umpteenth repetition of a route that you have
absolutely wired. You may also experience this flow state while on-sight
climbing just below your maximum ability, and on rare occasions you’ll
feel the rapture of the zone as you send a personal-best project or float up a
competition route.

Components of Skilled Performance

Despite being as intuitive and natural as walking or running, climbing can
be a remarkably complex and demanding activity. Consider that the
climbing gyms and crags of the world offer a playing field of infinite
variation and demand for skilled performance. Compound this with the
potential for adrenaline-releasing risk and the perplexing challenge of
ascending a gigantic wall, and it becomes apparent that climbing is indeed a
complex sporting activity.
The goal of this section, then, is to provide a primer on the theory of skill
acquisition as well as introduce you to valuable practice strategies. While
many climbers stumble through the maze of trial-and-error learning, you
will be empowered to practice more effectively and thus obtain
uncommonly good results and rate of improvement.

TYPES OF SKILLS
Motor learning scientists define skill as the ability to bring about an end
result with maximum certainty and minimum time and energy (Schmidt
2004). In climbing, these skills possess cognitive and motor components.
For example, perception and decision making precede physical execution of
most on-sight climbing movements; even a well-rehearsed redpoint ascent
relies on memory, focus, and sensory processes to bring about successful
execution of a motor skill. Clearly, technical rock climbing will test your
prowess of both mental and physical skills.
Another important distinction is that between discrete and serial skills. A
discrete climbing skill is a single movement with a definite beginning and
end—such as a mantle, lunge, high step, down pull, lieback, deadpoint, and
the like. String many discrete skills together, however, and you now have a

more complex skilled action called a serial skill. Like a gymnast performing
a routine, a climber must successfully execute specific moves, but must also
possess the skill to link all the moves into a complete ascent. This explains
why, in preparation for a redpoint ascent, you can’t just practice the
individual moves—it’s equally important to practice connecting the moves,
since this is in itself a new skill.

MOTOR PROGRAMS
Discrete climbing skills are directed by motor programs stored in long-term
memory. These motor programs, which define and shape movement,
become more stable, elaborate, and long lasting as you progress through the
three stages of motor learning described earlier. With consistent, quality
practice, the program becomes highly precise and largely unconscious, thus
freeing attention for other matters such as finding the next handhold or
remembering the sequence. Conversely, climbing skills that you rarely
practice or avoid will be represented by less detailed, unstable motor
programs that may lead to poor execution and demand high degrees of
attention.
A highly skilled climber can often look at a section of rock, see the
moves, and know what skills she will need to employ. For example, she
might view a short boulder problem and see a lieback move that leads to
backstep move, followed by a 2-foot deadpoint move to a good hold. In
ascending the boulder problem, motor programs for lieback, backstep, and
deadpoint yield a sort of movement script directing essential details of
movement: the muscles to be used and in what order, the force and duration
of each contraction, and so on. Still, the motor programs will not specify
every aspect of movement, and so the climber will make many tiny
reflexive and/or conscious adjustments that modify the commands of the
“movement script.”
A less skilled climber may be challenged in many ways by the same
boulder problem. First, he may lack the experience and cognitive skills to
“see” the necessary moves. Furthermore, he may possess less refined motor
programs for the lieback, drop-knee, and lunge skills that are necessary to

ascend the sequence. Chances are he will need numerous attempts to feel
out the moves and gather sensory feedback on body position, the muscles to
be used, and the force of contraction, among other things. Repeated blocked
practice attempts may eventually lead to a successful ascent of the boulder
problem.

PERFORMING NOVEL SKILLS
The hallmark of an expert climber is the ability to on-sight climb at a high
level on a wide variety of terrain and rock types. But how does this climber
execute novel moves with a high rate of success? After all, our playing field
has infinite variability—so even the most well-traveled professional climber
will fail to experience every possible motor skill and variation thereof.
Understanding how novel movements are generated will empower you to
practice more effectively so that you can become a master of on-sight
climbing through moves you’ve never before experienced!

Figure 4.1 Developing Schemas
Let’s use the boulder problem example above, which concluded with a
deadpoint to a good hold exactly 24 inches away. Given the infinite
variability of climbing moves and rock surface, it is unlikely that the
climber will have previously performed a deadpoint move, from a backstep
position, to a hold exactly 24 inches away. However, if the climber has
thrown deadpoint moves from several different distances (say, from 15, 21,
28, and 30 inches away) and from different body positions and rock angles,
he will likely be able to execute the novel move on-sight. This is because all
the different deadpoint moves call the same deadpoint motor program into
use, and this motor program is scaled to fit the novel situation according to
what is known as a schema.
A schema is a set of rules developed and applied unconsciously by the
central nervous system, which allows you to adjust a motor program for
different environmental conditions (hold location, rock angle, friction
properties, and such) by changing parameters of muscle force, body
position, and speed of movement. Becoming a proficient on-sight climber,
therefore, is not just a matter of learning all the different classes of skills
(jamming, side pulling, down pulling, lunging, flagging, and so on); it
demands that you practice these skills in a wide range of configurations and
settings. Such “variable practice” (more on this below) refines the existing
schema-rule for each generalized motor program, thus allowing more
accurate estimation of the necessary parameters for execution of a skill in a
novel situation. (see figure 4.1)
The practical application of schema theory should now be obvious: Upon
learning the new climbing skill of, say, finger jamming, you want to
practice finger jamming in cracks of different sizes, on different wall
angles, and on rock with different frictional properties. Doing so will
modify your schema-rule to expand your use of the finger-jamming motor
program and effectively ascend finger cracks at almost any crag on the
planet. The same goes for other climbing skills—strive to expand their use
to a variety of rock types and terrain, and you will be on your way to
becoming a master of rock!
Conversely, if you climb at only a few cliffs and favor a specific type of
climbing, you will develop fewer motor programs and less refined schema-

rules for each. These motor programs, no matter how well learned, will
work only for similar situations—and they may not apply particularly well
at the outer limits of difficulty at these crags. Worse yet, when you travel to
new areas, your limited skills and schema-rules will leave you climbing at a
much lower grade or flailing on routes of the grade you’re accustomed to
sending at your home area.

Transfer of Skill

In motor learning the idea of transfer relates to how practice of a skill in one
activity carries over to enhance performance of another, different activity.
One startling, but apparently consistent, result in this field of study is that
transfer is usually either absent or small, even between seemingly similar
activities (Schmidt 1991). The complexity, coordination, and integration of
a skilled movement are so specific that they derive very little help from
other skilled movements. Therefore, practice at climbing will improve
climbing skill, coordination, and technique, while playing around on a slack
chain, kicking a Hacky Sack, snowboarding, or what have you are wastes of
time for the purpose of improving climbing skill (although these activities
may develop mental attributes such as focus and toughness that somewhat
translate to climbing).
This helps us understand why the old assumption that gymnasts, with
their incredible strength and motor skills, would instantly become excellent
climbers has not proven true. Although climbing and gymnastics obviously
share certain physical requirements, the motor skills are very different and
they are based, in part, on markedly different underlying capacities.

Rate of Improvement and Your Ultimate Skill Level

According to the Law of Practice, performance improves rapidly from its
baseline level when the activity is first practiced and continues to improve
in gradually decreasing amounts as ability approaches some ultimate
(personal) skill level (see figure 4.2). In learning a simple task, like driving
a car, it only takes a few weeks to become fairly skilled. Beyond this, all the
thousands of hours you spend driving over the rest of your life will yield
only a small amount of improvement.
The learning curve for complex activities, like golf or climbing, also rises
rapidly upward as a result of the initial practice sessions. Because of the
high complexity and wide range of skills inherent to these sports, however,
you can continue to improve for many years, even decades. In fact, golf
would seem to be the more technically difficult sport of the two, since
several gifted climbers have reached world-class status in less than five
years, while the best golfer ever, Tiger Woods, took fifteen years to ascend
to that level—and that was unusually fast!

Figure 4.2 Rate of Skill Acquisition
As discussed in chapter 1, you can maximize your rate of improvement in
a specific style of climbing by focusing your practice and training in that
one area. It’s increasingly common to observe climbers who quickly
progress to a high level of ability in one type of climbing—say, gymnastic
bouldering or overhanging crimpfest routes. Since both these endeavors
require only a small subset of total climbing skills, it’s possible to focus
your practice on developing the small set of motor programs necessary to
excel. The trade-off is that your limited motor programs will be a handicap
when attempting routes outside your area of specialization—these climbs
will feel hard for the grade, perhaps even “impossible.”
The bottom line: Becoming a proficient, all-around climber is a longterm proposition. The most intelligent approach to training for climbing
would be to emphasize learning skill over getting wickedly strong during
your first few years in the sport. Developing refined schema-rules for the
many different climbing skills takes you many years of climbing at wide
range of areas and rock types. So while you may become a highly skilled
specialist climber in just a few years, you can continue to expand the depth
and breadth of your skills even after twenty or thirty years (I know that I
still am!).

Practice Strategies to Accelerate Learning of Skills and Enhance
Schema-Rules

If you want to maximize improvement, then you need to know how to
practice optimally. Acquiring a new skill requires a progression through the
three stages of motor learning before you will be able to use the new skill
efficiently and intuitively. Depending on the difficulty of the skill, this
process may be slow, awkward, and frustrating. Therefore, discipline and an
intense belief that you will become excellent in the skill (with effort) are
fundamental to the process. You must not try to get around having to learn it
by relying on your strengths in other areas.
Unfortunately, many climbers do exactly this when they lunge, swing, or
scum wildly through a sequence that could be done more efficiently by
learning a new move, technique, or body position. Another example plays
out when a competent gym or face climber first attempts to learn crack
climbing. The common tendency is to avoid the awkward—and possibly
painful—jams and pawl up the face on either side of the crack. In this case
the climber will rapidly fatigue and likely exclaim that the route felt way
harder than its grade (of course it did, since she wasn’t using the proper
technique for ascending the route).
The moral of the story is that you must convince yourself that no matter
how hard a new move feels at first, it will become easier to execute—and
perhaps even intuitive—as the result of intelligent practice. Toward this
end, keep in mind that you will become most competent at a skill by
practicing it on as many different rock varieties, angles, and settings as
possible.
Another important principle states that learning new skills is difficult in
states of fatigue, stress, fear, and urgency, whereas a fresh, relaxed, and
confident approach yields rapid acquisition of new skills. Consequently, it’s
best to practice new skills early in your training sessions and to employ
liberal hangdogging for blocked practice of crux moves. Interestingly, you
can solidify skills you already possess by practicing them in a fatigued

state! If all this motor learning theory is beginning to overwhelm you,
worry not—following are five powerful practice strategies that distill and
apply this information to produce optimal skill-learning results.

MODELING ADVANCED CLIMBERS
Modeling is a powerful technique for learning basic skills and climbing
strategy. It’s best used in a climbing gym where you can observe the
movements, positions, techniques, and tactics of a more advanced climber,
and then immediately give them a try on your own. Make a mental picture
of what you want to attempt and use that vision as a starting point.
Experiment, modify, and make the move your own. In practicing the new
move, progress through the following four practice strategies: blocked
practice, variable practice, fatigued practice, and random skill practice
(described below).
You can also model what you observe at the crags. In addition to actual
moves, take special note of the tactics and strategy used by high-end
climbers. For example, how do they work crux sequences? Where do they
find rests? At what pace do they climb? How do they go about equipping
routes? Again, it’s best to first experiment with your observations in the
gym before testing them outdoors.
Although modeling technical skills is a powerful weapon for your
arsenal, copying an elite climber’s fitness training program is usually a big
mistake. Remember that elite climbers have spent years conditioning their
muscles and tendons to withstand extreme levels of stress. To train as they
do without this long-term preparation could be disastrous.

BLOCKED PRACTICE
Blocked practice—identical repetitions of a specific move—is the most
popular method of practicing a hard climbing move because it produces

rapid learning of the skill in that specific situation. In learning the
undercling move, for example, you would repeat the same undercling move
over and over in order to refine your body position and the application of
force needed to optimally perform the move.
Upon development of “feel” and early success at a new skill, however, a
radical change is needed. Further blocked practice will have little value and
may even result in a false sense of confidence and poor use of the skill in
novel settings. Returning to our example, suppose you only practiced the
one basic undercling move you first learned at the gym. Despite your
expertise at that specific undercling move, you will struggle and likely fail
on undercling moves on different wall angles and on the infinite playing
field of outdoor climbing. The same phenomenon is seen in other sports,
like a golfer who hits great wedge shots from the perfect lie of a practice
range mat (blocked practice), yet on the golf course is unable to hit a solid
shot from the novel lies of the fairway and rough. These examples show
that, beyond the first few successful trials of a new skill, blocked practice is
for blockheads! Upon achieving initial success at a new skill, you must
graduate to variable and random practice.

VARIABLE PRACTICE
As explained above, learning a new skill in a specific way is just the first
step in the learning process. The ultimate goal is instant and proficient use
of the skill in any new situation you come upon. The tried and proven way
to do this is with variable practice.
Suppose you’ve just learned the drop-knee move on a vertical indoor
wall with large, positive holds. To incorporate variable practice you would
now change the “route” conditions slightly and attempt the same drop-knee
move again. After a few reps in this new setting, you’d again modify the
route by changing the hold spacing and wall angle to further expand use of
the skill—then continue this progression to the point that you could perform
the drop-knee move in a variety of random settings. Such “variable
practice” will refine schema-rules to direct effective execution of the drop-

knee motor program over a wide range of conditions (angle, hold size, rock
type, and frictional properties) that you may encounter in the future.

FATIGUED SKILL PRACTICE
Earlier I mentioned that you can increase your command of a skill by
practicing it while in a fatigued state. In fact, beyond the initial successful
trials of a skill, practice should be performed with variable conditions and
levels of fatigue and never again “blocked.” This may increase your rate of
failure at doing certain moves—but remember, performance isn’t your goal,
practice is! The benefits of this practice, no matter how poor it feels, will
become evident in the future. Besides, this concept actually makes good
sense. If you want the ability to stick a deadpoint in the midst of a dicey
lead climb while pumped, you’d better log some deadpoints in various
states of fatigue during practice.
Here’s the best approach. Use the first thirty minutes of your workout
(while fresh) to train new skills, then move on to chalking up some mileage
on a variety of routes. After an hour or so, or when you’re moderately
fatigued, attempt several reps of recently acquired moves and sequences. As
fatigue increases, finish up with some reps of sequences or boulder
problems you have more completely mastered.
In the context of a two-hour climbing gym workout, this rule emphasizes
the benefit of squeezing in a greater volume of climbing “practice” ascents
over doing just a few “performance” ascents with extensive rest in between.
The long rests and performance climbing may make you look better, but the
greater volume of practice will make you climb better!

RANDOM SKILL PRACTICE
The ability to on-sight a sequence of novel moves on “foreign” rock is the
ultimate goal of your skill practice time. Toward this end, the best workout

approach is a randomized free-for-all of skill types. This highly effective
method is widely used in other sports and should not be overlooked by
climbers as optimal training for the unknown.
There are two approaches to random training of climbing skills. First, on
an indoor wall, attempt to link a sequence of very different bouldering
moves. Contrive an unusual sequence of moves that will call a wide range
of skills into use, and make several attempts at sending it. Alternatively,
team up with your most deranged friend for a round of the Stick Game
(described later in this chapter). Take turns pointing (with a broomstick)
each other through an unusual sequence of widely varied skills and
movements. Don’t get too wrapped up in performance outcomes—if you
link a random series of moves, then you are a winner in terms of developing
superior climbing skill.
Another powerful method of random skill training is to climb a series of
widely differing routes in rapid succession. A commercial gym with many
different wall angles, a few cracks, and a roof or two is ideal. Team with a
partner and toprope ten to fifteen routes of different character over the
course of an hour or so. The first route may be a vertical face, the next a
slab, the third a finger crack, the fourth an overhanging pumpfest, the fifth a
handcrack, the sixth a roof route, and so on. This rapid recall of a wide
range of motor and cognitive skills is like taking skill-fortifying steroids!

Fundamental Techniques
The essence of climbing is a dance up the wall using the four points of
contact as your dance steps. Since each climb possesses a novel
configuration of hand-and footholds, your challenge is to unlock the perfect
sequence of moves and leverage your points of contact into this dynamic
dance.
In executing any physical skill—whether it’s shooting a basketball or
simply running—there are fundamental techniques that represent optimal
use of body position, leverage, and physical energy. While the specific
techniques may be hard to observe with an untrained eye, just about any
novice can spot an athlete steeped in the fundamentals: Her movements are
smooth, crisp, and confident, and her demeanor reveals a poise and ease of
execution, despite inherent difficulties of the situation. The bottom line:
Fundamentally sound movement affords perfect economy and looks easy.
Unfortunately, becoming a highly skilled, proficient climber rarely just
happens—it results from a conscious decision to develop superior technique
via disciplined long-term practice. Make it your goal to learn to climb every
move and every route in the optimal way, and not to be satisfied to succeed
with sloppy, inefficient movement. Excellence in climbing comes only to
those with knowledge of the fundamentals and a desire to make them habit.
To help you on this journey, this section provides a primer on twelve
fundamental techniques that you must practice to the point of mastery. As
you read through each section, ponder your current level of competency in
each fundamental technique and make it an urgent part of your training-forclimbing program to improve these weak areas. For a more tangible record
of your technical ability, score your command of each fundamental
technique using the checklist assessment in table 4.1.

Tips for Rapid Learning of Skills and
Developing Good Technique

1. Engage in regular climbing “practice.” That is, go climbing
with the intention of learning new skills and improving quality
of movement, with little regard for absolute difficulty. Climb
on as many different types of rock, wall angles, and areas as
possible to build diverse skills and true climbing expertise.
2. Practice new skills and techniques early in the session while
you are physically and mentally fresh.
3. Use blocked practice to accelerate learning during the initial
trials of a new move, skill, or sequence. After two or three
successful repetitions, cease blocked practice in favor of
variable and randomized practice.
4. Employ variable practice to expand command of newly
acquired skills over a wide range of conditions (angle, hold
size, rock type, and so forth). Vary the “route” conditions more
than you expect would be the case in a real-life climbing
situation.
5. Practice known skills while in varying states of fatigue to
increase your mastery of them and to build long-term retention.
6. Use random practice—climb a random series of moves backto-back—to enhance proficiency of serial skill performance.
Another random practice strategy is to climb several very
different routes back-to-back to mandate recall of many
different motor programs.
7. Model the techniques and tactics of advanced climbers to learn
new moves and climbing strategies.
8. Aspire to dominate at a climbing grade, and not just get by.
Focus practice on routes at or just below your maximum
difficulty and resist the urge to constantly work routes beyond
your ability level.
9. When working a route, resolve to find the best way to do a
move or sequence and resist the urge to just thrash up the route
and deem that acceptable. As a practice method, climb a route
several times to identify and learn the most effective and
efficient moves and tactics.

10. Maintain a long-term perspective toward learning to climb.
No matter how fast you improve or how hard you climb,
realize that you can still improve technique and learn new skills
—even after ten, twenty, or more years!

Table 4.1 Score Your Technical Ability

Precise Foot Placements That Carry Your Weight

Given that your legs are stronger than your arms, the first fundamental of
climbing is that the legs should do the majority of the work. The exceptions
to this rule are overhanging routes, which demand greater use of the arms
(more on this in a bit). The process of effectively using your feet begins
with spotting the footholds and positioning your feet on the best part of
each hold. Directing your foot placement demands attention to detail
beyond that given to hand placements. Whereas handholds are easy to
inspect, the greater eye-to-foot distance commonly leads to less-than-ideal
foot placements. Furthermore, your feet don’t provide the same degree of
feel as the hands, making the quality of each foot placement more difficult
to assess. For these reasons, developing good footwork is an attribute that
you must make happen via constant foot focus and practice.
The another aspect of sound footwork is proper alignment of your center
of gravity directly over a foothold. Balance, stability, and application of
force are optimized when your center of gravity is positioned directly over
your feet, forming a line perpendicular to level ground. On a less-thanvertical wall or slab, this requires a hip position out from the wall and over
the foothold. On a near-vertical climbing surface, you simply need to keep
your body position straight and over your feet as much as possible. When
the climbing wall overhangs, it becomes impossible to position your weight
over your feet, so a new fundamental skill takes over (see “Twist Lock and
Backstep” later in this chapter).
Center of Gravity

1. Keep your center of gravity over your feet so they carry most of your
weight. This requires a hips-out position when climbing slabs.

2. On vertical rock, it’s essential to keep your hips in near the rock to
position your center of gravity over your feet.

Handholds Gripped Lightly; Arms Play a Secondary Role

In a sport where anxiety and fear often rule, it’s understandable that many
climbers hang on with their hands for dear life. This tendency manifests
itself with overgripping of the handholds and unnecessary muscling of
moves with the arms. The end result is rapid fatigue, pumped forearms, and
an eventual need to hang on the rope to rest and recover. You can avoid this
outcome by practicing—and making habit—the fundamentals of proper
hand and arm use. These critical skills include gripping each handhold with
the minimum force required, using the arms mainly for balance and not as a
primary source of locomotion, and pushing with the feet in unison with
modest arm pull.
Begin by making each hand contact a conscious process. Whereas many
climbers just grab a hold with little thought and continue with the process of
climbing, you must make each hand placement a thoughtful act. First,
consider where the best place is to grab the hold. It’s not always on the top,
and it often relates to the location of your last foot placement. Now as you
grab the hold, focus on using a light touch that yields soft forearms. Sure,
certain holds will demand that you bear down hard on them, but most don’t.
Your goal must be to try to use each hold with a light touch, and then
increase the gripping force only as much as is required for the move at
hand. This process of minimally gripping each handhold takes but a split
second, yet it’s a master skill that separates the best from the rest.

Conserve energy by gripping the rock lightly and maintaining straight
arms, especially when you’re climbing on overhanging terrain.

Beyond gripping the rock, you need to decide just how much you need to
pull down on a given handhold. As discussed earlier, it is imperative that
you push with your feet and let the leg muscles carry the load. Think of
your arms as points of contact that simply prevent you from falling
backward off the wall. In climbing a ladder, for example, your feet do all
the work while the arms mainly provide balance. While rock climbing is far
more complex, hold this model in your mind as the ultimate goal—the arms
maintain balance while the legs drive movement. Still, there will be
occasions on which your arms will need to briefly carry much of your
weight. In these situations it’s imperative that you maintain straight arms.
This way the bulk of your weight is supported by the skeletal system of
your upper body and not by your muscles.

The Left-Right Rule for Stable Movement

The magic of efficient climbing movement comes from the synergistic
interaction of the arms and legs and a constant transfer of force and torque
through your body. To this end, the Left-Right Rule states that maximum
stability and ease of movement comes from the pairing of a left hand and
right foot (or a left foot and right hand) in harmonious action. Let’s again
use climbing a ladder as our model. Ascending a ladder with opposing
hand-foot combinations (say, the left hand pulling and right foot pushing at
the same time) is so intuitive that it’s almost impossible to climb a ladder
any other way. Suppose you tried to climb a ladder with nonopposing handfoot combinations, such as a right hand and right foot working together;
you’d immediately begin to barndoor or rotate sideways off the ladder.
Thus, the Left-Right Rule is a fundamental for balanced, stable movement.
While you don’t need to even consider the Left- Right Rule in ascending
a ladder, formulating movement up a climbing wall is much more complex:
The position and shape of the hand- and footholds wreak havoc with your
intuitive sense of movement. Thus, in seeking to reposition your hands and
feet on the wall, it’s helpful to ponder which holds will provide the best
opportunity for a left-right combination. Easy climbs will often provide a
pulling right hand that can combine with a pushing left foot (or vice versa).
More difficult climbs tend to be more devious because the holds are
smaller, farther apart, or displaced off to the side of the route line.
Advanced climbers will often be able to intuit the best way to proceed;
however, beginners must be willing to try difficult sequences multiple ways
to discover and learn the best solution.

Move with Perfect Economy

The technical paramount is to climb with perfect economy. Make those two
words, perfect economy, your mantra every time you touch the rock. Perfect
economy means discovering the way to do each move—an entire route, for
that matter—with minimal energy expenditure. If you have a cat, you can
observe highly economic movement firsthand. Most of the time a cat moves
in a slow, smooth, deliberate way; sometimes, however, a situation demands
a powerful, dynamic leap to maintain perfect economy. Catlike movement
should be your technical model for efficient climbing: smooth, quiet, legdriven movements, but with an unhesitating shift to an arm-pulling,
dynamic movement when it is required to most efficiently execute a
difficult move. Here are five attributes of economic movement that you
should aspire to.

QUIET FEET
Quiet foot movements are one of the hallmarks of a climber with great
technique. Conversely, feet that regularly pop off footholds or skid on the
wall surface are typical of an individual possessing lackluster footwork and
poor economy. For many climbers, noisy footwork is just the way they
climb—it’s a habit that developed over a long period of time, as well as a
flaw in their technique that will prevent them from ever reaching their true
potential. Your goal, of course, is to learn to climb with good foot technique
even in the toughest times. This means concentrating on each foot
placement, keeping your foot steady and firm to the hold, and standing up
on the foot with confidence as you proceed smoothly to the next hand- or
foothold.

RHYTHM AND MOMENTUM
Like any dance, climbing should have a natural rhythm that utilizes
momentum and inertia. Climbing in a ladderlike motion yields the rhythm
step, reach, step, reach. However, a better rhythm for effective movement is
often step, step, reach, reach, since it allows the legs to direct and drive the
movement. There are obviously many other rhythms, and every unique
sequence possesses a best rhythm of movement and, more important, a best
use of forward momentum to help propel successive moves. This is
especially important on difficult climbs with large spacing between holds.
Consider how you use momentum in moving hand-over-hand across
monkey bars at a playground, with each movement blending into the next in
a perfect continuity of motion. Make this “monkey bar” model of smooth,
continuous motion your goal when climbing through strenuous sequences.
(Ironically, many climbers do just the opposite, engaging crux sequences in
a slow, hesitant way.)

SMOOTH MOVES AND RELAXED BODY
Smooth, fluid movement is another hallmark of high economy, while stiff,
mechanical movement is a sign of poor technique and a high burn rate of
energy. One of the keys to smooth, efficient climbing movement is learning
to contract only the muscles necessary for engaging the rock and directing
movement (usually these will be the muscles of your forearms, shoulders,
abdomen, thighs, and calves). The easiest way to achieve this is to
periodically switch your focus to the antagonist muscles and scan for
unnecessary tension (in the upper arms, hips and legs, torso, neck, and face)
that is making the agonist muscle work harder and burn more energy than
necessary. Take a few slow, deep belly breaths and visualize the tension
escaping the antagonist muscle like air from a balloon—such mental
imagery really helps the process. Now return your focus to executing the
next climbing movement, but continue alternating your focus back and forth
between directing movement and directing relaxation.

PACE
Pace is another aspect of climbing economy that becomes increasingly
important as a route gains in steepness and difficulty. While an easy climb
with large holds allows you to ascend at a leisurely pace, a crux sequence or
overhanging terrain will demand that you kick into high gear and surmount
the difficulty in short order. When climbing near your limit, it must be your
intention to move as briskly as possible without any drop-off in technique
(skidding feet, botching sequences, and such). Reduce the pace at the first
sign that your technique is suffering. It helps to identify obvious rest
positions ahead of time, and then make it a goal to move from one to the
next as fast as possible. Ultimately, knowing just the right pace on a given
route is a sense you will develop with experience. Practice climbing at
different speeds and on different types of routes, and you’ll quickly foster
the subtle skill of proper pace.

STEADY BREATHING
A steady flow of oxygen to the muscles is important for energy production
and recovery, and it’s the slow, deep, steady belly breaths that best get the
job done. Many climbers, however, have a tendency to shift into shallow,
rapid breathing as fatigue and mental anxiety grow. Worse yet, some
climbers unknowingly hold their breath at times of high stress. These are
two tendencies that you must be aware of and proactively counteract if you
are to climb your best.
Before every climb, pause to close your eyes and take several slow, deep
breaths. Feel your belly expand outward as you slowly inhale, and then
allow the air to escape sparingly through pursed lips in a slow ten-second
count (count in your mind). As you commence climbing, strive to maintain
the same slow, steady breathing that you initiated on the ground. This is, of
course, often difficult, since a dicey sequence or strenuous move can trigger
irregular breathing patterns. Consequently, it is critical that you use every
rest position as an opportunity to reset your breathing cycle with a few

slow, deep belly breaths. Such proactive breath control is like topping off
your gas tank—do it frequently, and you’ll rarely hit empty.

Optimize Use of Rest Positions

Finding efficient rest positions is as important as finding the best way to do
a crux sequence. If you miss a good rest stance, you miss an opportunity to
physically recover as well as mentally “read” and prepare for the next
section of the climb. Consequently, locating rest positions on a climb should
be viewed with the same sense of importance as locating all the key holds—
make this part of your preclimb visualization routine.
Upon reaching a rest step, assume a body position that will allow the
most fatigued muscles to rest (usually the forearms, biceps, and calves). An
optimal rest position consists of your feet in the rest-step position, legs
straight, and hips over the legs or in a position midway between the feet
(should they be on holds more than shoulder width apart). Unfortunately,
rest positions on vertical to overhanging climbs make complete weighting
of the feet more difficult—often impossible. While you still want to place
as much weight as possible on the footholds, a significant amount of weight
will remain on your arms. In this case it’s absolutely vital that you hang
with straight arms, so that the bones are providing the support, not the
muscles of the upper arm. Still, your forearm muscles will need to contract
in order to maintain a grip on the handhold. The best strategy, then, is to
attain a stable stance and shake out alternate arms every ten to twenty
seconds. Use the G-Tox method described in chapter 10.

Clever Use of Opposing Forces

You have already learned the importance of the Left-Right Rule for
enabling stable movement. On easy climbs this left-right combination is
usually a pulling right hand along with a pushing left foot (or vice versa).
More difficult climbs tend to be more devious, however, so you’ll need to
consider all the other possible arm positions—side pull, Gaston, and
undercling—and figure out how to match one of these with an opposing
foot placement. Detailed below are a few of the most common left-right
combinations called into use on difficult climbs. You should practice each
of these on the bouldering wall in order to develop its unique motor skills.
Vary your hand and foot placements as much as possible to acquire a broad
range of use for each hand-foot combination.

SIDE-PULL ARM AND OUTSIDE EDGE OF
OPPOSITE FOOT
Side-pulling arms are a staple move on almost every moderate to advanced
climb, but it’s your foothold selection that often determines the
effectiveness of this move. In most cases it’s best to use the outside edge of
the opposing foot, not the inside edge. Doing this may feel awkward at first,
but you’ll find a natural sense of stability once you learn to appropriately
set your hips over the outside-edging foot. The key is to concentrate on
rotating your hips so that the hip opposite the pulling hand is turned into the
wall—that is, your face and chest will rotate toward the side pulling hand.
This very stable position will allow you to step up your free (nonopposing)
leg and quite possibly your free (nonopposing) hand as well. Occasionally a
move will dictate that a side-pulling hand must be combined with use of the
inside edge of the opposing foot. While this, too, is a fairly stable body

position, it provides less reach upward with the free hand. Therefore,
anytime you are struggling to reach a handhold, try using the outside edge
of your shoe and a hip turn to maximize reach.

Pairing a side-pulling hand with the outside edge of the opposite foot (and
a hip turn) provides great stability and reach. LISA ANN HÖRST

GASTON AND INSIDE EDGE OF OPPOSITE
FOOT
The Gaston (aka reverse side pull) is the most unnatural and weak arm
position, yet it’s a fairly common move needed to unlock many crux
sequences. Use of the Gaston is best opposed by the inside edge of the
opposite foot. Combining a Gaston with an outside-edging foot is strenuous
but doable if absolutely needed. Practice this move in a variety of ways to
gain comfort and strength in its use. As with all these advanced moves, the
bouldering area is the ideal proving ground to experiment with and learn the
skills.

UNDERCLING AND INSIDE OR OUTSIDE
EDGE OF OPPOSITE FOOT
Frequently overlooked by inexperienced climbers, undercling hand
positions are often essential for unlocking difficult sequences on steep
terrain. What’s more, an underclinging hand helps maximize your reach
with the free hand, and it positions your arm and body in a naturally strong
position. Typically you will undercling a hold somewhere near your torso
while you press with an opposing foot. This foot can edge with either the
inside, outside, or toe portion of the shoe, although use of the outside edge
is best for maximizing your reach. Remember that in edging with the
outside of your foot, it’s best to turn the hip opposite the pulling hand to the
wall. In extreme situations you may even need to use a foot smear to oppose

the underclinging hand. This is a very powerful but important move that
you should train on a bouldering or system wall.

The undercling move can save the day on a reachy move lacking a
positive down-pull hold. Use a hip turn and the outside edge of your
opposite foot to maximize reach, stability, and power.

ERIC McCALLISTER

SIDE-PULLING LEFT AND RIGHT HANDS
Use of opposing handholds is a key move for unlocking a sequence that
lacks any usable down-pull or undercling handholds. Most common are two
opposing side pulls that you’ll draw inward to create tension through your
arms, shoulders, and upper body. While you will be unable to create much
upward movement, this opposition will allow you to upgrade one or both
feet. Ideally, you’ll want to upgrade the foot that opposes the better of the
two side pulls, so that it sets up a stable left-right combination. This will
enable you to release the other side-pulling hand so as to upgrade it to the
next hold. Another possibility is opposing Gaston holds. Though strenuous,
you may occasionally need to grab two Gastons at or just above head height
and pull outward in order to support your weight while upgrading a foot
position. This is a most advanced move that requires a high level of base
strength.

Use Foot Flagging to Enhance Stability

Flagging is the alternative technique for maintaining stability when a leftright hand-foot combination is not possible. Suppose you are attempting to
use a right-hand and right-foot combination to propel upward movement.
Upon releasing your left hand to make a reach upward, you will
immediately begin to barndoor. This sideways rotation is hard to fight and
often results in a fall. However, a simple flagging of the free leg (in this
case the left) significantly improves stability and balance by shifting your
center of gravity more directly over the supporting (right) foot and under
the supporting (right) hand. Practice using these flagging techniques on a
vertical wall and then expand their use onto overhanging terrain. You will
soon discover that foot flagging is an indispensable technique for steep,
thin, balancy move.

Mantling and Hand-Foot Matching

The mantle move is often called upon to overcome a long reach between
holds. Depending on the size of the hold to be mantled, you may be able to
press your entire palm onto the hold or, possibly, just your fingertips. The
left-right combination of pushing and pulling hands provides great stability,
so you will be able to upgrade one or, possibly, both feet. In many cases you
will match a foot (the same side as the mantling hand) on the same hold that
you are mantling; it is then often possible to shift your center of gravity
over that foot and stand up.
Severe climbs frequently demand that you adroitly match your foot onto
a tiny crimp or finger pocket hold. Quick, precise execution is essential to
maintain forward inertia as you progress through such tenuous sequences.

Unstable moves and a tendency to barndoor can often be overcome by a
flagging foot—which shifts your center of gravity closer to the weightbearing foot.

Twist Lock and Backstep on Steep Terrain

The twist lock and backstep are the bread-and-butter moves of a steep-wall
connoisseur. As a climbing wall tilts back past vertical, it becomes
increasingly difficult to place a high percentage of weight on your legs.
Consequently, a greater portion of body weight must be supported by your
arms—which, of course, possess less absolute strength than the legs. Use of
the twist lock and backstep together helps draw your body in toward the
surface of the overhanging wall. This changes the force vector on the
handholds, making them feel more positive and secure. More important,
this drawing-in of the body places more weight onto the footholds. Proper
execution of these moves, however, requires practice and a significant
amount of strength through the core muscles of the torso. See chapter 6 to
learn exercises for strengthening these core muscles.
The twist lock is typically used to ease the upgrading of a hand on an
overhanging section of wall. For example, consider the situation in which
your left hand is on a good hold and you’d like to reach up high with your
right. While you could attempt this move straight-on—chest facing toward
the wall in a neutral position—it’s far less strenuous to turn your right hip to
the wall before making the upward reach. Proper positioning of the feet is
critical for making this move work. Since the right hip is turning to the
wall, you’ll need to use the outside edge of your right foot on a hold
somewhere below or in back of your body (hence the term backstep).
Usually you’ll find a complementary left foothold to help maintain the
twist-lock body position. The feet then press in unison while the left arm
pulls down and in toward your torso, creating the twist lock. Finding just
the right body position is the key to providing a secure twist lock; when you
do, you’ll notice that a surprising lack of effort is needed to reach up and
acquire the next handhold. This amazingly efficient locomotion over steep
terrain is the magic of the twist-lock technique. See photos on next page.

Use Creative Footwork with Heel and Toe Hooks, and Knee Locks

Heel hooks, toe hooks, and knee locks are real difference makers when it
comes to moving over steep terrain and surmounting overhangs. Given the
strength of the leg muscles, a good heel hook is often better than a handhold
in helping turn the lip of a difficult roof. Similarly, toe hooks and knee locks
provide terrific support when you’re cranking a serious move on overhang
rock. Let’s take a brief look at each.
Use of Twist Lock

1. Without the twist lock, the climber’s neutral, straight-on body position
places the center of gravity way out from the wall. This makes for
strenuous, inefficient movement.

2. The twist lock with its hallmark hip turn draws the center of gravity in
closer to the wall, thus placing more body weight onto the feet, increasing
reach and enhancing grip on handholds (thanks to the changing force
vector of the arm pull).

HEEL HOOK

Heel hooks are the major go-to move when you’re turning the lip of a roof,
topping out on a boulder problem, or copping a quick shakeout while on
steep terrain. In these cases you’ll likely have your hands on holds at or
above face level and intend to place one of your heels on a hold off to the
side near shoulder level. Which heel you choose to hook with depends on
two factors: the availability of a decent-size hold on which to place your
heel, and the location of the next handhold that you hope to acquire. This
next reach up is best made with the hand on the same side as the heel hook.
So if it looks like the next attainable hold is set up for the right hand, it
would be best to use a right heel hook. Once set, pull with the heel hook as
if it were a third arm and, of course, pull with both arms as well. Often it
helps to think about pulling your heel toward your rear end; this will
maximize use of the leg muscles and help shift your center of gravity
toward the heel hook. Meanwhile, the other foot should inside-edge or
smear on the wall to help contribute to the upward motion. As you gain
elevation, make a quick reach to the next handhold and then switch your
heel hook into a standard step-down foot placement.

Heel hooks can make a huge difference in pulling a tough roof or
copping a shakeout on steep rock.

TOE HOOK
The toe hook is a foot move used mostly in pulling overhangs or in
navigating roofs. This technique involves simply hooking as much of the

top-laces side of your shoe as possible on a large protruding hold.
Sometimes you will toe hook onto a hold with a bent leg, and then
straighten that leg as your hands move out the roof. Ideally you’ll have one
foot toe hooking while the other foot pushes off a nearby hold. This
opposing push-pull combination enhances the foot purchase on the holds
and lowers the chance that your feet will come swinging off the roof (a
common problem). Strive to keep your arms and legs in the straight position
as much as possible so that your body weight is being supported more by
bone than by muscles. Done properly, you can navigate a surprisingly large
roof, with the limiting factor being forearm endurance. Experiment with
this foot technique in the bouldering area and you’ll gradually gain skill and
confidence in climbing with your back to the ground!

KNEE LOCK
Knee locks are a boon on overhanging walls and roofs with large protruding
holds—that is, if you know the technique and can find a position to exploit
this “thank-God” move. On a severely overhanging climb with no obvious
rest positions, finding a knee lock may be your only hope for a rest. Look
for a place where you can step your toe onto a hold and then lock in your
knee against a larger opposing hold. Such a knee lock provides surprising
purchase; it will allow you to drop one hand at a time to shake out and
chalk up. Occasionally you will come upon a knee lock that’s so solid,
you’ll be able to cop a rare no-hands inverted rest! Of course, miss the knee
lock and you have no choice but to sprint up the climb in the hope of
reaching the anchors before the pump clock runs out.

Use Dynamic Moves When They Offer Greater Economy

Throughout this chapter I’ve stressed the importance of climbing with
maximum economy—the goal being to climb a move, a sequence, and an
entire route in a way that requires minimal energy. In most cases the
hallmark of economical climbing is smooth, relaxed movement that utilizes
the feet and legs over the muscles of the upper body. Such controlled, fluid
movement is often referred to as static climbing. The opposite of static style
is dynamic or explosive movement, and there are certain moves and
sequences that demand dynamic movement to achieve maximum economy.
In particular, vertical routes with tiny handholds and overhanging routes
with long reaches often require dynamic movements.
The key is to know which moves are best attempted dynamically versus
statically, and this is a recognition skill that takes years to fully develop.
When working a route, it’s best to attempt a crux in both a static and
dynamic way to determine which style yields the most economical passage;
otherwise you’ll never know if there was a more effective method, and
you’ll miss out on an important learning opportunity. Let’s examine the two
primary forms of dynamic movement: deadpoints and lunges.

DEADPOINTS
Consider a situation in which both hands cling to poor holds, and you
would fall off the wall if either hand let go for more than an instant. It’s in
just such a predicament that the deadpoint move will save the day, because
it allows you to make a rapid hand upgrade despite the fact you can’t hang
on to the wall statically with a single-hand contact point. How’s this
possible? It’s the magic of the deadpoint!

Envision a basketball player making a jump shot. He jumps straight up
and shoots the ball at the peak of his flight, a moment of apparent
weightlessness before gravity returns him to the floor. This instant of
weightlessness and stillness is the deadpoint. Climbers can similarly exploit
the apparent weightlessness of the deadpoint to upgrade a hand position as
in the desperate situation described above. But instead of jumping like our
basketball player, the climber needs to use a smaller, more controlled
motion to facilitate the delicate upgrading of a hand from one small hold to
another.
For example, imagine a tenuous move on a vertical or slightly
overhanging wall in which you want to upgrade your right hand, but you
can’t make a static reach for the hold. Initiate the deadpoint movement with
a small droop downward (or a release outward in the case of an
overhanging wall) immediately followed by a firm drawing-inward of the
handholds toward your torso. This drawing-in of your body is akin to—but
less dramatic than—the basketball player’s jump, and there will be an
instant when the motion peaks and you’ll be able to flash your hand up to
snag the next hold. A well-executed deadpoint is calculated and controlled
such that it flows naturally in perfect economy. In extreme cases you may
need to execute several deadpoint moves in a row in order to climb through
a series of small handholds that you could never hang on to for a static
movement.

LUNGES
Unlike the careful, controlled movement of a deadpoint, the lunge (or dyno,
as it’s often called) is a full-on leap for an out-of-reach hold. In lunging, the
arms and legs explode in unison to propel your body upward toward the
next good hold. Lunges typically end in one of two ways: Ideally you latch
on to a hold and regain control of your body; however, it’s also possible that
you will fail to catch the target hold and end up falling on the rope or the
bouldering crash pad.

All all-out lunge move should be reserved for situations in which a static
move would be more difficult or impossible. Here Matt Bosley lunges to
crimp pay dirt at Earth Treks.

Lunging is like any other skill in that it takes practice and a high level of
confidence before you will be able to exploit the move in severe situations.
It’s also a strenuous and stressful move that has led to many shoulder
injuries. Consequently, it’s best to view lunging as a last-resort move that
you only pull out of the bag when nothing else appears possible. In the heat
of a crux sequence, though, it often comes down to a gut feeling as to
whether you should try to throw a lunge or attempt a static sequence.
Ideally it would be best to lunge only when climbing statically would
require more energy. In fact, a perfectly executed lunge in just the right
situation is a classic example of climbing with high economy, despite the
apparent burly nature of the move.
Executing a lunge is very physical, but also requires good timing and a
belief that you can reach the next hold. Much like a gymnast attempting her
hardest move, throwing and sticking the perfect lunge requires laserlike
focus and an intense belief in a successful outcome. Begin by locking your
eyes on the target hold and visualize exactly how your hand will hit—and
stick!—the hold. Next, look down and concentrate on maximizing an
explosive launch off your four points of contact. In many cases it helps to
“cock” your lunge by drooping or bouncing before you catapult upward. As
you go airborne, your eyes will naturally return to a pinpoint focus on the
target hold. Now stick it!

Jam Crack Climbing

Crack climbing involves techniques and tactics far different from the skills
outlined above, and therefore you need to develop completely novel motor
programs and schema-rules. I advise novice climbers to consult John
Long’s How to Rock Climb! for more comprehensive instruction than I offer
here.

FINGER- AND HAND-JAMMING TECHNIQUES
Just how your hands engage a crack depends on the size of the fissure. The
narrowest cracks will accept little more than the tips of your fingers. Most
often you’ll place this jam with your index finger on the bottom and your
elbow out to the side. This way, when you pull on that arm, the elbow will
rotate downward and produce a twisting of the fingers that further anchors
them into the crack. One thing you will notice in larger finger cracks
(around an inch wide) is that your fingers tend to slide down instead of
jamming solidly. In these situations it’s vital to look for constrictions or
bottlenecks along the crack and attempt to place your jams in or just above
these narrower spots.
Cracks ranging from 1 to 3 inches wide are the domain of hand jams. You
can execute a hand jam in the thumb-up or thumb-down position. Vertical
cracks are often better climbed thumb-down, whereas cracks that slant to
the side may be more easily climbed with the lower hand jamming thumbup and the high hand jamming thumb-down. As in finger jamming, scan
hand cracks for constrictions or bottlenecks that will provide the most
bombproof jams imaginable. Cracks with little variance are more
challenging, as they require a bit more effort to create a solid jam. The key
is to cup your hand inside the crack to generate outward pressure and

friction on the inside of the crack. Furthermore, jamming thumb-down
exerts a twisting force on the jammed hand as you pull down, and this tends
to increase the security of the jam.
Fist jamming is the optimal technique for cracks about 4 inches wide.
The technique here is simply to insert your hand with the palm facing into
the crack and then make a fist. In closing your hand tightly, the width of
your fist increases, making it stick like an oversize cork stuck in the top of a
wine bottle. Cracks larger than 4 inches require a difficult off-width
technique in which your arm and leg are jammed to gain purchase.

FOOT TECHNIQUES

Crack climbing is vastly different from face climbing, yet one
fundamental remains the same: Let the leg do most of the work. ERIC
McCALLISTER

There are two primary foot techniques used in crack climbing: feet inside
the crack and feet on the rock face. In climbing thin finger cracks, you have
little choice but to search for edges on the rock surface on which you can
edge or smear (as in face climbing). The exceptions are offset cracks (where
one edge of the crack is set out from the opposite edge of the crack) and
larger finger cracks, which occasionally afford a foot smear on the exposed
edge of the crack. Look for stems, high steps, outside edges, and even
backsteps in attempting to use your feet optimally. Cracks wider than about
1 inch provide exceedingly solid foot placements by means of foot
jamming. The simple technique involves turning your foot side-ways—so
that the sole of the shoe is facing inward and your knee is bent outward—
and inserting as much of your foot as possible into the crack. Depending on
the crack’s size, you may be limited to jamming just the toe portion of the
shoe (narrow hand cracks) or its entire front half (fist cracks). Once you’re
secured in the crack, your knee will naturally rotate back to center as you
stand up on the foot. In climbing a continuous hand or fist crack, you will
simply need to leapfrog one foot above the other in a series of foot jams
about 1 foot apart.

Finger- and hand-jamming skills are subtle and require practice to
perfect. Here crack master John Bachar pumps laps on his “crack
machine,” circa 1985. PHIL BARD

LIEBACK TECHNIQUE
Finally, there’s liebacking, a unique method of climbing cracks that are
located in the vertex of a dihedral or corner. The lieback technique is fairly
strenuous since it places your body in a sort of rowing position with your
arms pulling and your legs pushing in a powerful opposition. Feet smear on
one wall of the corner while your fingers cling to the edge of the crack and
arms remain as straight as possible. Move upward by simply walking your
feet up the wall and sliding (or leapfrogging) your hands up the crack. With
practice you’ll learn to position your hands and feet to provide the greatest
leverage at the lowest possible energy expenditure. Of course, as in all kind
of strenuous climbing, moving quickly is fundamental to maximizing
performance.

CRACK-CLIMBING STRATEGY
Effective crack-climbing strategy is nearly identical to optimal faceclimbing strategy—climb briskly and efficiently, utilize your legs as much
as possible in generating locomotion, and pause for long periods only at
definitive rest stances. Just as in your clumsy first days attempting any new
climbing technique, expect your initial forays at crack climbing to feel
awkward and frustratingly difficult. Trust that you will rapidly acquire the
unique motor skills and that crack climbing will soon become less strenuous
and a heck of a lot of fun.
In your formative days of crack climbing, use the security of a toprope to
experiment with different techniques and subtle variations of the basic
jamming skills described above. Don’t be satisfied with just thrashing up a
crack to the top; instead strive to learn the best way to do each move with
the goal of climbing each crack in good style and with minimal energy

burn. As a practice method, climb single-pitch crack routes a few times in a
row to refine your skills and learn the subtle finesse moves that will
eventually make you a master crack climber!

Smart Training Drills for Enhanced Learning of
Motor Skills and Strategy
Having performed the technical evaluation in table 4.1 and the selfassessment in chapter 2, you should now have a clear picture of your
technical weaknesses. But knowledge is not enough; to improve you must
act! Dedicate a portion of two climbing sessions per week to improving
your weaknesses and you will become a better climber.
Regardless of whether you plan to climb in a gym or at the crag, it’s
important that you make the distinction between time spent practicing
versus performing. Unfortunately, many climbers handicap themselves by
constantly focusing on performance as they succumb to the natural
tendency to climb as close to their limit as possible. We’ve all seen climbers
with horrible footwork flailing repeatedly on a steep route so that they can
eventually tick some impressively difficult route. While they may
ultimately succeed at sending their “5.hard” climbs, they gain little in
technical ability from this exercise—and in fact they further groove their
bad habits and poor technique. I call such practices “stupid training.”
Conversely, intelligent climbers will dedicate a block of practice time
early in the workout when they’re mentally and physically fresh. During
this practice period or day (if at the crags), the goal is to seek out routes that
will target their technical weaknesses. Since performance is not a goal,
there is no hesitation to hang on the rope and experiment with moves, body
positions, and sequences that feel awkward or difficult.
For example, if backstep and drop-knee moves are a weakness, you’ll
want to dedicate some time during each workout to getting onto steep
routes that demand these moves. No matter your weaknesses, it’s likely that
the type of routes you must get on will be intimidating, since up to this
point it’s probably been your tendency to climb routes that favor your
strengths. If you are poor at drop-knee moves, for instance, I’ll bet you
avoid steep routes because they feel especially hard and look overly

intimidating to you. The same goes for any style of climbing—slab, thin
face, cracks, roofs, what have you. You must partake in regular practice on
the terrain and type of routes that target your top technical weaknesses as
identified in the self-assessment and table 4.1. Excellence comes no other
way.
Following are a few practice drills and games that will enhance your rate
of learning new skills and correcting weaknesses, as well as making the
process a little more fun. More examples of such speed learning practices
can be found in my book How to Climb 5.12.

Bouldering

Bouldering is often touted as the supreme method for developing sportspecific strength, but it’s even more effective for learning climbing skills
and acquiring new schemas. For proof of this, consider a recent bouldering
session in which you worked a difficult problem a few times before
eventually succeeding. Did you ultimately succeed because your strength
increased after each attempt, or did each successive attempt result in
learning of the body positioning, feel, and hand- and footwork necessary to
do the moves most efficiently and successfully? I think the answer is
obvious.
With all the restraints of roped climbing removed, bouldering allows you
to narrow your focus and partake in relaxed, repeated attempts at learning a
specific skill or sequence of moves. Sports scientists call this blocked
practice, because the fixed moves can be practiced over and over again until
they are successfully acquired. Once a skill is perfected, however, there is
little benefit to additional blocked practice of that skill. Further learning
demands that you either move on to practicing a new skill via blocked
practice (say, a new boulder problem with new moves and positions) or
modify the original problem so that some element of it has changed (say,
angle, hold size, hold position or spacing, or the like). This latter strategy is
known as variable practice, and it’s the gold standard for learning a skill
that must be performed in a variety of positions or settings: hitting a golf
ball from an infinite variety of lies, shooting a basketball from anywhere on
the court, floating a deadpoint from any one of a million different body
positions.
Indoor walls and home gyms are the ideal setting for variable practice.
Supposed you want to gain skill at, say, using undercling holds and hip
turns on overhanging cliffs. To begin, set a problem with a relatively easy
sequence of underclings and hip turns. Practice the sequence several times
until you feel it’s 100 percent wired. Now redesign the problem with slight
changes in the hold positions and locations, and repeat the practice drill

until this, too, is wired. Next, reduce the hand- and foothold size and repeat
the drill. Keep repeating this process until you’ve exhausted the
possibilities.
Completion of this variable practice drill might take anywhere from a
single evening to a couple of weeks. Regardless, the end result is
comprehensive schemas surrounding this type of movement, and rapid
recall and execution of the skill in some future performance setting. So,
while bouldering outdoors on a wide range of move types and angles is best
for building a diverse library of climbing skills, using the variable practice
strategy on an artificial wall enables comprehensive learning of a new type
of movement in a wide range of configurations. Clearly, there is great value
in both formats, so get busy!

Traverse Training

Like bouldering, traverse training is a no-frills activity that affords focused
practice on numerous technical aspects of the climbing game. Although
some people find ad-lib traversing along a cliff base or at a climbing gym
boring, this drill does have some major benefits when compared with
working a known, graded boulder problem. When working the graded
boulder problem, it’s natural to want to succeed at any cost, even if your
technique is sloppy and inefficient. As discussed earlier, it’s difficult to
develop new skills in such a performance setting.
Conversely, traversing for the sake of practicing technique and
movement eliminates the pressure to perform. You can experiment with
new grip positions, gentle and precise foot placements, and various body
positions with no concern about whether or not you step off the wall.
Maximize the benefit of this drill by carefully spotting each foot placement,
concentrating on shifting your center of gravity over the leading foot,
relaxing your grip as much as possible, and learning to move quickly and
confidently through thin, tenuous sequences. Finally, strive to remain calm
and relaxed at all times, and refocus on your feet anytime you sense you’re
losing control.
To mix things up and increase the intensity and benefit of traverse
training, you can also play around with various elimination or focus drills.
For example, try doing a complete traverse using only two fingers (the
index and middle fingers, for example, or middle and ring fingers) of each
hand. This drill forces you to maximize the weighting of your feet (a good
thing); it’s also an excellent way to increase your finger strength. As
another variation, challenge yourself to do a complete traverse using only
open-hand finger positions. (This will be especially difficult and beneficial
if you naturally favor the crimp grip.) Be creative and make up other drills,
such as “side-pull only,” “undercling only,” or “cross-through only”
elimination traverses. Beginner and intermediate climbers have much to
gain from performing these drills on a regular basis.

Toproping and Hangdogging

Toproping and hangdogging are the ideal formats for practicing difficult
moves near your limit or when diving into unfamiliar terrain like pocket or
crack climbing. As discussed earlier, a relaxed, low-stress environment is
critical to rapid learning of new skills. Obviously, climbing on toprope or
on lead, bolt-to-bolt, represents a low-stress setting where you can
experiment with tricky, awkward moves without the risk of a serious fall
and injury.
When attempting a route that is continuously hard or with multiple
cruxes, it’s best to break it down into smaller sections or chunks. This
reduces the mental burden by allowing you to view and solve the route in
parts. Much like working a boulder problem, you can employ blocked
practice to work a sequence repeatedly. Once a problem is solved and
programmed to a high likelihood of success, you can move on and begin
work on the next chunk. Upon solving all the chunks (and after a good rest),
your next goal should be to combine chunks. For example, on a route that
you had broken down into four hard sections, you would try to link the top
two chunks, and then move down and link the top three chunks. Such
incremental learning will wire you for a successful redpoint or toprope
ascent after another rest or on your next outing or day at that area. (Note:
See chapter 5 of How to Climb 5.12 to learn many more strategies for
working and sending project routes.)

The Stick Game (aka Send Me)

This popular game is great for learning to quickly assess and execute a
novel, unknown move onsight—a vital skill when you’re on-sight climbing
at the crag or in competition. Best played on an indoor wall, the drill
requires at least two players who take turns pointing out (with a
broomstick) impromptu boulder problems for the other to ascend. Begin by
identifying the starting hand- and footholds for the climber; then, as she
pulls up on them, the course setter points to the next hold to be used.
Continue in this fashion until the climber falls or the problem is done.
Commonly, the game is played with open feet—that is, the climber can use
any foothold she likes.

First Touch

First Touch is a great practice drill for would-be competition and on-sight
climbers—though anyone can benefit from its use. An indoor facility with a
wide range of toprope routes is the ideal setting for this drill. As the name
implies, you must climb a route by using each handhold in the exact way
that you first grab it—no readjusting or changing your grip after you first
touch it. By climbing many routes in this fashion (and, of course, obeying
the guidelines completely), you will learn to examine holds more closely—
both from the ground and while climbing—and thus increase the likelihood
you’ll use them optimally from the first touch. On lead, this skill saves you
time and energy, both of which increase your odds of on-sighting a route.

Tracking and Elimination

This drill can be used indoors when you’re bouldering or on toprope. The
goal is simply to climb a route by tracking your feet on the exact same
holds used by your hands. It’s kind of like climbing a ladder, where you
press down on a rung with your right hand and make room to step on that
same rung with your right foot. As a type of elimination drill, this will make
a climb much harder than it would be if climbed with all the holds on route.
Therefore, if you normally practice skill by climbing 5.10 or 5.11 routes,
you’ll want to do this drill on routes in the range of 5.7 to 5.9.
If you climb indoors a lot, exercise your creativity and develop other
elimination drills that might improve your skill, strategy, and strength. For
instance, begin eliminating certain hand- and footholds from the routes you
have ruthlessly wired. There’s little to be gained from blocked practice of
the same tired routes over and over again. So challenge yourself by
eliminating the five biggest holds from the route, or by limiting yourself to
grabbing the holds only as side pulls or underclings, or with only two
fingers, or what have you. Not only can this make for some good fun for
you and your friends, but it’s also an excellent way to enhance your skill
practice and overall ability.

Downclimbing Routes

When I’m leading or toproping indoors, it’s rare that I climb a route to the
top and lower off without trying to downclimb as much of the route as
possible. There are many benefits to this practice beyond the obvious one of
doubling the pump. If you know you are going to downclimb a route, you
become a more observant and focused climber on the way up. What’s more,
since poor footwork is a leading handicap for many climbers, there’s a lot to
be gained from this practice, which demands intense concentration on
footwork!
At first you will find downclimbing to be difficult, awkward, and very
pumpy. But that’s the MO when first attempting anything new that’s
worthwhile (read challenging). As your hold recognition improves,
however, and as you learn to relax and fluidly reverse the route, you’ll find
that downclimbing a route often feels easier than sending it in the first
place. This is because your eccentric (lowering) strength is greater than
your concentric (pulling) strength, and due to the fact that by leading with
the feet while downclimbing you learn to maximally weight them and
conserve energy. All of the above make downclimbing a killer drill—one
not to be overlooked by any serious climber!

Speed Training

When the rock gets steep and the moves hard, there’s no more important
weapon to have in your arsenal than being able to climb fast and precisely.
Climbing quickly is primarily a function of skill, not strength or power (I’m
not talking about lunging wildly up a route). In fact, the less strength and
endurance you possess, the more important this skill becomes.
To begin with, it’s important to note that there is no benefit to climbing
faster if you begin to botch sequences or if your technique degrades.
Therefore, you want to practice speed climbing on routes you have
completely wired and, likely, at a number grade or two below your personal
best. Climb several laps on the route (rest between attempts), each
incrementally faster than the previous. Attempt to climb about 10 percent
faster on each successive lap, but back off the accelerator at the first sign
that your technique is suffering.
Perform this drill a few times a week for several months, and you’ll find
yourself naturally moving faster when climbing on-sight or redpoint at the
crags. This new skill alone could push your redpoint ability a full grade
higher over the course of a single season—a much greater gain than you’d
achieve from strength training alone!

Stephen Meinhold on Mango Tango (5.13d), New River Gorge, West
Virginia. DAN BRAYACK

CHAPTER FIVE
Theory and Methodology of Strength Training

Man is in a position to act because he has the ability to discover
causal relations which determine change and becoming in the
Universe.
—Ludwig von Mises

Perhaps no sport can match rock climbing for the dramatic increase in the
mean level of performance of its participants in recent years. Today’s
average climber is capable of a standard that few climbers dreamed of
achieving when I began climbing in the mid-1970s. Furthermore, many
weekend warriors are able to progress to the lofty levels of 5.12 and 5.13—
grades that hardly existed three decades ago. The reasons for these
incredible improvements include sticky-soled shoes, sport-climbing tactics,
and, more than anything else, the advent of climbing gyms and a growing
focus on sport-specific strength training.
Still, there are many arguments among climbers about the best way to
train, and people frequently tell me that they are confused by the often
conflicting training information that has been published. Surely an article or
book describing the training practices of some 5.14 climber is of little help
for average climbers—it might even get them injured. Alternatively, joining
a health club and performing the typical weight-lifting workout would be of
little benefit for most climbers; in fact, it may even hurt their climbing
performance!

As a result of all the confusion, numerous climbers have quipped to me
that they have decided to “just climb” as training for climbing. While this is
an excellent strategy for novices, intermediate and advanced climbers
definitely need to partake in some sport-specific strength training if they
want to continue to improve and, hopefully, someday reach their genetic
potential.
The goal of this chapter (as with this whole book) is to help you avoid—
or step out of—the muck and mire of confusion that surrounds so much
information on training for climbing. Toward this end, I will arm you with a
basic understanding of the theory and science of strength training. I have
always felt that the theoretical person is a practical person. Therefore,
gaining knowledge of training theory will enable you to act and train more
practically and effectively. Furthermore, you will be able to evaluate more
critically and effectively what you read elsewhere.

Overview of Strength and Fitness Training for
Climbing
Just for the record let me state that simply going climbing is not the best
method of strength training for climbers. This is because the ultimate goals
of these two activities are very different. Consider that when rock climbing,
it is your goal to avoid muscular failure at all costs—you want to reach the
top of a boulder problem or climb before the muscles of your arms and
forearms pump out. Conversely, when training for climbing you
purposefully fatigue the muscles and in some cases even target-train a
muscle for failure. Simply put: When climbing, you avoid failure; when
strength training for climbing, you pursue failure.
Another example that underscores the difference between climbing and
training for climbing is the way in which you grip the rock. In climbing, the
rock dictates a random use of many different grip positions; at times you
may even deliberately vary the way you grip the rock. As a result it’s
unlikely that any single grip position will ever get worked maximally, and
therefore the individual grip positions (crimp, open hand, pinch, and so
forth) are slow to increase strength. This should help you understand why a
full season of climbing will indeed improve your local forearm endurance
(anaerobic endurance) but do little to increase your absolute maximum grip
strength. Therefore, varying grip positions is a great strategy for
maximizing endurance when climbing for performance, but it stinks for
training maximum grip strength. Effective finger-strength training demands
you target a specific grip position and work it until failure.
On the following pages, we’ll delve into the science of strength training
and reveal some of the other secrets to highly effective training for
climbing.

A Primer on Exercise Physiology
While there is no need to get into an advanced-level discussion of exercise
physiology, I feel it’s beneficial to have a basic understanding of some
functions involved in strength training. For instance, understanding how
different types of muscle fiber become “recruited” into action and how the
muscles adapt to training stress offers key distinctions in how to best train
your upper-body muscles for strength and power. Furthermore, knowledge
of the body’s energy systems and why muscles fail can give clues as to how
you might modify your climbing to maximize power and local endurance.

Muscle Movements and Roles

The production of movement involves three different muscular actions, as
well as three basic roles the muscles can play during an athletic
performance.
• Concentric contraction: Muscle action in which the tension
developed produces a shortening of the musculature, as in the biceps
during the upward phase of a pull-up.
• Eccentric contraction: Muscle action in which the muscle resists as
it’s forced to lengthen, as in the biceps during the lowering phase of
a pull-up.
• Isometric contraction: Muscle action resulting in no shortening of
the muscle (no movement), as in musculature of the forearm while
gripping a handhold.
• Agonist: The muscle or muscle groups causing an action to occur.
For instance, the biceps and the latissimus muscles of the back are
some of the prime movers in the pulling motions common to
climbing.
• Antagonist: The muscle or muscles providing an opposing force to
the primary muscles in action. For example, the muscles on the back
of your forearm oppose the action of the forearm flexor muscles
when gripping the rock.
• Stabilizer: The muscle or muscle groups that help stabilize the
skeletal structures so that tension of the agonist (prime movers) can
produce smooth, effective movement. In climbing, there are many
small and large stabilizers (including the antagonist muscles) that
come into play, from the arms to the core muscles of the torso and
down through the legs.

Muscle Fiber Types

There are two distinct types of muscle fiber: slow twitch and fast twitch.
Fast-twitch fibers are further subdivided into two main subcategories: Type
IIa and Type IIb. A third subcategory of Type IIc fibers has been identified,
though they exist in only very small numbers.
• Slow twitch (ST): These Type I fibers make up approximately 50
percent of the total skeletal muscle, though genetic variation can
range from about 20 percent to 80 percent (Bloomfield, et al., 1992).
They are recruited primarily during low-intensity, aerobic endurance
activities.
• Fast twitch (FT): These fibers are recruited during high-intensity
movements or activities. Type IIa (FTa) fibers are energized through
both aerobic and anaerobic processes and are, therefore, fatigueresistant. These fibers excel at longer-duration high-intensity
activity, and they would be most active when climbing long, hard
routes. Type IIb (FTb) fibers have the fastest contraction time and
generate energy almost entirely through the anaerobic system. These
fibers are recruited during brief, maximum movements such as a
difficult boulder problem or a powerful crux move.
Your relative percentage of FT and ST muscle fibers is genetically
determined and varies little in response to training. Naturally strong
climbers are likely gifted with a higher-than-normal percentage of FT fibers
(among other things), whereas gifted mountaineers, who can keep on going
like the Energizer Bunny, likely have a higher percentage of ST fibers.
Fortunately, ST fibers can be taught to act like FT fibers through use of
certain training protocols (Chu 1996), which I will introduce later.

RECRUITMENT

Muscle fibers of the same type are organized into motor units. ST motor
units innervate between 10 and 180 fibers, while FT motor units innervate
up to 800 fibers (Bloomfield, et al., 1994). When a muscular contraction is
triggered, motor units are recruited on an as-needed basis beginning with
the smaller ST motor units. As muscular tension increases, a greater number
of ST motor units will join in, and if the tension grows further, the larger FT
motor units will begin to fire. Maximum muscular force is eventually
achieved if all motor units (ST and FT) are recruited into action (see figure
5.1).
Knowing this physiological process should help you understand why it’s
important to train with high intensity and with maximum weight
(resistance) if you want to recruit, and make stronger, the FT fibers.
Compare this with “just climbing a lot of routes” for training: That way you
would recruit primarily ST fibers on the many moderate moves and only
occasionally recruit the FTa fibers when you encountered hard moves. The
high-threshold FTb fibers would seldom be called into action—only when a
move or sequence required explosive power or application of maximum
strength.

Figure 5.1 Muscular Force Production

Muscular Adaptations to Strength Training

Two primary adaptations occur in response to strength training—adaptation
of the neural system and adaptation of the muscular system.

ADAPTATION OF THE NEURAL SYSTEM
The nervous system adapts to strength training in three ways: motor
learning, motor unit synchronization, and disinhibition.
• Motor learning: The first neural adaptation, motor learning, should
sound familiar after reading chapter 4. During the initial work at a
new exercise (say, uneven-grip pull-ups or even campus training),
your primary limitation will be a lack of coordination and feel for
the exercise. The first few weeks should yield rapid improvement as
a result of motor learning and improved coordination among the
prime mover, stabilizer, and antagonist muscles. Beyond this point,
further strength gains will depend on other adaptations taking place.
• Motor unit synchronization: Motor unit synchronization is the
second neural adaptation that increases strength. Suppose you have
acquired the coordination and motor skills needed for performing a
given exercise—or perhaps you’re adding a new exercise that
requires no learning (such as hanging on a fingerboard). Initial
training triggers motor units to fire in a rather random, asynchronous
manner. Continued training, however, enhances motor unit
synchronization; eventually most of the motor units will fire in
unison, resulting in more strength and power.
• Disinhibition: The final neural adaptation, disinhibition, is most
important (and exciting) for intermediate to advanced climbers in

search of gains in maximum strength and power. The neuromuscular
system has a built-in feedback mechanism that acts as a safeguard
during times of increasing force production. The Golgi tendon
organ, located in the musculotendinous junction, is sensitive to the
level of tension in the muscle, and in situations of high force it sends
inhibitory signals that prevent further motor units from firing. In
most individuals this protective response limits force production to
some amount far below your absolute maximum-force-producing
potential. It’s like putting a restrictor plate on the engine of a race
car to limit its top speed to 150 miles per hour, even though it’s
capable of 225. Fortunately, regular high-intensity training reduces
the sensitivity of the Golgi tendon organ (disinhibition) and thus
opens up a new level of maximum strength.
The difference between your maximum voluntary force and the
absolute maximum capacity is called the strength deficit. Research
has shown that significant gains in strength are possible by training
to reduce these neural inhibitions. One study (Tidow 1990) showed
that untrained individuals possessed strength deficits of up to 45
percent; that is, neural inhibition was reducing their maximum
strength to almost half of their absolute capacity. The study also
revealed that targeted training by elite athletes reduced strength
deficits to only 5 percent. Therefore, large gains in strength are
possible without ever growing a larger, heavier muscle!
As a final note, the best type of training to produce disinhibition
depends on the magnitude of your strength deficit. Intermediate
climbers, who likely have larger strength deficits, would benefit
most by training with heavy loads (heavy pull-downs, hypergravity
training on a fingerboard or HIT system, and so forth). Elite
climbers with smaller strength deficits might realize further
improvements only through a combination of high resistance
(hypergravity) and high-speed (reactive/plyometric) training.

ADAPTATION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM

Long-term gains in muscular strength result from increases in the size of the
individual muscle fibers (see figure 5.2). This process of growing larger
muscles is known as hypertrophy. Since there is a strong relationship
between the size and the strength of muscles, your ability to grow stronger
over the long term depends to some degree on hypertrophy.
Certainly large muscles in the wrong place (such as legs, chest, and
shoulders) are a liability to climbers. Even overdevelopment of the allimportant pull muscles can be a bad thing if it’s the result of exercising in a
nonspecific way (such as heavy free-weight or circuit training). For
example, baseball-size biceps that result from doing heavy biceps curls will
not only underperform on the rock but also get in the way and prevent you
from locking off effectively while you are climbing.
Still, any muscular hypertrophy occurring in the forearms, arms, and
back resulting from sport-specific training should be viewed as a good
thing. In fact, an experienced climber who has been training for a long time
and doesn’t realize a little hypertrophy probably isn’t training effectively or
eating right. Since most hypertrophy occurs in response to high-intensity,
heavy-load training, you would want to train with higher resistances
(hypergravity training) to trigger this adaptation.

Figure 5.2 Muscular Adaptations to Strength
It’s interesting to note that a highly trained neuromuscular system is not
absolutely necessary for being a strong climber. As mentioned in chapter 1,

a small number of individuals possess tendon insertion points at a larger
distance from the joint (axis of rotation) than the rest of us with average
genetics. These gifted people will exhibit what seems to be amazing
strength given their modest body builds. Other genetic factors, such as
having a slight build or an unusually high percentage of fast-twitch fibers,
may further enhance their physical prowess. With this in mind, you can see
why these rare climbers will be incredibly strong regardless of the type of
training, if any, in which they engage. Hence it would be a mistake to copy
their training methods, and you should question the advice of anyone who
instructs you to train like such-and-such a 5.14 climber does.

Energy Systems

In climbing, energy production in the crucial pull muscles most often comes
from the ATP-CP system and the lactic acid system. The lactic acid system
can function both in the presence (aerobic) or absence (anaerobic) of
oxygen.

ATP-CP
The ATP-CP system provides rapid energy for brief, intense movements
such as a vigorous boulder problem or a few maximal crux moves. In
training, the ATP-CP system is the primary fuel source for brief, intense
exercise lasting less than fifteen seconds—for example, campus training or
doing a one-arm pull-up. ATP and CP are high-energy phosphate
compounds resident in all muscle cells in small amounts; intense exercise,
however, will exhaust the supply in a matter of seconds.

LACTIC ACID
Consistent, moderate- to high-intensity exercise lasting between ten seconds
and about three minutes calls the lactic acid energy system into play. This is
the primary energy system that fuels your climbing up a long boulder
problem or a sustained crux section of route. Carbohydrates, in the form of
glycogen, fuel the lactic acid system, which can operate in either the
presence or absence of oxygen.

• Anaerobic: High-intensity exercise forces the muscles to create
energy in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic) and at the expense of
lactic acid production. The resulting accumulation of lactic acid
leads to fatigue, muscular pain, and, eventually, muscular failure.
This limitation of anaerobic energy production helps explain why
sustained climbing on maximally difficult moves is limited to about
three minutes or less (if there are no rests). Consequently, climbing
as quickly as possible from rest to rest is the best strategy on hard,
sustained routes.
The anaerobic threshold is defined as the workload or oxygen
consumption level at which lactate production by the working
muscle exceeds the body’s ability to remove lactate. Therefore, once
you cross this threshold level, the net amount of lactic acid
increases, and muscular failure soon follows (see figure 5.3).
Depending on your level of conditioning, the anaerobic threshold
may be crossed at an exercise intensity of anywhere between 50
percent and 80 percent of maximum. Becoming winded (oxygen
debt) and burning muscles are two signs you have crossed the
anaerobic threshold.

Figure 5.3 Supercompensation Cycle

The above knowledge underscores the importance of using an
interval approach to high-intensity climbing. In sending a hard
route, you want to avoid crossing the anaerobic threshold for as long
as possible and, once you do cross it, climb as quickly as possible to
a rest or easier terrain. Only then will you get back down below the
anaerobic threshold and allow your body to begin lowering blood
lactate concentration. Depending on the amount of lactic acid in
your system, it could take twenty minutes or more to return to a
baseline level of blood lactate (Watts 1996).
• Aerobic: Muscular action lasting longer than three minutes demands
use of oxygen to produce energy. With ATP-CP reserves depleted
and high muscle and blood lactate levels (from anaerobic energy
production), exercise can continue only if the intensity of movement
is reduced (see figure 5.4). Anaerobic energy production is limited
to an amount proportionate to the liver’s ability to remove lactic
acid (and convert back to glucose) from the blood. Therefore,
aerobic energy production takes over and powers most of the muscle
action by means of a breakdown of carbohydrates, fats, and (if
exercise continues long enough) protein in the presence of oxygen.
Since aerobic energy production does not produce lactic acid, lowintensity movements may continue for several hours without
cessation (as in hiking or climbing over easy terrain).

Figure 5.4 Supercompensation Cycle

Training Principles
Possessing a basic understanding of relevant training principles empowers
you to make the most of your time investment in training. Without getting
too deeply into sports science, let’s examine the important principles of
specificity, individualization, progressive overload, variation, rest, and
detraining.

Specificity

The principle of specificity of training may be the most important of all. It
simply states that the more specific a training activity is to a given sport—in
velocity of movement, pattern of movement, body posture, range of motion,
and type of contraction—the more it will contribute to increasing
performance in that sport. Therefore, for an exercise to be effective at
producing usable strength gains for climbing (such as grip strength, lock-off
strength, or lunging power), it must be markedly similar to climbing in
many ways. The more specific the training activity or exercise, the greater
the benefit to your climbing performance. Let’s look at a few examples of
how this rule applies to training for climbing.
Circuit training or pumping iron does not train the muscles in the
slightest way similar to their use in rock climbing. Consequently, healthclub-style weight training is largely a waste of time for climbers, except for
those possessing unusually poor levels of general fitness. Some
intermediate climbers have disputed me on this, since they have noticed
improvement on the rock while participating in weight-training regimens.
Since gains in climbing skill and strategy produce most of the increase in
overall ability during the first few years in the sport, however, these folks
would have improved regardless of the type of training they participated in.
They probably would have improved as much with a training regimen
outside of climbing itself consisting of ice skating and poker playing.
Squeezing a rubber hand doughnut (or other similar spring-loaded
device) is likewise unproductive for improving your finger strength for
climbing. Grip strength shows a remarkable amount of specificity
depending on the grip position (crimp, open hand, pinch), the positions of
the wrist and elbow, the intensity of the contraction, and even the type of
contraction (isometric, concentric). Furthermore, since your grip tends to
fail while you are pulling down on it with near-maximum load, it must be
trained in much this same way. Consequently, squeezing a rubber doughnut

is basically useless as climbing training, though it does have some value as
a warm-up exercise and in injury rehabilitation.
What about the basic pull-up (palms away), a most popular exercise
among climbers? Obviously the motion is similar to climbing, but your
posture, your degree of body tension, and the exact positions of your hands
and arms do not vary randomly as they do on rock. What’s more, the ability
to stop or lock off your arm in some novel position is often more vital in
climbing than is the simple act of pulling. Therefore, to produce the most
transfer of your pull-up training to the rocks, you want to alter the pull-up in
a variety of ways with every set. For example, you might change the
distance between your hands, stagger one hand lower than the other (use a
webbing loop), and include some lock-offs or stops in the motion at a
variety of arm angles. This approach would be much more advantageous
than just doing pull-ups in the same fixed position.
Finally, let’s consider the concept of cross-training as some individuals
try to apply it to climbing. Clearly, the idea that performing any other sports
activity might improve climbing performance is in blatant conflict with the
principle of specificity. In fact, the only sports in which cross-training
seems to be practical are the aerobic endurance sports, as popularized by the
triathlon phenomenon.

Individualization

No climber on this planet is quite like you; therefore the most effective
training program for you will be different from that of any other climber.
This might sound obvious, but many climbers copy the training program of
their peers or, worse yet, imitate what some elite climber does. I consider
this a rather stupid approach to training.
The most intelligent training program (for you) would take into account
your strengths, weaknesses, and previous injuries, as well as your goals and
the amount of time you have available to work out. Furthermore, since you
may recover from training at a faster or slower rate than others, your
optimal amount of rest may dictate a different workout frequency.
Consequently, it would be wise to develop and execute what seems to be
the best program for you and ignore how others train.

Progressive Overload

This granddaddy of training principles states that in order to increase
physical capability, it is necessary to expose your body to a level of stress
beyond that to which it is accustomed. You can achieve this overload by
increasing the intensity (greater resistance), volume, or speed of training, or
by decreasing the rest interval between successive sets. Depending on the
exercise and which of these exercise parameters you choose to vary, the
overload will result in adaptations resulting in more strength, power,
anaerobic endurance, or stamina. For example, increasing exercise
resistance and speed will produce gains in maximum strength and power,
whereas decreasing rest intervals and increasing volume will improve
muscular (anaerobic) endurance.
While it’s probably a good idea to vary the method of overload from time
to time, the best method of overload for you depends on your climbing
preference. If bouldering is your favorite type of climbing, then you’d want
to favor training that builds strength and power (and create overload by
increasing resistance and speed of exercise). In training for roped climbing,
however, it would be best to increase volume and decrease rest intervals to
improve muscular endurance. Finally, big-wall and alpine climbers looking
for greater stamina should create overload by increasing total volume of
exercise.

Variation

One of the most common training errors among all athletes is the failure to
regularly change their training program. This principle states that the body
becomes accustomed to training stimuli that are repeatedly applied in the
same way. Therefore, if you go to the climbing gym and engage in the same
basic routine every time, your strength and climbing gains will eventually
plateau despite what feel like good workouts. Strive to vary your training by
manipulating the type of overload (per above) as well as mixing up the type
and order of climbs and exercises performed.
Periodization, another form of variation, involves alternating the overall
workout intensity and volume from session to session. For example, with
indoor training you might alternate workouts among “high volume” (doing
many moderate routes), “high intensity” (hard, powerful bouldering), and
“high, high” (climbing as many hard routes as possible). You could also
vary your workouts every few weeks as in the 4-3-2-1 Training Cycle
described in chapter 7. Bottom line: Make the principle of variation a
cornerstone of your training for climbing program and you will get
uncommonly good results!

Rest

The muscular adaptations discussed earlier occur between, not during,
workouts. Sufficient rest and healthy lifestyle habits (including proper
nutrition and adequate sleep) are fundamental to maximizing the strength
gains that result from training stimuli. As a rough guideline, complete
recovery (supercompensation) takes anywhere from twenty-four to seventytwo hours depending on the intensity and volume of the stimulus (see figure
5.5). For example, it might only take one day to recover from a high volume
of low-intensity activity like climbing a bunch of really easy routes or just
hiking, whereas it will likely take two or three days to recover completely
from a high volume of high-intensity exercise, such as climbing a bunch of
routes near your limit, or performing hypergravity and campus training in a
single workout.

Figure 5.5 Supercompensation Cycle

The importance of this principle cannot be overstated, since training too
often (or resting too little) will eventually lead to a decline in performance
and/or injury (see figure 5.6). This is known as the overtraining syndrome,
and it’s surprisingly common among serious climbers. Observe how many
climbers out there are whining about their nagging injuries or complaining
that they are “not getting stronger” despite their dedication to hard training.
You now know why: overtraining.
Another factor leading to overtraining or unusually long workout
recovery is the mistake of placing too much training stimulus on the
neuromuscular system. As shown in the Supercompensation Cycle (figure
5.5), the workout stimulus results in neuromuscular fatigue and a temporary
degradation in functional ability. With adequate rest, the system regenerates
to a level higher than before the workout. Interestingly, working out beyond
a certain point provides no additional stimulus for growth, though it does
make further inroads (muscular breakdown) from which you must recover.
This is an important concept to keep in mind when performing highintensity training. Doing twelve sets of campus training probably provides
no more stimulus for growth than six sets, but by doing twelve sets you dig
yourself a deeper hole from which it will take longer to recover. The same
argument could be made against doing twenty sets of pull-ups or spending
sixty minutes hypergravity training on a fingerboard. Summing up: In highintensity training, less is usually more.

Figure 5.6 Long-Term Training Response

Detraining

Upon cessation of strength training (or frequent climbing), recent gains in
strength begin to erode slightly in just ten to fourteen days. A more
significant decrease in strength will occur in the weeks that follow if
training or climbing does not resume. While some downtime is a good thing
each year (mentally and in the case of nagging injuries), frequent breaks in
training make it very difficult to acquire long-term gains in strength.
If you are someone who travels a lot on business, or for some other
reason frequently misses a week or two of training, you can temporarily
delay the detraining by leveraging your knowledge of the lengthened
supercompensation period after high-intensity workouts. Since we know
that it can take several days to recover from a long, intense workout,
performing such a workout the day before the beginning of your break
would delay the beginning of detraining by a few more days. Therefore,
you might return from the break and be at peak strength even after ten days
off. This long period of supercompensation after extremely strenuous
training or climbing also explains why the many enthusiastic climbers who
are unknowingly overtraining discover a new level of strength after taking a
week off from training and climbing.

Tips for Effective Physical Training
1. Specificity: For an exercise to produce usable strength gains for
climbing, it must be markedly similar to the physical action of
climbing, including velocity and pattern of movement, body
position, range of motion, and type of contraction.
2. Individualization: There are no other climbers quite like you;
therefore, your optimal training program will be different from
those of all other climbers!

3. Overload: To increase physical capability, it is necessary to
expose your body to a level of training stress beyond that to
which it is accustomed. This can be achieved by increasing
training intensity, speed, volume, or by decreasing the rest
interval between sets or climbs.
4. Variation: Since the body adapts to training stimuli, it’s
essential to regularly vary training activities and workouts
every few days or weeks.
5. Rest: Neuromuscular adaptations occur during periods of rest
and sleep, not during workouts. Therefore, sufficient rest and a
healthy lifestyle are essential for making the most of your
training investment.
6. Detraining: Skipped workouts or frequent breaks in a training
cycle will make strength gains unlikely and may lead to a loss
of climbing fitness.

Training Methods
Detailed below are the concepts and methods central to effective strength
training for climbing. Since the pull muscles are most often the limiting
physical factor in climbing, examples of how this information applies to
climbing will focus on training these body parts.

Strength Training Versus Local Endurance Training

Strength training results in neural and muscular adaptations that eventually
enable muscle action at higher loads. Meanwhile, training local muscular
endurance (aka anaerobic endurance) produces different adaptations—such
as increased density of capillaries and mitochondria (the little ATP
“factories” inside cells)—that will help sustain longer periods of vigorous
muscle action (see figure 5.7). Certainly all climbers would benefit from
enhancement in both areas; the form of training you emphasize, however,
should match the demands of your preference climbing subdiscipline (per
the SAID Principle explained in chapter 1).
Climbing icon Tony Yaniro long ago pointed out that “if you cannot pull
through a single hard move, then you have nothing to endure.” From this
perspective, strength training could be viewed as more important for all
climbers, save big-wall and alpine enthusiasts. This notion is supported by
the fact that strengthening a muscle also improves its endurance, because a
stronger muscle can use a smaller percentage of maximum strength to
execute a sequence of nonmaximum moves. What’s more, a stronger
muscle will have a higher absolute anaerobic threshold than a weaker
muscle with higher endurance capabilities. Conversely, endurance training
will not increase maximum strength one iota.

Muscular Strength Versus Muscular Power

Strength is defined as the force a muscle group can exert in one maximum
effort. Your ability to pull a single hard movement or grip a small, difficult
handhold is a function of your maximum strength. Muscular power is more
complex, because it is the product of force and the distance through which
the force acts. Therefore, power is the result of strength and speed. This
would be expressed as: power = strength x speed (where speed =
distance/time).

Figure 5.7 Physiological Adaptations to Training

Figure 5.8 Rate of Force Production
So while strength and power are clearly related, they differ in the rate at
which a force is applied. A real-life example that helps clarify this
distinction relates to your ability to grip a tiny hold versus your ability to
quickly stick (draw in) a small handhold at the end of a lunge. Figure 5.8
shows hypothetical force-time curves for three climbers. Climber A
possesses the strongest grip strength and can hang on the smallest holds, but
he is not very powerful. Climber B has less absolute strength than Climber
A, but she is more powerful. Consequently, she can summon her strength
more quickly (that is, she has greater contact strength), and she will be more
successful at catching dynos and quickly latching on to tiny holds. Climber
C is neither strong nor powerful—he’d better stick to climbing slabs.
Obviously, it’s ideal to maximize your strength and power, much like
Climber B. This can be achieved by partaking in a variety of exercises that
train both strength and power.

Training for Strength

Rate of strength gains, as a result of training, decreases as a function of
your current level of strength. Therefore, initial increases in strength will
result from even a poorly conceived and executed training regimen.
Adaptations in stronger, more advanced climbers occur more slowly—and
possibly not at all unless they are using the best training methods. This
helps explain why so many intermediate to advanced climbers feel they are
no longer getting stronger: For them, further gains require advanced
training techniques and the discipline to apply them precisely over a long
period of time.
In terms of training maximum strength—your ability to pull a single
maximum move or grip a small edge or pocket under full body weight—it
is widely accepted by sports scientists that exercising at high intensity and
heavy loads is the most important factor. Furthermore, the muscles must be
progressively loaded beyond the point to which they are accustomed. In the
weight-lifting world, this is achieved by performing three to ten repetitions
at some high load, which is increased over time. Unfortunately, this is a
difficult protocol to create for the purpose of developing finger strength for
climbing. For instance, what do you do to create progressive overload of the
fingers (forearm muscles) once you are strong enough to handle your own
body weight over steep terrain? The obvious answer is to “climb longer,”
which is exactly what many climbers do. This strategy, however, develops
endurance of strength (anaerobic endurance), not maximum strength.

BOULDERING AS STRENGTH TRAINING
A better strategy is to seek out progressively more strenuous boulder
problems that seem to require near-maximum strength. The drawback here

relates to the fact that it’s very difficult to say if you fell off a move because
of muscular failure or because you performed the movement poorly (bad
technique). Further diluting the training effect is the randomness of
handholds in size and shape, which dictates the use of different grip
positions—we now know that varying grip position is a good endurance
strategy, but it’s poor for building maximum grip strength. Consequently,
while you may notice some gains in strength and power from bouldering,
you can assume that it’s not providing you with the greatest strength gains
possible. There are just too many variables involved.
Bouldering on a steep artificial wall represents a better format for upperbody strength training, because you can control the size and distance
between holds and minimize the technical aspects that might spit you off
before muscular failure. Still, there are practical limits to how far you can
increase hold spacing and decrease the size of the handholds—beyond a
certain point the moves will become overly technical or the tiny holds too
painful to climb on. As described above, it’s necessary to perform three to
ten maximum repetitions before reaching muscular failure (for the purpose
of developing maximum strength); in the case of climbing with both hands,
you would need to perform six to twenty total hand movements before
failure.

HYPERGRAVITY TRAINING
Once the above strategies have been exhausted for the purpose of
developing further gains in maximum grip strength, you need to up the ante
by employing hypergravity training. At advanced levels of training for
climbing, the importance of training at progressively higher intensity and
with heavier loads cannot be overstated. This is best achieved by adding
extra weight to your body while performing certain controlled, sportspecific movements. As a result, your fingers (and other upper-body pull
muscles) are exposed to a load and intensity not previously experienced at
normal body weight. The extra weight simulates a greater-than-normal
gravitational pull (hence the name hypergravity). After a period of

hypergravity training, you will return to the rock and feel like you are
climbing on the moon!
The dramatic gains in strength produced by hypergravity training are the
result of neural and muscular adaptations (discussed earlier). In particular, it
likely triggers a higher degree of disinhibition and hypertrophy that may
never result from climbing at the lower resistances of body weight. I also
suspect that hypergravity training may trick ST muscle fibers into acting
like FT fiber—more on this later.
As a disclaimer, it must be pointed out that hypergravity training is an
advanced strength-training method to be used only by well-conditioned and
advanced climbers with no recent history of injury. Chapter 7 discusses the
four best applications of hypergravity: weighted pull-ups, weighted
fingerboard hangs, weighted bouldering, and Hypergravity Isolation
Training (HIT).

FUNCTIONAL ISOMETRICS
Functional isometrics involve superimposing one or more isometric
contractions within the concentric or eccentric phase of an exercise motion.
This strategy has been shown to provide significantly greater strength gains
(16 percent more in one study) than those achieved by doing the same
exercise without intermittent isometric contractions (O’Shea 1989). Greater
overload during the isometric contractions is what stimulates the muscle for
enhanced strength gains. The overload is created by removing the loadlightening effects of momentum and use of stored potential energy (a
benefit of the elastic properties of muscle and tendon).
You can best leverage this method when training to strengthen your pullup and lock-off strength. Superimposing numerous lock-offs (isometric
contractions) within a set of pull-ups will produce surprising gains in
absolute strength. And unlike hypergravity training, even novice climbers
can safely incorporate this strategy into their training regimen.

Tips for Training Maximum Strength

1. Train with high-intensity exercises that produce muscular
failure in three to ten repetitions. With body exercises, add
weight as needed (hypergravity training) to meet this training
criteria.
2. Isolate movements and grip positions to maximize specificity
and best target your training.
3. Seek out (or set) burly, nontechnical boulder problems that will
test you physically.
4. Rest at least three to five minutes between exercises. Quality
maximum-strength training requires fresh, full-on efforts.
5. Regularly vary your workouts and cycle your training focus
every two or three weeks. Occasionally employ functional
isometrics and hypergravity training to mix things up and
generate progressive overload.

Power Training

When climbers talk about “power,” they are typically referring to the need
to make quick, strenuous reaches or handhold grasps on steep terrain. This
type of movement is the stuff of steep sport climbs and V-hard boulder
problems. As I explained earlier, power is the product of strength and speed
as expressed by the equation: power = strength x speed (where speed =
distance/time). Since you have just learned several leading-edge methods
for increasing strength, we now need to consider ways to effectively train
the other factor in the power equation, speed.
First, you must recognize that there is an inverse relationship between
force and velocity—creating maximum force, as in high-load strength
training, can only be done at relatively slow speeds (see figure 5.9).
Conversely, performing an exercise at high speed demands use of relatively
light weights (low force production). The problem is, in climbing (and
training for climbing) we are usually dealing with the weight of our body
and exercising with movements that are difficult or impossible to do at a
high rate of speed (compared with, say, a sprinter training on the track). The
most effective and practical approach, then, is to try to train at the highest
speed possible at less than body weight, or with moderately fast speed at
body weight.

BOULDERING TO TRAIN POWER
In climbing a steep, strenuous boulder problem, chances are you are
performing some movements that meet the power-training criteria above.
Assuming you are using your feet, then your arms are carrying less than
body weight; and undoubtedly you are moving quickly—perhaps lunging—
on the very hardest moves, so your upper-body muscles are working at a

relatively high speed. Consequently, sending hard, steep boulder problems
is a good method of power training (duh!). The training limitations relate to
the fact that the typical boulder problem might only include one or two
high-speed power moves, and as such it lacks the repeated movement
needed for optimal training stimuli. This is, again, where indoor walls are
preferable to out-door bouldering, since you can design a problem up a
steep wall that requires several moderately fast power moves (ideally five to
ten movements that can be performed in ten seconds or less). If climbing on
medium to large handholds, power gains will come primarily to the larger
pull muscles of the upper arm and back, whereas an advanced climber able
to swing powerfully up a problem of small holds will be training both the
forearm (grip) muscles and the large pull muscles.

Figure 5.9 Force Versus Velocity Curve

PULL-MUSCLE SPRINTS
Another good power-training strategy for the large pull muscles is to
perform pull-ups, Bachar Ladder, or some other form of pull training at a

rate faster than is normal for training. In doing such pull-muscle sprints,
your goal is to fire the pulling muscles as fast as possible for five to ten
seconds. In doing Power Pull-Ups, for instance, it’s important not to lower
to a straight arm position at the bottom of the range of motion in order to
facilitate the most rapid turnover rate possible. Of course, doing a set of
Power Pull-Ups will be difficult if you lack base strength at the pull-up
motion. In this case you should try to simulate hypogravity (reduced
gravitational force) so that you are executing the correct number of pull-ups
at a resistance less than body weight. You can achieve this by standing in a
few loops of thick elastic cord or surgical tubing, or by training on a lat
pull-down machine. Regardless of the exercise used, do two or three sets,
with a three- to five-minute rest between sets, toward the end of your
workout when your muscles are well warmed up.

REACTIVE TRAINING
The National Academy of Sports Medicine defines reactive training as a
quick, powerful exercise that couples a forceful eccentric contraction,
followed immediately by an explosive concentric contraction. This
advanced training technique (often referred to as plyometric training) holds
great potential for advanced climbers looking to increase their contact
strength and power—it’s also rife with risk for those who misuse or overuse
reactive training exercises such as campus training, lunging exercises, and
other explosive movements.
When used properly, however, reactive training will actually strengthen
tendons and ligaments—and, of course, the muscles too—and, thus,
increase your resistance to injury when out climbing a physically stressful
move or sequence. Consequently, I advocate a limited amount of reactive
training for intermediate climbers, with an increase in volume and intensity
of reactive training as one enters the elite category. One qualifying rule that
no climber should overlook is that reactive training will be more harmful
than beneficial if performed while injured. In particular, any finger, elbow
or shoulder problems must be rehabilitated (rest and antagonist-muscle
training) before engaging in reactive training of any type.

First used by Russian athletes in the 1960s, reactive training was
originally applied to climbing by the late Wolfgang Güllich with the advent
of campus training. Before we get into this and other types of reactive
training, let’s first look at the unique stimulus (and adaptations) created by
these powerful movements. Given that reactive training involves fast,
dynamic movements, the resistance used (training load) must be
significantly less than in the maximum strength training exercises above.
For many climbers, the resistance will need to be less than body weight in
order to allow for the rapid movement and turnover that’s essential for
effective reactive training. The resultant adaptations of such speed training
are primarily neural, so reactive training alone will produce little in the way
of hypertrophy. Still, the numerous neural adaptations of properly executed
reactive training will result in highly practical—and often surprisingly
noticeable!—gains in lunging ability and contact strength (like Climber B
in Figure 5.8).

Tips for Training Power
1. Exercise at faster-than-normal speeds with exercises such as
Power Pull-ups, Uneven Grip Pull-Ups, and Lat Pull-Downs.
2. Set a nontechnical boulder problem with several long, powerful
moves. Send it several times.
3. Employ reactive training techniques such as One-Arm Lunging
and campus training to maximize neural excitement.
4. Leverage Complex Training strategies for elite-level power
training.
5. Rest three to five minutes (or more) between sets so that you
can make a high-quality effort each time.
6. Cycle on and off power-training exercises every two to three
weeks.
In chapter 7 I will detail several reactive training exercises of varying
difficulty and injury risk. The safest, and therefore the most appropriate for
non-elite climbers, are reactive exercises performed at less than body
weight and with some measure of control. For example, One-Arm Lunging

and Campus Touches are two reactive exercises that most healthy
intermediate climbers can incorporate into their training with little risk. By
contrast, reactive exercises that involve full body weight and doublehanded, drop-and-catch movements are extremely stressful and appropriate
only in small doses for injury-free, elite climbers. The impact forces
inherent to drop-and-catch exercises like campus training Double Dynos are
dangerously large and injury may result from improper execution or
overuse.

Anaerobic Endurance (A-E) Training

Anaerobic endurance training is of high importance if your goal is sending
difficult rope-length routes or long, sustained boulder problems. Think of
A-E as your ability to maintain a high level of strength output over a
relatively long period of time. As shown in figure 5.4, true maximum
strength output (near 100 percent intensity) can only be sustained for a few
fleeting moments. Anaerobic endurance relates to how long the muscle can
function above the anaerobic threshold—that is, at a level not far below the
absolute maximum. Of course, muscle action above this threshold generates
lactic acid faster than the liver can metabolize it. Inevitably, blood lactate
concentrations become so high that the working muscle fails or functions
only at a much lower aerobic intensity (below the anaerobic threshold).
The goal of A-E training is to produce muscular adaptations that will
enable you to climb above the anaerobic threshold for as long as possible.
Through repeated exposure, the muscles adapt by developing a higher
tolerance to elevated blood lactate, enhanced lactate removal (due to
increased capillary density) and metabolism, increased mitochondrial
density, and other increases in cardiovascular efficiency. If you frequently
climb to the point of getting a Hindenburgian forearm pump, then you have
already acquired some of these adaptations. Let’s look at three methods of
training anaerobic endurance.

HIGH-REPETITION TRAINING
High-repetition training involves performing a high enough number of
consecutive exercise movements that the muscles shift from burning ATPCP for fuel to breaking down glycogen (and creating lactic acid) to sustain
exercise into the anaerobic training zone. Exercise resistance and intensity

should be high enough to bring the muscles to near failure in, at most, two
or three minutes. However, the weight should not be so great as to cause
failure in less than about thirty seconds (or fifteen reps).
Since climbers are interested in increasing anaerobic endurance in the
pull muscles and forearm, let’s consider a few training methods using a
simple pull-up bar or fingerboard. Remember, the primary training
requirements are that the exercise must last for between thirty seconds and
three minutes and it should pump you up! For training forearm endurance,
you could do a series of one- to two-minute straight-arm hangs on a pull-up
bar. As you near muscular failure, step down and rest for one to two
minutes, and repeat. For the large pull muscles or the arms and back, you
could train on a lat pull-down machine or with Frenchies or high-rep pullups on a fingerboard. Many climbers will need to stand in loops of latex
tubing or bungee cord to reduce the resistance so as to meet the thirtyseconds-to-three-minutes training requirement.

CLIMBING INTERVALS
Climbing intervals are the gold standard for training anaerobic endurance,
because the exercise routine is tremendously specific to how we have to
climb on hard routes. Consider that most long boulder problems or roped
routes possess a couple (or more) hard sections as well as intermittent
sections of easier terrain or rest stances. Such stop-and-go climbing likely
pushes you in and out of the anaerobic threshold—you get pumped and start
breathing harder on the hard section, and then you recover somewhat when
you reach easier moves or a rest position. Climbing intervals simulate this
exact scenario by alternating one to four minutes of strenuous climbing with
an equal or longer period of easy climbing or rest (1:1 to 1:2 work-to-rest
ratio). This, in fact, mirrors the way serious runners (and other athletes)
perform interval training—runners commonly alternate fast and slow
intervals in 100-, 200-, or 400-meter increments. Interval climbing is just
another one of the ways we can successfully transfer to climbing the
training methodology used in other sports (though more often than not this

isn’t possible). You will learn several applications of interval training in
chapter 7.

THE TABATA PROTOCOL
The Tabata Protocol is a highly specific method of interval training that is
popular among elite speed skaters, cyclists, middle-distance runners, and
swimmers; but serious climbers can benefit from this training strategy too.
Developed by Dr. Izumi Tabata at the National Institute of Fitness and
Sports in Japan, the Tabata interval is twenty seconds of high-intensity
exercise followed by ten seconds of rest (a 2:1 work-to-rest ratio). This
interval is repeated eight times to create four minutes of the most grueling
training you can imagine.
The Tabata Protocol differs from traditional interval training in three
ways. First, the twenty-second work interval is much shorter than
traditional intervals. The second difference, then, is that this shorter work
interval must be performed with 100 percent exertion. Third, the rest
interval is just ten seconds, which is so brief that very little recovery can
occur before the next work interval begins. Research has shown this
protocol to be uniquely effective in producing gains in both anaerobic and
aerobic capacity (Tabata 1997), although longer rest intervals are superior
for training anaerobic recovery (removal of lactic acid and other metabolic
by-products). Consequently, climbers can benefit from use of both the
Tabata Protocol and the traditional interval training methods described
above.

Tips for Training Muscular Endurance
1. Use high-repetition exercises that allow fifteen to fifty
repetitions before you approach muscular failure.
2. Climb or traverse thirty to one hundred total hand movements
on a moderately difficult route (for you) without stopping for a
rest.

3. Train or climb to the point of getting pumped, but always stop
before reaching the point of muscle failure.
4. Engage in climbing interval training comprising roughly equallength climbing and rest periods.
5. Notch up training overload by increasing repetitions or
reducing the rest intervals (between sets), not by increasing
resistance. Give the grueling Tabata Protocol a try.
6. Cycle on and off anaerobic endurance training every two to
three weeks.
You can leverage the Tabata Protocol in several ways to enhance your
climbing performance. The most obvious is to alternate twenty seconds of
sprinting and ten seconds of walking for a total of eight run-walk intervals
—likely the most insane four minutes of exercise you’ll ever engage in!—to
increase your total anaerobic and aerobic capacity (VO2 max). Applied to
climbing-specific exercises, you could use the Tabata Protocol to train pullmuscle endurance (Lat Pull-Down Tabata) and forearm endurance (HIT
Strip Tabata). However, it’s highly questionable whether it would be
beneficial to utilize the Tabata Protocol with less specific free-weight
exercises, as commonly done by bodybuilders and other athletes. It’s my
belief that your limited reserve of mental and physical energy is better
invested in climbing-specific training activities.

Stamina Training

Stamina training and strength training are at opposite ends of the exercise
spectrum. Therefore, you cannot optimally train for both maximum strength
and maximum stamina—nor can you expect to become excellent at both.
Just as no one has ever won an Olympic gold medal in both the 100-meter
dash and the marathon, it’s highly unlikely we’ll ever see a climber who
boulders V15 and summits Mount Everest without oxygen. The mental and
physiological requirements are just too different.
Chapter 1 introduced the SAID Principle, which explains that training
time should be invested in a way most specific to your primary focus in
climbing. If your focus is bouldering, sport climbing, or multipitch free
climbing, then training maximum strength and anaerobic endurance must be
at the center of your fitness-training program. Conversely, big-wall and
alpine climbers would most benefit from stamina training, in addition to
some anaerobic endurance training.
It’s well known that the best method for developing stamina is long, slow
distance aerobic training. Applying this method to climbing involves
performing a high volume of low- to moderate-intensity exercise lasting
several hours or more. Putting in frequent long days of climbing is
undoubtedly the best stamina-training method for rock climbers—training
doesn’t get any more specific than this! For the average weekend warrior,
however, putting in ten to twenty full-length climbing days per month is
improbable. Engaging in regular aerobic activity is the best training
alternative for triggering the numerous adaptations within the
cardiovascular system, such as increased heart stroke volume, lung capacity,
and intramuscular capillary density. In the aggregate these adaptations will
improve stamina as well as the ability to function at altitude.

Tips for Training Stamina

1. Perform a high volume of moderate-intensity exercise. The
total duration of exercise session should be measured in hours,
not minutes.
2. Log frequent all-day climbing adventures with a goal of twelve
to twenty-five pitches of total climbing.
3. Engage in one to two hours of sustained aerobic activity
(running, biking, or brisk hiking with a light pack on) as a
substitute for all-day climbing workouts.
4. Strive for a total of ten to twenty stamina-training days (all-day
climbing and aerobic workout days) per month.
5. When training time is limited, use aerobic interval training and
the Tabata Protocol—both will improve aerobic capacity.
6. Take a full week of rest every two months or prior to the
beginning of a climbing trip or expedition.
In the final analysis, the average rock climber will not benefit from large
amounts of stamina training. With the exception of the overweight climber
(wanting to lower percentage of body fat), any aerobic activity beyond a
few twenty-minute sessions per week would not be advantageous. As stated
above, stamina and strength training are opposites, so excessive aerobic
training should be viewed as an enemy of anyone pursuing maximum
strength.

Complex Training

I’ll conclude this section on training methodology by introducing you to the
exciting concept of complex training. Complex training represents the
leading edge of strength and power training, and it’s now in use by elite
athletes in numerous sports. Applied to climbing, the complex training
protocol described below may represent the most powerful training concept
known to climbers at this time.
Complex training involves coupling a high-force, low-speed exercise
(such as hypergravity training) with a higher-speed, reactive-training
exercise. Of this pair, the first exercise caters to developing maximum
strength, while the second targets power. Research has shown that
performing these two very different exercises back-to-back (and in the order
of strength first, power second) produces gains in strength and power
beyond that achieved by performing either exercise alone. While no studies
have been done with climbers, there is compelling research in the use of
complex training to increase vertical jump that shows phenomenal gains in
absolute ability (Adams, 1992). In this study six weeks of strength training
produced a 3.3-centimeter increase in the vertical jump, compared with a
3.8-centimeter increase after six weeks of reactive (power) training. The
group performing complex training (strength and reactive) for six weeks
experienced an incredible 10.7-centimeter increase in jumping ability.
To understand why a coupling of these two exercises produces such a
synergistic gain in strength and power, we must examine the unique ways in
which the neuromuscular system is stressed. This two-step process begins
with high-intensity strength training that excites the muscle to nearmaximum motor unit recruitment. The second step takes the already excited
muscle and challenges it to function at higher speed. In this way complex
training stimulates the muscle fibers in conjunction with the nervous system
in such a way that slow-twitch fibers are taught to behave like fast-twitch
fibers (Chu 1996). Consequently, complex training could be viewed as the

magic-bullet exercise for the average climber born with an average
percentage of fast-twitch fibers (approximately 50 percent).
Incorporating the complex training method into your program could be
done in several ways. Remember, the key is a back-to-back coupling of a
maximum-strength exercise and a power exercise with no rest (only as long
as it takes to chalk up) in between the two exercises. Intermediate climbers
might couple Hypergravity Pull-Ups with One-Arm Lunging. Or they could
perform a maximum boulder problem that is really fingery followed by a
set of Campus Touches. Rest for three to five minutes between coupled sets.
A more advanced protocol would couple a set of heavy Hypergravity
Isolation Training (HIT) with a set of Double Dynos on a campus board.
This latter strategy of combining HIT and drop-and-catch reactive training
should be a staple technique of elite climbers: It may represent the single
best training protocol for fulfilling genetic potential in finger strength and
upper-body power.
Obviously, complex training is an advanced technique that produces both
high passive and active stresses—it should be used only by wellconditioned, intermediate to elite climbers with no recent history of injury.
Furthermore, its use should be limited to once or twice per week, and it
should be cycled on and off about every two weeks. Finally, complete
recovery from a complex workout could take as long as three to five days.
Any other strenuous training or climbing during the supercompensation
period would tend to negate its benefits.

Summary of Complex Training
1. Complex training is the most advanced method for developing
maximum strength and power.
2. Only well-conditioned, injury-free advanced intermediate and
elite climbers should engage in complex training.
3. Couple a maximum-strength exercise and a power-training
exercise back-to-back with no rest in between.
4. Rest for at least five minutes between sets so that each training
couplet is a high-quality effort. Do only three to ten coupled
strength-power sets. Never more.

5. Engage in complex training once or twice (elite climbers only)
per week. Use complex training as part of the maximumstrength and power phase of a training mesocycle.

Rachel Melville on Table of Colors (5.13a), Red River Gorge, Kentucky.
DAN BRAYACK

CHAPTER SIX
General Conditioning Exercises

What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny matters compared
to what lies within us.
—Oliver Wendell Holmes

The previous chapter provided an overview of the principles and methods
of strength and fitness training for climbing. With this understanding, we
can now take a more purposeful look at the dozens of conditioning
exercises that are of value to climbers. In this chapter you’ll learn a variety
of basic, yet important, warm-up and general conditioning exercises;
chapter 7 will then provide a detailed look at the many climbing-specific
exercises for the pull muscles of the upper torso and arms.
Since failure while climbing often seems to center on lack of arm and
finger strength, you may be tempted to skip this chapter in favor of total
immersion into the climbing-specific exercises. Please don’t! No matter if
you are a beginner or elite climber, the content of this chapter is essential
for building a balanced body that can best learn climbing skills, maintain
coordinated movement despite growing fatigue, and tolerate high amounts
of climbing with minimal injury risk. By regularly using the general
conditioning exercise described herein, you will develop and maintain a
solid physical foundation from which you can train and climb hard for
many years to come.
Divided into five parts, this chapter will delve into optimizing body
composition, improving flexibility, core conditioning, antagonist-muscle
training, and aerobic training to improve stamina. The first section on
optimizing body condition is especially important since strength-to-weight

ratio correlates well to climbing performance. While most climbers obsess
on improving the strength side of the equation, it’s equally important to
achieve a reasonable climbing body weight.
In the next section you will learn about flexibility training. While warmup and stretching is a common least-favorite activity among climbers, it is
actually indispensable if you want to refine your movement skills, best
prepare your joints and muscles for climbing, and lower injury risk.
Following this you will learn a dozen must-do exercises for your core
and antagonist muscles. The core muscles of your torso are called into play
for every climbing movement, and they are especially important when
climbing on overhanging terrain. Regardless of wall angle, however, a
stronger core will enable you to step higher, move your hips better to
optimize center-of-gravity placement, and create torso tension and torque
for hard, powerful movements. The antagonist muscles play a similarly
vital role in facilitating smooth, balanced movement and protecting the
joints. Twice-weekly use of the upcoming antagonist exercises will
strengthen and stabilize your elbows and shoulders—important if you want
to climb hard and say off the disabled list.
The chapter concludes with a primer on stamina training. While lack of
stamina may rarely be a limiting constraint in bouldering or sport climbing,
improved stamina can help speed recovery between attempts and ascents.
Of course, possessing a high level of stamina is an essential for all-day,
pedal-to-the-metal wall ascents and alpine climbing endeavors. Thus,
engaging in some stamina-training activities can elevate performance,
regardless of your climbing preference.

Optimizing Body Composition
As explained earlier, climbers with less-than-ideal body composition can
increase their strength-to-weight ratio most quickly by decreasing weight,
not by increasing strength. Every serious climber should ponder whether or
not body composition represents a significant limiting constraint. Obtaining
a measurement of your percentage of body fat is the best way to determine
if you need to work on this area. Given this data, you can decide how much
training time should be spent on improving body composition versus other
climbing-specific exercises.

Measuring Your Percentage of Body Fat

Most health clubs and some universities have the equipment necessary to
measure your percentage of body fat, so getting your body fat measured
may be just a phone call and a few miles away. A study of athletes in a
variety of sports reported that males possessed body fat ranging from 4
percent in wrestlers to 8-12 percent in runners and 16 percent in football
players, with an elite average of below 12 percent (Wilmore 1983). The
same study showed that female athletes possessed body fat between 8 and
25 percent, with an elite average of 15 percent. Therefore, a percentage of
body fat near these elite average levels (12 percent men, 15 percent women)
is a good initial target for most climbers. Given that climbing performance
is directly correlated to strength-to-weight ratio, however, your ultimate
goal should be a few percentage points lower—perhaps 6 to 8 percent for
men and 10 to 12 percent for women. One study (Watts 1993) revealed that
some elite male and female climbers possess body fat as low as 4 percent
and 9 percent, respectively. However, extremely low body fat is neither
desirable nor advised, since it will adversely affect your energy levels and
recovery ability, as well as cause numerous health problems (especially
among women).
If you are unable to get a professional body fat measurement, you can
always employ the highly economical, at-home method—that is, pinch a
fold of skin just above your hip. If you can pinch an inch or more (thickness
of the fold), you definitely need to drop some body fat. A fold between 0.5
and 1 inch thick indicates you may be slightly overweight for a climber. If
you pinch less than 0.5 inch of fat, then your body fat is likely at or below
the target averages stated above.
In addition to optimizing your percentage of body fat, you should
consider the size and location of the muscles you carry. For instance, it is
indisputable that possessing hulking leg muscles is as bad or worse for a
climber than carrying a spare tire around the waist (especially since muscle
weighs more than fat per unit volume). Since the legs muscles are never the

weakest link while climbing, you should limit or eliminate any training
practices that might increase the size of your legs. The same goes for any
weight-lifting exercise or practice that produces a bulking-up effect in any
other part of the body. This subject was covered in chapter 5, but it’s worth
pointing out again that strength training must be extremely specific in order
to transfer to climbing. Heavy squats, maximal bench presses, and other
traditional body-building exercises such as biceps curls are of little benefit
for many high-level athletes since they lack absolute specificity (Bell 1989).
And for climbers, these exercises are surely counterproductive since they
will result in hypertrophy and weight gain.

Strategies for Optimizing Body Composition

Certainly there are genetic limitations to how much you can change your
body composition through training and diet. Some people are naturally
going to carry a little more body fat; others naturally have a larger frame
and bulkier muscles. Still, many novice climbers can improve their body
composition significantly in a way that will benefit their climbing. The two
key strategies are improved dietary surveillance and increased aerobic
training.
Performance nutrition will be discussed in depth in chapter 9, but for now
let me state the obvious—reducing body fat is possible only if you create a
net calorie deficit over the course of many days and weeks. Simply put,
burning more calories than you consume causes the body to tap into and
burn fat reserves. Crash dieting is unhealthy and dangerous, especially for a
serious athlete. Instead strive for, at most, a 500-calorie deficit per day.
Over the course of a week, this would add up to a 3,500-calorie deficit and
equal the loss of one pound of body fat. Surely the bathroom scales will
indicate that you’ve lost more weight, but this additional weight loss is all
in the form of water and glycogen. This nonfat weight loss will return next
time you eat a surplus of calories that can replenish the muscle glycogen
stores.
Your daily calorie deficit is best created by a combination of reduced
calorie intake and increased calorie expenditure. For burning fat, nothing
beats aerobic activities such as running, biking, and swimming. Given a
healthy back and knees, select running as your choice activity since it will
not result in muscle hypertrophy (growth in size) in the legs. Moderateintensity swimming and biking on relatively flat terrain are the next best
alternatives. Unfortunately, mountain biking over rugged terrain is a legmuscle builder. No matter what you choose, make it your goal to perform a
minimum of thirty minutes of sustained moderate-intensity aerobic activity
at least four days per week.

If your schedule is too busy to accommodate this two-plus hours of
aerobics per week, recent research indicates you can get a similar (and
possibly better) fat-burning effect from shorter, high-intensity interval
training (King 2001). For instance, after a three-minute slow warm-up jog,
alternate a minute of sprinting with a minute of jogging for an additional
twelve minutes. This vigorous fifteen minutes of interval training may burn
less fat during the actual training than the slow thirty-minute run, but its
metabolism-elevating effect will have you burning more calories for the rest
of the day. Regardless of your chosen mode of aerobic training, you can
maximize the fat-burning effect by doing it first thing in the morning and
before eating breakfast.

Tips for Optimizing Body Composition
1. Use a combination of dietary surveillance and exercise to lower
your percentage of body fat.
2. Strive for four, thirty-minute (or more) aerobic workouts per
week.
3. Adjust calorie intake to produce approximately a 500-calorieper-day deficit. See chapter 9 for more nutritional tips.
4. Reduce aerobic training activities (and reinvest the training
time in climbing-specific exercises) as you approach your
optimal percentage of body fat.
5. Do not obsess over body composition—do the best you can
given your genetics, and remember that climbing is two-thirds
mental and technical. You can climb at a high level despite
less-than-ideal body composition.
Upon reaching your desired percentage of body fat, cut back somewhat
on the aerobic training and refocus your efforts elsewhere. Slowly
reintroduce more calories incrementally and watch your waistline and body
weight. The goal is to find a level of calorie consumption equal to your
daily energy use and thus maintain a steady body weight.
In summary, I want to emphasis that while optimizing body composition
is an important aspect of training for climbing, it is not everything. Sadly,

some climbers obsess over minimizing their body fat to the point of
starving themselves—this is obviously a flawed training strategy and not a
fun way to live. Sure, there are a few anorexic climbers who climb at a very
high level thanks to their finely tuned mental and technical skills; however,
their malnutrition is indeed limiting them (imagine how good they’d be if
they ate right!) and may eventually lead to hardships such as injury and
illness.

Flexibility Training
While there is rarely a need for extraordinary flexibility in climbing,
regular flexibility training will have a positive influence on your training
and performance. Considering that movement is the very essence of the
vertical dance we call climbing, anything you can do to help facilitate
smooth, efficient movements will enhance your performance. Flexible
agonist muscles and tendons will function better—and are more resilient—
when exposed to the high dynamic force loads common to climbing. What’s
more, flexible antagonist muscles will levy a lower inherent resistance to
the opposing agonist muscles, enabling smoother, more economical
movement. Given all these benefits, why would any climber not engage in
some flexibility training as part of every workout?
Stretching exercises have, of course, been long used by athletes as part of
a warm-up routine before training and competition. Such pre-performance
stretching is useful as long as it is preceded by a warm-up activity to
increase joint and muscle temperatures. Static stretching alone can injure a
cold muscle (Shrier 1999, 2000)! Engage in five to fifteen minutes of lowintensity exercise such as jogging, cycling, or easy climbing (vertical walls
with good holds) before beginning your flexibility training or preperformance stretching. When climbing outdoors, the hike to the cliff base
often provides the perfect lead-in to your preclimb stretching as long as it’s
lengthy enough to increase your breathing rate and cause a light sweat.
Detailed below are seventeen stretches that are ideal for fulfilling the
above-stated goals. Certainly there’s no need to spend an hour stretching
each day; in fact, that could be viewed as a poor use of your training time.
Instead commit to ten minutes of gentle stretching as part of your warm-up
for climbing and training. Some additional stretching on climbing rest days
is useful for maintaining range of motion in tight muscles (always warm up
first) and as lower-body flexibility training to improve hip turnout,
stemming, and high-stepping ability. Consult the muscular anatomy photos

in appendix A if you are uncertain of the location of the muscles specified
in each stretching exercise below.

Upper-Body Stretches

Perform each of the following stretches as part of your warm-up routine
before any hard training or difficult climbing. As stressed above, it’s
essential to perform five to fifteen minutes of general exercise before
stretching. At the very least, do fifty jumping jacks followed by twenty arm
circles and twenty finger flexors. Complete the pre-stretching warm-up with
a few minutes of self-massage to the finger tendons, the palm of your hand,
and the forearm muscles and biceps.

ARM CIRCLES
Arm circles provide a nice dynamic stretch that warms up your shoulder
joints and increases circulation to your shoulders, arms, and fingers. Do this
before you engage in any of the upper-body static stretches that follow.
Stand with your arms out to the side and parallel to the floor, and begin
moving your arms in small circles. Gradually increase the size of the circle
until you feel slight tension in the shoulders—go no larger with the circles
beyond this point and do not wildly whip your arms or perform a rapid
windmill-like motion! Complete twenty slow, smooth arm circles and then
proceed to the Finger Curls.

FINGER CURLS AND MASSAGE
This is a must-do warm-up movement for climbers, because it increases
circulation to the forearm muscles and spreads lubricating synovial fluid in

the joints of the fingers. Stand with your arms relaxed by your sides. Close
your hands to make relaxed fists, and then quickly open your hands and fan
out the fingers as if you’re trying to flick water off your fingertips. Continue
for thirty to forty repetitions. Use a pace that allows about two repetitions
per second. Now perform a minute or two of massage to the palmar side of
your fingers and hand—this will encourage blood flow and help warm the
tendons and tendon pulleys.

FINGER FLEXOR STRETCH AND MASSAGE
Finger Flexor Stretch

1. Palm down.

2. Palm out.
This rudimentary stretch targets the forearm muscles that enable finger
flexion and your grip on the rock. Be sure to perform this stretch in the twohanded positions shown above. In a standing position, bring your arms
together in front of your waist. Straighten the arm to be stretched and lay
the fingertips into the palm of your other hand. Position the hand of your
stretch arm so that the palm is facing down with the thumb pointing inward.

Pull back on the fingers of your straight arm until a mild stretch begins in
the forearm muscles. Hold this stretch for about twenty seconds. Release
the stretch and turn the hand 180 degrees so that your stretch arm is now
positioned with the palm facing outward and the thumb pointing out to the
side. Using your other hand, pull your fingers back until a stretch begins in
the forearm muscles. Hold for ten seconds. Repeat this stretch, in both
positions, with your other arm. Finish up with a minute of self-massage to
the forearm flexor muscles using deep cross-fiber friction (see page 215).

FINGER EXTENSORS STRETCH
This important stretch is unfortunately overlooked by many climbers. It
stretches and warms up the numerous extensor muscles and the often tight
brachioradialis muscle of the back of the forearm; when used daily, it will
help your prevent tendinosis of the outer elbow (often called lateral
epicondylitis). In a standing position, bring your arms together in front of
your waist. Straighten the arm to be stretched and then make a tight fist;
place the fist in the palm of your other hand. With your fist hand in the
thumb-up position, gently pull the fist inward to create a mild stretch along
the back of the forearm. Hold this stretch for twenty seconds. Now release
the stretch and rotate the fist until it’s in the awkward thumb-down position.
Again, use your free hand to flex the fist and hold for twenty seconds—hold
a solid fist and keep your arm straight to best work this strange yet
important stretch. Repeat with your other hand.
Finger Extensors Stretch

1. Thumb up.

2. Thumb down.

FINGER ISOLATION STRETCH

This isolation stretch, along with massage of the fingers and hands, is very
effective for warming up your precious digits. Work through this sequence
one finger at a time. Either sitting or standing, bend one arm at the elbow to
position your hand palm-up at chest level. Curl your fingers about threequarters of the way, but do not close your hand or make a fist. Extend your
hand fully into a hand-back position. Place the index finger of the other
hand across the last digit of finger to be stretched and position the thumb
under the finger near the hand knuckle. Gradually apply pressure with the
index finger to further close the bent finger and to push it back in the
direction opposite that to which it flexes. Stop when you feel mild tension
in the joints. Hold this stretch for ten seconds. Release the finger for a few
seconds and repeat the stretch for another ten seconds. Repeat this process
with all eight fingers. Stop immediately if you experience any pain.

Finger isolation stretch.

SHOULDER, CHEST, AND BICEPS STRETCH

Sit on the floor with your feet flat and knees bent about halfway. Position
your arms just behind your hips with the elbows straight, palms flat, and
fingers pointing back. Slowly walk your hands away from your hips until
you feel mild tension in your biceps. Hold this position for twenty seconds.
Walk your fingers back a few inches farther to increase the tension a bit
more. You may also feel some mild stretching in your shoulders and chest.
Hold this position for twenty to thirty seconds before releasing the stretch.

RHOMBOIDS AND TRAPEZIUS STRETCH
This is a great stretch for the shoulder and upper-back muscles that are so
heavily used in climbing vertical and overhanging walls. From a standing
position, bring one arm across your chest until the hand rests on the
opposite shoulder. Maintain the bent elbow at chest level so that your arm is
parallel to the floor. With the other hand, grasp behind the bent elbow from
below. Pull on the bent elbow until you feel tension in your shoulder and
upper back. Hold the stretch for ten seconds. Release the stretch for a few
seconds before repeating for twenty seconds more. You can stretch the
shoulder muscles more completely by slowly working your bent elbow up
and down a few inches from the horizontal position. Repeat this stretch with
the other arm.

Shoulder, chest, and biceps stretch.

Rhomboids and trapezius stretch.

TRICEPS, SHOULDERS, AND LATISSIMUS
STRETCH
Stand erect with arms overhead and bent at the elbows. Grab one elbow and
gently pull it toward the back of your head until you feel a stretch in the
back of your upper arm. Hold the stretch for ten seconds. Release the
stretch for a few seconds, and then perform a secondary stretch for about
twenty seconds. You can extend this stretch down through the shoulder and

the side of your back by leaning sideways slightly in the direction the elbow
is being pulled. Repeat this stretch with your other arm.

SHOULDERS AND UPPER-TORSO STRETCH
This is a great climbers’ stretch because it works many of the shoulder and
upper-back muscles that are so used and abused in climbing. Stand erect
and extend your arms overhead. Cross your wrists, place your palms
together, and interlace your fingers. Now reach your fingertips toward the
sky and feel the stretch through your shoulders and upper back. Hold this
extended position for ten seconds and then lower your hands to release the
tension. Repeat the stretch a second time, but this time reach for the sky and
then move your hands backward a few inches to enhance the stretch.

Triceps, shoulders, and latissimus stretch.

Shoulders and upper-torso stretch.

Lower-Torso and Leg Stretches

The legs, hips, and lower back are areas where many climbers benefit from
improved flexibility. Greater hip turnout, stemming, and high-stepping
ability in particular will markedly improve your center-of-gravity placement
on vertical routes and quality of movement on all routes. While your
ultimate degree of flexibility is largely a function of genetics, dedicated
daily stretching will produce some gains in functional flexibility. You will
need to decide if targeted flexibility training of your lower body is a good
use of training-for-climbing time. Is lack of flexibility holding you back on
the rock? Quite often it’s hard to tell, since inadequate lower-back, hip, and
leg flexibility will sabotage efficient movement and climbing technique in
very subtle ways. It would thus be wise for all climbers to engage in a
modest amount of lower-body stretching, both as part of a pre-performance
warm-up and as a rest-day flexibility-training activity. Here are eight
stretches to put to use beginning today.

BUTTOCKS AND LOWER-BACK STRETCH
This stretch will improve hip flexion and help facilitate high-stepping. Lie
flat on your back with both legs straight. Bend one leg and grasp it behind
the thigh or over the top of the knee, and pull it toward your chest. Hold the
stretch for ten seconds, then release for a few seconds. Pull the bent leg
toward your chest again for a secondary stretch of about twenty seconds.
Repeat with the other leg.

Buttocks and lower-back stretch.

Hamstrings stretch.

Adductor stretch.

HAMSTRINGS STRETCH
The muscles along the back of the thigh are chronically tight in many
climbers, thus restricting stem and high-step movements. Lie flat on your
back with one leg straight and the other bent, with the sole of that foot flat
on the floor next to your opposite knee. Lift the straight leg upward, grab it
behind the thigh or calf, and pull gently forward until you feel the stretch
down the back of the leg. Hold this stretch for ten seconds, and then release
it slightly for a few seconds. Pull the leg once again for another twenty- to
thirty-second stretch. Be sure to maintain a straight leg all the while. Repeat
with your other leg. You can also work this stretch by looping a fitness band
over your foot and regulating the stretch by pulling on the band, or by
having a partner apply pressure on your leg using the PNF stretching
technique described below under “Tips for Safe and Effective Flexibility
Training.”

ADDUCTOR STRETCH
This wall stretch is one of the very best lower-body stretches for climbers.
Lying on the floor eliminates strain on the lower back and allows you to
relax and let gravity do the work. Wearing socks will reduce friction
between your heels and the wall, helping maximize the range of the stretch.
Lie on the floor with your buttocks about 6 inches from a wall and your legs
extending straight up it with about a ninety-degree bend at your hips.
Slowly separate your legs by sliding your heels out to the sides. Concentrate
on relaxing throughout your body and allow gravity to extend the split until
you feel mild tension in your legs and groin. Hold this position for ten to
twenty seconds. Try to split your legs farther apart; if needed, grab your
thighs to apply some downward pressure to extend the stretch. Hold this
position for thirty to sixty seconds.

GROIN STRETCH
This is an excellent stretch for improving hip turnout. Flexibility gains from
this stretch will allow you to move your center of gravity in closer to the
wall—more over your feet—on near-vertical climbs. Sit upright with your
legs flexed and knees out to the sides so that you can bring the soles of your
feet together. Grasp your ankles and rest your elbows on the inside of the
thighs. Press down with your elbows to apply light pressure on the thigh
until you feel mild tension in your groin and inner thigh. Hold this stretch
for ten seconds, and then release it for a few seconds. Apply pressure for a
secondary stretch of twenty to thirty seconds. Next, lie down flat on your
back while keeping your feet together. Relax and allow gravity to pull your
knees toward the floor for another thirty seconds to one minute.

1. Stretch while sitting.

2. Stretch on your back.

QUADRICEPS AND HIP FLEXORS

This is a common wall stretch, often used by runners, that provides a nice
stretch of the quadriceps and psoas (hip flexor) muscle. Stand near a wall or
other object that you can hold on to with one hand for balance. Now flex
the leg on the supporting hand’s side and bring the heel up to near your
buttocks. Reach behind your back with the free hand and grasp the foot of
your bent leg. Slowly pull upward on the foot to induce a stretch in the
quadriceps and hip flexors. Hold this for ten seconds, then release the
stretch slightly for a few seconds. Pull upward again for another twenty to
thirty seconds of stretching. Repeat this stretch with the other leg;
remember to switch the supporting hand so that you are holding the bent leg
with the opposite hand.

CALF STRETCH
The gastrocnemius and soleus muscles of the calf are the unsung heroes of
climbing performance. Stretch mthese muscles before and after every day
of climbing! Stand with one foot about 3 to 4 feet ahead of the other. Bend
the front leg and shift your hips forward while keeping your rear leg straight
and the heel in contact with the floor. Rest your hands on your forward knee
or lean against a wall or other solid object to maintain balance as you shift
your hips far enough forward to produce a stretch in the calf muscles. Hold
this stretch for twenty seconds, and then shift your hips back to the starting
position to release the stretch for a few seconds. Move your hips forward to
produce a secondary stretch for thirty to sixty seconds. Maintain heel
contact with the floor throughout. Repeat with the other leg.

UPPER- AND LOWER-ABDOMINAL STRETCH
Lie flat on the floor with your arms bent and palms flat next to your
shoulders. Slowly press your shoulders away from the floor until you feel
mild tension in your abdominals. Keep your legs and pelvis in contact with

the floor for the duration of this stretch—it helps to contract your buttocks
in order to maintain the position and reduce stress on your lower back. Hold
the stretch for ten seconds, then return to the starting position for a few
seconds. Press up for a secondary stretch of twenty to thirty seconds. Relax
and allow the curve of your spine to extend up through your upper back and
neck. Look forward, but not up toward the ceiling. Do not be overly
aggressive with this stretch—proceed with caution, especially if you have a
history of back problems. Stop immediately if you experience any pain in
the lower back.

Quadriceps and hip flexors.

Calf stretch.

OBLIQUES AND BACK STRETCH
This final stretch will help prepare your body for the torso-twisting, hipturning, drop-kneeing movements that are so common on steep sport climbs
and boulder problems. Sit erect on the floor with one leg straight and the
other bent and crossing over the opposite knee. Slowly turn your body
toward the side of the bent leg until you feel mild tension in your lower
back, hips, and the side of your torso. Maintain a level head position and fix
your eyes on the wall to the side of the bent leg. Hold the stretch for ten to
twenty seconds, then return to the starting position for a few seconds.
Perform a secondary stretch for twenty to thirty seconds. If needed, you can
increase the stretch by levering your elbow against the thigh of the bent leg.
Repeat the stretch in the other direction. Be sure to switch leg positions.

Upper- and lower-abdominal stretch.

Obliques and back stretch.

Tips for Safe and Effective Flexibility Training
1. Always engage in five to fifteen minutes of jogging, jumping
jacks, or easy climbing before beginning flexibility training.
Stretching a cold muscle can lead to injury.
2. Stretch in a slow, gradually progressive manner. Stretching
should produce mild discomfort, but never sharp pain.
3. Perform a primary stretch of ten to twenty seconds. Release the
stretch for a few seconds before performing a secondary stretch
for twenty to thirty seconds.
4. Direct slow, deep breathing throughout the stretch. Inhale
through your nose and exhale through your mouth.
5. Maintain a neutral back position—neither rounded nor
hyperextended—to maximize the stretch and avoid injury.
6. Limit “gain” stretching to the lower body; excessive upperbody stretching is counterproductive and could lead to injury.
Perform only light stretching of your shoulders—a small

degree of tightness is good and needed to protect the shoulder
joint.
7. Refrain from excessive stretching of the forearm flexors prior
to climbing, since this will reduce your maximum strength and
power for up to one hour. Favor light stretching and sports
massage prior to maximal climbing.
8. An alternative stretch method, known as PNF, replaces the
period of relaxation between the primary and secondary
stretches with a period of muscular contraction. For most of the
stretches described, this will require a partner to create an
immovable resistance against which you can contract for six
seconds. After this isometric contraction, relax completely and
allow the stretch to lengthen the muscle. This is especially
useful technique for individuals trying to overcome uncommon
lack of flexibility in the legs and hips.
Abdominal Crunch

1. Start with legs bent and hands behind head.

2. Crunch upward and repeat.

Training the Core Muscles
In climbing vertical to overhanging rock, the core muscles of your torso
play a key role in enabling your arms and legs to maximize leverage and
transfer torque from hand to foot and vice versa. Many beginner and
intermediate climbers making their initial forays on steep terrain find goodlooking holds more difficult and pumpy to use and modest-length reaches
feeling surprisingly long. The root of these difficulties is probably a
complex blend of poor technique and insufficient strength in both the arms
(obviously, they are the ones getting pumped up!) and, less noticeably, the
torso.
As you might expect, one good way to strengthen these core stabilizer
muscles is by climbing frequently on steep terrain. If your specialty is
climbing overhanging routes or if you regularly boulder on steep cavelike
routes, chances are you’ve already developed a high degree of strength in
these muscles (though you could probably still benefit from additional
conditioning). If you are new to climbing, however, or if you have
previously climbed mainly vertical to less-than-vertical routes, you would
likely benefit significantly from some targeted training of these core
muscles.
Two “strength tricks” first popularized in climbing by John Gill are the
gold standard of core-muscle strength. The front lever and straight-arm flag
both require steely torso muscles. If you can do these two tricks, then your
training time is better spent on areas other than the stabilizing muscles of
the torso. Otherwise, employ a blend of bouldering and traversing on steep
walls and executing the eight exercises described below.

ABDOMINAL CRUNCH
Lie on the floor with your legs bent at about ninety degrees and your feet
flat on the floor or hovering in the air about knee height above the floor
(better isolates the upper abs). Cross your arms over your chest or place
your hands behind your head (harder), but do not interlace your fingers
behind your neck. Now lift your shoulder blades off the floor and exhale as
you “crunch” upward. The range of motion is small—the goal is to lift your
upper back off the floor, but not to ascend all the way as you would in doing
old-school sit-ups. Continue up and down at a brisk pace that takes just over
one second per repetition—but don’t go so fast that you are bouncing off
the floor. Perform as many crunches as possible. Your long-term goal
should be fifty to seventy-five repetitions. As your conditioning improves,
you can perform a second set after a three-minute rest.

HANGING KNEE LIFT
This strenuous exercise targets the lower-abdominal muscles in a very
climbing-specific way—much like lifting your legs on an overhanging
route. Do these hanging from a pull-up bar, the bucket holds of a
fingerboard, or a set of Pump Rocks with your palms facing away. Briskly
lift your knees up to your chest level, allowing your legs to bend naturally
with the motion. Pause for a moment, then lower your legs slowly until they
return to a slightly bent position. Immediately begin the next upward
repetition, and continue these knee-lift movements at a steady pace until

you can no longer perform the full range of motion. Your long-range goal is
twenty-five to thirty repetitions. Rest for three minutes before performing a
second set or moving on to the next abdominal exercise.

SIDE HIP RAISE
This surprisingly difficult exercise works the oblique muscles along the side
of your torso. Lie on your side on the floor and press up with the floor-side
arm straight and supporting your weight so that your body forms a triangle
with the floor. Rest the free arm along the other side of your body. Keeping
the supporting arm straight, lower your hip until it touches the floor and
then immediately raise it back up to the starting position. Repeat this
lowering and raising of the hip in a slow, controlled manner for ten to
twenty (hard) repetitions. Rest for one minute and then switch sides to
perform another set.

AQUAMAN
Hanging Knee Lift

1. Lift knees.

2. Pause and repeat.
The Aquaman is a great core exercise that particularly homes in on
strengthening the commonly weak muscles of the lower back. Lie facedown
on the floor with your arms extended overhead, your legs straight with
pointed toes, and your head in a neutral position. Begin by simultaneously
raising one arm and the opposite leg as high as comfortably possible. Hold
the top position for one second, then return to the starting position. Repeat

by raising the opposite arm and leg off the floor simultaneously. Again,
hold for a second in the top position before returning to the floor. Continue
this alternating exercise motion for a total of twenty repetitions or until you
can no longer perform a slow, controlled movement. Rest for three minutes
before performing another set.

ONE-ARM, ONE-LEG BRIDGE
This strenuous exercise calls into play almost every muscle from your
hands to your feet, and as a result it’s remarkably hard and tiring! Assume a
push-up position with your torso straight and in line with your feet. Spread
your feet shoulder width apart, with your toes in contact with the floor.
Keeping your arms, back, and legs straight, lift one foot and the opposite
hand off the floor for approximately five seconds. Contract the muscles of
your arms, shoulders, core, and legs as needed to maintain balance. Switch
foot and arm positions so that your other arm and leg are now supporting
your weight. Hold this position for about five seconds. Continue alternating
the supporting arm and leg every five seconds. To make the exercise harder,
occasionally use the arm and leg on the same side. End the exercise after
one minute, or earlier if you cannot maintain balance on the single arm and
leg. Rest for three minutes and perform a second set.
Side Hip Raise

1. Keep arm straight.

2. Lower hip to floor, then return to start position.

Aquaman

1. Raise one arm and leg.

2. Then the other.
One-Arm, One-Leg Bridge

1. Lift one hand and foot.

2. Then the other.

Front lever.

FRONT LEVER
Introduced to climbing by the legendary boulderer John Gill, the Front
Lever is the gold standard of core-muscle strength. It is a very difficult
gymnastics move, so expect this exercise to feel hard—or even impossible!
Fortunately, you can make it a bit easier by simply bending one leg or
having a spotter hold your feet. Begin by hanging straight-arm from a bar or
a set of rock rings (ideal). Pull up halfway, then push your hands forward,
drop your head backward, and lift your legs. Do all this in a single quick
motion while attempting to position your entire body—head to toe—
parallel to the ground. Squeeze tightly throughout your shoulders, torso,
buttocks, and legs to hold this position for three seconds (if you can). It
helps to think about pushing your hands toward your hips, even though
you’ll be in a stationary position. The goal is to hold the lever for three
seconds before lowering yourself slowly to the starting position.
Immediately pull up into a Front Lever again and hold for three seconds.

Perform three to five (hard) total Front Levers. Rest for three to five
minutes before performing a second set.
Safety note: The Front Lever places a great deal of stress on your
shoulders and elbows (just like steep climbing), so it is inappropriate for
novice or out-of-shape climbers or anyone with ongoing elbow or shoulder
problems.

STEEP-WALL TRAVERSING
Climbing overhanging walls is the ultimate core-training exercise, and it’s
obviously the most specific. The best training strategy is to traverse
sideways across a long overhanging wall, or back and forth across a shorter
wall. The only drawback to this exercise is that lack of finger strength and
climbing ability will prevent some climbers from traversing long enough to
adequately work the core muscles. Here’s how to do it.
Select a section of wall that overhangs between thirty and fifty degrees
past vertical. Using medium-size handholds and small footholds, traverse
across the wall at a steady pace. Avoid extremely technical or strenuous
moves. Try to make long sideways reaches with your hands and feet—the
longer the horizontal reach, the more your core muscles will need to work
to maintain balance and stability. Allow your body to twist and turn as
needed to execute the moves, and concentrate on contracting your core
muscles to prevent body sag, sway, or swing. Continue traversing for at
least one minute, and alternate leading with your hands and feet. Rest for
three to five minutes before performing a second or third set. Adjust the
difficulty of the traverse by using holds that are closer (easier) or farther
apart.
Single-Leg Squat

1. Feet a bit more than shoulder width apart.

2. Lower yourself over one foot and press up.

Core-Training Tips
1. Train the core muscles three to six days per week. Climbing,
especially on overhanging routes, provides an excellent core
workout. Still, you should perform supplemental core exercises
at least twice a week.
2. Perform a variety of core exercises to work all facets of
conditioning: lower and upper abs, obliques, and the spinal
erectors.
3. Most important, be sure to train the often neglected muscles of
the lower back using the Aquaman exercise.
4. Graduate to the advanced total core exercises such as the OneArm, One-Leg Bridge, and Front Lever—these difficult
exercises are the gold standard for core training.

SINGLE-LEG SQUATS
This final exercise isn’t strictly a core exercise, but it does train the leg and
core muscles in a very specific way that mimics the process of pressing out
a high-step move and maintaining a balanced center of gravity throughout.
It’s actually quite difficult. I suggest you use this exercise at least twice per
week—it will provide payoffs on the rock!
Stand erect with your feet a bit more than shoulder width apart—the
farther apart they are, the harder this exercise—and your hands gathered
behind your hips. Slowly bend your left leg and begin shifting your center
of gravity to the left as you lower yourself over your left foot until the
bottom of your thigh is about parallel to the floor. Now press back up with
your left leg to return to the starting position. Maintain a nearly straight
right leg throughout this down-and-up motion. Immediately begin another
repetition with the same leg. Continue for ten to thirty (hard) repetitions, or
stop when you can no longer control your downward motion. After a brief
rest, perform a set with your right leg doing the squatting motion.

Training the Antagonist Muscles
The muscles that are antagonist in most climbing movements include the
pectorals (chest), deltoids and trapezius (shoulders and upper back), triceps
(back of the upper arm), and the finger extensors (outside of the forearm).
Consult the anatomy photos in appendix A if you are unfamiliar with these
muscle groups. Strength and flexibility in these muscles is fundamental to
controlled, precise movement and for maintaining joint stability.
Unfortunately, few climbers regularly engage in training of these antagonist
muscles; the agonist pull muscles get all the attention. Growing imbalance
subsequently develops around the elbow and shoulder joints, thus
increasing instability and risk of injury. Outside of the fingers, the most
common injuries among climbers are elbow tendinosis and shoulder
impingement and subluxation. You now know why.
As common as injuries are in this sport, it surprises me that so few
climbers commit to regular training of the antagonist muscles. The time
commitment is minimal, and the exercises themselves are not that difficult.
On average it would take only about twenty minutes, twice per week, to
gain all of the benefits of antagonist training. Any more than this is
unnecessary and undesirable, since excessive antagonist training and use of
extremely heavy weights would gradually build heavier, more bulky
muscles.
Reverse Wrist Curl

1. Maintain neutral wrist.

2. Curl dumbbell up.
Upcoming are several exercises for strengthening the antagonist muscles
that help support optimal function of the elbow and shoulder joints. Healthy
climbers can begin using all of these exercises, whereas anyone with
ongoing elbow tendinosis or a shoulder injury of any kind should follow a
prescribed rehabilitation program (which may include some of these
exercises).

Hand and Forearm Muscles

The musculature of the forearms is some of the most complex in the body.
Climbing works these muscles in a very specific way that, over time, can
result in tendinosis on either the inside or outside of your elbow (more on
these injuries in chapter 11). Use the following two exercises to strengthen
the finger extensor and pronator muscle groups—two small but highly
important muscle sets. If there are two exercises in this book that every
climber must do, they are these.

REVERSE WRIST CURLS
Use this in conjunction with the forearm stretches provided earlier in this
chapter as an insurance policy against lateral epicondylitis. Consider doing
one set of Reverse Wrist Curls during your warm-up for climbing and two
more sets as part of your cool-down.
Pronator

1. Palm up.

2. Lift hammer to vertical.
Sitting on a chair or bench, rest your forearm on the far end of your thigh
so that your hand faces palm down and overhangs the knee by several
inches. Firmly grip a five- to fifteen-pound (much harder) dumbbell, and
begin with a neutral (straight) wrist position. Curl the dumbbell upward
until the hand is fully extended. Hold this top position for one second, then
lower the dumbbell back to the starting position. Avoid lowering the
dumbbell below a horizontal hand position. Continue with slow, controlled
reverse curls for fifteen to twenty repetitions. Perform two sets with each

hand, with a two- to three-minute rest between sets. Use a heavier dumbbell
if you can easily execute twenty repetitions. Well-conditioned individuals
may need as much as a twenty-five- or thirty-pound dumbbell.
An alternative exercise, though perhaps less beneficial, involves opening
your fingers against the resistance of a strong rubber band. This method is
best used as a preclimbing warm-up. Store a thick rubber band in your car
or climbing pack, and do a set of finger extensions before you perform your
warm-up stretching.

PRONATOR
Arm-pulling movements naturally result in supination of the hand. If you
perform a pull-up on a free-hanging set of Pump Rocks, you’ll discover that
your hands naturally turn outward or supinate as your biceps contract.
Consequently, training forearm pronation is an important antagonist
exercise for climbers to maintain muscle balance across the forearms. There
are several different ways to train forearm pronation, but the easiest is with
an ordinary three-pound sledgehammer.
Sit on a chair or bench with your forearm resting on your thigh, hand in
the palm-up position. Firmly grip a sledgehammer with the heavy end
extending to the side and the handle parallel to the floor. Turn your hand
inward (pronation) to lift the hammer to the vertical position. Stop here.
Now slowly lower the hammer back to the starting position. Stop at the
horizontal position for one second before beginning the next repetition.
Continue lifting the hammer in this way for fifteen to twenty repetitions.
Choke up on the hammer if this feels overly difficult. Perform two sets with
each hand.
Alternatively, you can cut a 14-inch length of 1-inch-diameter dowel (or
purchase a blank dumbbell bar) and mount a few one-pound weights on one
end. A total resistance of only two or three pounds is all you need.

Training the Large Push Muscles

These exercises are equally vital for maintaining balance in the stabilizing
muscles of the shoulders and upper torso. The three exercises described
below will go a long way toward maintaining the necessary balance and,
hopefully, the health of your shoulders through many years of rigorous
climbing. If you have an existing shoulder problem, these exercises may
help mitigate the pain and prevent further injury. Still, it’s essential that you
to see a doctor or physical therapist for guidance specific to your affliction.
While the three following exercises can all be performed on standard
health equipment (Cybex, free weights, and so forth), I would not advise
that you buy a club membership just to gain access to the necessary
machinery. Instead a onetime investment in a few dumbbells (less than $50)
is all you need. Alternatively, you might ask the climbing gym you
patronize to purchase a few dumbbells for the purpose of training the
antagonist muscles of the forearms and upper torso.

SHOULDER PRESS
The shoulder-press motion involves a motion that is almost exactly opposite
that of pulling up while climbing—thus no exercise is more central to
antagonist-muscle training. Although you can execute this exercise with a
common health club shoulder-press machine, performing dumbbell
shoulder presses provides a more complete workout of the many small
stabilizing muscles of the shoulders. Here’s how to do it.
Sit on a bench with good upright posture and feet flat on the floor. Begin
with bent arms, palms facing forward, and the dumbbells positioned just
outside your shoulders. Press straight upward with your palms maintaining
a forward-facing position. As your arms become straight, squeeze your

hands slightly inward until the dumbbells touch end-to-end. Lower the
dumbbells to the starting position. The complete repetition should take
about two seconds. Continue this motion for twenty to twenty-five
repetitions. Strive for smooth, consistent motion throughout the entire set.
Rest for three minutes and perform a second set.
Shoulder Press

1. Palms face forward.

2. Touch dumbbells end-to-end.

Women should start with five-pound dumbbells and advance to ten- or
fifteen-pounders when they can do twenty-five reps. Most men can begin
training with fifteen- or twenty-pound dumbbells and then progress to
twenty-five and thirty pounds as they are able to achieve twenty-five
repetitions. Over the long term it’s best not to progress beyond 40 percent
of your body weight (total weight lifted): Heavier weight may build
undesirable muscle bulk.

BENCH PRESS (OR PUSH-UPS)
The bench press is a staple exercise of power lifters and bodybuilders, but
it’s also useful to climbers striving to maintain stable, healthy shoulders.
The key is to use only moderate weight—begin with a total equal to about
25 percent of your body weight and progress up to 50 percent (never more).
For example, a 160-pound climber would begin training with two 20-pound
dumbbells (40 pounds total) and progress up to training with, at most, 40pound dumbbells or 80 pounds with an Olympic bar.
Lie flat on a bench with bent legs and your feet flat on the floor. Using an
Olympic bar or two dumbbells, begin the exercise with your hands just
above chest level and palms facing your feet. If you’re using a bar, your
hands should be a few inches wider than your shoulders. Press straight up
with a slow, steady motion. If using dumbbells, squeeze your hands
together to touch the ends of the dumbbells together upon reaching the top
position. Return to the starting position, pause for a moment and then begin
the next repetition. With a bar, be careful not to bounce the bar off your
chest. The goal is slow, controlled movement that takes about two seconds
per repetition. Continue for twenty to twenty-five repetitions. Rest for three
minutes before performing a second set.
As an alternative, push-ups provide a workout similar to the bench press.
Begin with your hands shoulder width apart and build up to doing two sets
of twenty-five repetitions. If necessary, move your hands closer together to
increase training resistance. Conversely, beginners should do the push-ups
with their knees on the floor until they are able to progress to the normal
feet-on-floor position.

DIPS
Dips are an excellent exercise for strengthening the many muscles of the
upper arms, shoulders, chest, and back. What’s more, the dip motion is
quite similar to the mantle move in climbing and thus provides a very sportspecific benefit! Some health clubs and gyms possess a parallel-bar setup
ideal for performing dips. Alternatively, you can use the incut ninety-degree
corner of a kitchen counter, or set two heavy chairs in a parallel position. A
set of free-floating Pump Rocks or gymnastics rings are my personal
favorite, as they provide a more dynamic (and difficult) workout.
Position yourself between the parallel bars, Pump Rocks, or other
apparatus. Jump up into the straight-arm starting position with your hands
drawn in near your hips. Slowly lower until your arm is bent ninety degrees
—do not lower beyond this point! Immediately press back up to the starting
position. Continue this up-and-down motion, with each repetition taking
about two seconds. Strive to complete ten to twenty (hard) repetitions.
Perform two or three sets with a three-minute rest between each. Don’t rush
or bounce through this exercise, and never lower beyond a ninety-degree
arm bend.
If you are unable to do at least ten dips, enlist a spotter to reduce the
resistance as needed so that you can reach this goal. The spotter should
stand behind you and lift around your waist or, more easily, pull up on your
ankles (bend your legs and cross them at the ankles to facilitate this).

Antagonist-Muscle Training Tips
1. Regular training of the antagonist muscles will make you a
more biomechanically sound climber and vastly reduce your
risk of elbow and shoulder injuries.
2. Perform all of the antagonist exercises described in this section
at least twice per week. Use relatively light weights that enable
you to perform fifteen to thirty (better) reps with each exercise.
3. Dips are most beneficial, but for many people they are difficult
to perform at full body weight. If needed, engage a training

partner to help you perform at least fifteen dips per set.
4. Most important, perform Reverse Wrist Curls and Forearm
Pronators before and after every climbing workout. These
exercises provide a valuable dynamic warm-up before
climbing, and may help you avoid the elbow tendinosis that can
result from muscular imbalance.
Bench Press

1. Press straight up.

2. Slow, controlled movement.
Dip

1. Straight-arm start.

2. Bend to 90 degrees, then press to starting position!

An Overview of Stamina Training for Climbing
Stamina is the ability to resist fatigue while engaging in sustained or
intermittent physical activity for an extended period of time. Some people
refer to this attribute as endurance, since it is largely a function of one’s
aerobic and anaerobic endurance. Depending on your preferred type of
climbing, the importance of stamina can range from minor to paramount. In
bouldering, for example, the need for strength and power far exceeds that
for stamina. Conversely, stamina supersedes strength and power for alpine
and big-wall climbing. In the middle of this continuum are multipitch
climbing and all-day sport climbing, which require strength and power, as
well as significant stamina.
As in other types of conditioning, there are sport-specific and general
ways of stamina training. The most specific—and therefore effective—
approach would be to train as you perform. That is, to develop stamina for
long days of cragging, you would train by logging many long days at the
crags. Obviously, this approach is not an option for many recreational
climbers with commitments to job, school, and family. A more practical
training alternative, then, is to engage in general stamina training such as
running and biking coupled as often as possible with high volumes of
climbing at the gym or crags.

Stamina Training for Boulder, Sport, and Multipitch Climbers

Excellence at bouldering and sport climbing requires abundant strength and
power, precise technique and efficient movement, and a killer instinct, but
very little in the way of stamina. The exception are long boulder problems
and sport and multipitch routes that do test anaerobic endurance (local to
your forearm and upper-body pull muscles) and your body’s ability to
sustain exercise near or beyond its lactate threshold. So, while stamina
training will have no real impact on your maximum-move ability, it will
enhance recovery between climbs, as well as increase your anaerobic
threshold and ability to persevere through long, sustained boulder problems
or sport routes.
But before you set out to run five miles per day, remember that highvolume stamina training could be viewed as the enemy of strength and
power training of the upper body. Not only would it divert time you could
invest more effectively—say, in bouldering—but regular high-mileage
aerobic activity results in systemic fatigue that may prevent you from
training and climbing up to your potential. Furthermore, excessive aerobic
training has a catabolic effect on the muscles of the upper body: That is, the
body begins to metabolize muscle during long training sessions.

Indoor lead walls are the ideal platform for interval training. Here Lorin
Teres pulls down at Metro Rock, Boston. ERIC McCALLISTER

Let’s examine two popular stamina training strategies: climbing intervals
and running intervals.

CLIMBING INTERVALS
Climbing through a timed bouldering circuit or doing timed laps on a route
is the most specific form of stamina training for boulderers and crag
climbers. This is analogous to a weight-lifting circuit-training program,
which research has shown to yield gains in cardiovascular (aerobic)
conditioning. In bouldering, the goal is to climb a series of moderately
difficult problems with only brief rest intervals in between. Select problems
that are a few grades below your maximum ability—the right grade
problem should make you work, yet not test you maximally or cause you to
fall off repeatedly. When climbing with a rope, the training goal is to climb
five laps on a moderately hard route, each comprising three to six minutes
of climbing followed by three to six minutes of rest. This is basically the
same workout strategy as in training local forearm endurance, so by
engaging in climbing intervals you are training both anaerobic endurance
and stamina.
Although this drill can be performed at an outdoor crag, it’s ideal for use
at a commercial gym with friendly holds and nontechnical overhanging
terrain. The goal is to train the body, not climbing skills or technique—so
regardless of whether you are interval training on a boulder problem or
route, the moves should not be so hard that you fall off.
The goal in stamina training is to develop the capacity to sustain
moderately difficult climbing activity while avoiding complete muscular
failure. If you develop a deep muscular pump, immediately decrease the
climbing difficulty so that you don’t shift into training anaerobic endurance.
It’s important to have a training plan and stick to it, whether it’s to climb a
few laps on a route or send a circuit of ten boulder problems. Decide how
long you will rest between each ascent, then stick to a prescribed schedule.
Purchase a stopwatch (less than $10 at most sports stores) to time precise
rests between climbs. This is a great thirty- to sixty-minute stamina
workout!

Whether you are climbing route intervals or a bouldering circuit, ask
your belayer or spotter to join in on the session. It’s of great benefit to have
a partner who’s vested in the training—this will enhance motivation and
create a training synergy that is mutually beneficial. Take turns timing each
other with the stopwatch, and have fun!

RUNNING INTERVALS
Competitive runners view interval training as the gold standard for
increasing one’s capacity to sustain moderate- to high-intensity running and
race-day pace. These benefits come as a result of an increase in aerobic
capacity (VO2 max) and lactate threshold. The long-term benefits of this
training methodology are so profound that all serious medium- to longdistance runners incorporate some form of interval training into their
monthly training cycle.
The physiological adaptations of interval training can also be a boon for
serious rock climbers. While the act of running intervals is hardly specific
to climbing, its effects on the cardiovascular system are not far different
from a long, multicrux route. If you engage in any form of long, strenuous
climbing, you can be sure that running intervals will improve your
performance, in terms of both improved total stamina and accelerating
recovery between efforts.
The most common interval-training program is to run alternating fast and
slow laps on a track. Although you can also run intervals on a road or trail,
the ease of setting a goal and gauging distances makes running on a track
preferable. For initial training sessions, set out to run 2 miles—that’s an
aggregate distance of fast and slow laps. As a rough gauge, your fast laps
should feel like 80 to 90 percent of your maximum speed and result in your
getting significantly winded. Try to hold the fast pace for a complete lap,
and then pull back to a jog for the “slow” lap. Continue alternating fast and
slow laps (or half laps) for a total of eight.

Stamina Training for Big-Wall and Alpine Climbers

Big-wall and alpine climbing are obviously more about all-day or multiday
stamina than possessing fingers of steel. If such stamina climbing is your
cup of tea, your training should be specific to these demands. The two best
training strategies here are high-volume climbing and high-volume aerobic
exercise.

ALL-DAY CLIMBING
This is a classic train-as-you-climb strategy. If you have the resources
nearby, then no training could be more specific than chalking up many long
days on the rock. You could do this in the form of climbing as many routes
as possible from sunrise to sunset at a cragging area or by racing up a Grade
IV or V big-wall route in a day. Ideally the goal would be to engage in two
or three all-day climbing workouts per week—do this for a few months and
you’ll develop amazing climbing stamina! For many climbers, however, it
may only be possible to train this way a few days per month. In this case,
you will need to engage in some high-volume aerobic training as an adjunct
for all-day climbing.

HIGH-VOLUME AEROBIC TRAINING
The goal here is to engage in four, forty-five- to ninety-minute aerobic
workouts per week with a focus on mileage over speed. This could be any
combination of running, swimming, cycling, brisk hiking, and trail running.

As your conditioning improves, consider increasing the number of
workouts to six or eight per week. To do this—and to help make these
workouts fit with your other life activities—you will need to double up on
some of your workouts. For example, you might go for a long run in the
morning then an hour-long bike ride in the evening, or vice versa. If you
engage in such two-a-day workouts, it is best to take at least a six-hour
break between the two. This is clearly an advanced aerobic training
program, but it might be just the ticket in the weeks leading up to a long
wall climb or high-altitude expedition.

Stamina-Training Tips
1. All climbers can benefit from some stamina training.
Boulderers and crag climbers will enhance recovery rate
between climbs, whereas big-wall and alpine climbers will gain
valuable general endurance for ultralong days and ascents at
elevation.
2. Boulderers and sport climbers will benefit the most from brief
interval training (Tabatas) and running 2 to 3 miles of track
intervals.
3. The most effective stamina training for big-wall and alpine
climbers is climbing for mileage—that is, putting in frequent
long days on the rock. Alternatively, regular long-distance
aerobic activities (running, cycling, hiking, and such) lasting
forty-five to ninety minutes or longer will yield substantial
gains in aerobic capacity.
4. Two-a-day stamina workouts are especially effective in
preparation for single-day wall ascents and high-altitude
expeditions.

Emily Harrington sending Lulu (5.14a), Rifle, Colorado. KEITH
LADZINSKI

CHAPTER SEVEN
Climbing-Specific Exercises

Training means not only knowledge of the things which will build the
body, but also knowledge of the things which will tear down or injure
the body.
—Bruce Lee

More than any other, this chapter details the exercises that most climbers
associate with training for climbing. Given what you’ve learned in the first
half of this book, however, you know that climbing-specific exercises are
just one piece of the climbing performance puzzle. That said, great physical
gains await if you regularly and properly use the exercises that follow. The
key, of course, is to identify and execute the exercises holding the most
value for you—that is, those that target the specific physical weaknesses
you identified in chapter 2’s self-assessment test and from your on-the-rock
experience. Chapter 8 will then guide you in crafting a maximally effective
training program given your current ability level and experience.
Exercises in this chapter are divided into two main sections: exercises
that target the forearm muscles controlling your finger strength and
endurance, and exercises that target the large pull muscles of your upper
arms and back. Each section has three subdivisions that classify exercises
according to what physical capacity they most train: maximum strength,
power, or local (anaerobic) endurance. The exercises in each subdivision
are organized according to relative difficulty for the average climber,
beginning with the easiest exercises and ending with the most severe,

advanced-level exercises. Exercise difficulty and the appropriateness of an
exercise for a given ability level is a most vital distinction. A novice
climber could be injured in attempting an advanced-level exercise, whereas
an advanced climber would gain little outside a warm-up by performing a
beginner-level exercise. To help you in appropriate exercise selection,
tables 7.1 and 7.5 classify the exercises according to difficulty.
Before we dive into the details of thirty-three must-know exercises, I
want to provide you with a deeper understanding of how your fingers and
arms are used in climbing. Your levels of strength and endurance on various
climbing movements are very specific to the grip and arm position used.
Awareness of all the grip and arm positions is therefore an essential
precursor to effective training in the most climbing-specific and effective
ways.

An Overview of Sport-Specific Strength Training
According to the Principle of Specificity, training gains in strength, power,
and local endurance will transfer favorably to climbing only if the exercise
is extremely similar in motion, body position, and functional use. It must
therefore be a primary goal of climbing-specific training to train the fingers
and arms in ways that are most similar to their use in climbing. Moreover,
the most high-value training is that which targets your weaker finger and
arm positions. While it’s natural to favor certain finger and arm positions—
usually the strongest—as you climb, the greatest training payoffs come
from targeting your weakest links. In doing so, neuromuscular adaptations
gradually make you stronger and more confident in using every grip and
arm position. It’s this kind of attention to subtle training details that
differentiates average from extraordinary in training outcomes and future
climbing performance.

Finger Positions

The basic finger-grip positions are full crimp, half crimp, open hand, and
pinch. Of course, there are many variations of the above positions—for
instance, a one-, two-, or three-finger pocket can be gripped with a halfcrimp or an open-hand position.

FULL CRIMP
The full crimp is favored by many climbers since it provides what feels like
the most secure lock onto small handholds. The hallmark of the full crimp
is the hyperextension of the first joint of each finger and the sharp flexion
of the second finger joint. The full-crimp grip is then secured by locking
your thumb over the end of the index finger. Unfortunately, this grip
position places the highest force load on the joints and tendons, and overuse
can result in nagging finger injuries; excessive use of this grip is also hard
on the lateral aspect of the elbow and may lead to injury. While it is
absolutely necessary to use and train the crimp grip, the best approach
would be to limit to holds that cannot effectively be gripped any other way.
The full-crimp grip excels on small, square-cut edges, shallow flakes, and
any hold that possess a small incut or recessed edge.

HALF CRIMP
The half-crimp grip is just a variation on the full crimp in which you do not
thumb-lock over the index finger. This reduces slightly the aggressive

angles on the first and second joints of the finger, thus making the grip a bit
more ergonomic. The trade-off is that the half crimp often feels less secure
than the full, although you can develop strength and comfort in the half
crimp through regular use and training. The half-crimp grip is most often
used on small edges and shallow, incut pockets.

OPEN HAND
The open-hand grip has distinct advantages over the crimp grip. First, the
open-hand position is kinder to the finger tendons and joints, since it softens
the joint angles and may allow the rock to provide some tendon support
(your fingers wrap naturally over a curved hold). Furthermore, despite its
frequently less secure feel, the open-hand position can be trained to become
your strongest grip position on all but smallest crimp and incut holds
(which require a crimp grip). This grip is most effective on rounded or
sloping holds, and particularly when pulling on pockets. If you’re
unfamiliar with the open-hand grip, it will feel quite awkward and unlikely
at first. But rest assured that your open-hand grip strength will improve
quickly with targeted training.

PINCH GRIP
The pinch grip is vital for latching on to protruding holds such as pebbles,
tuffas, and opposing edges. Due to the protruding nature of indoor climbing
holds, use of the pinch grip is far more common indoors than on natural
rock faces. Fortunately, our hands are designed to excel at pinching.
Difficulties in using the pinch grip in climbing tend to relate more to the
size, smoothness, and positiveness (or lack thereof) of the pinch. Like all
the other grips, however, you can improve your use of this grip through
targeted training at pinching holds of different shapes, widths, and depths.

Arm Positions and Movements

Regardless of how you grip the rock, it’s the arms that utilize this point of
contact to create torque, leverage, and upward movement. Therefore, it’s
vital to distinguish between grip position—the point of contact—and the
arm position that connects this point of contact to your torso.
Finger Positions

1. Full crimp.

2. Half crimp.

3. Open hand.

4. Pinch grip.
The five primary positions are the down pull, the undercling, the side
pull, the reverse side pull or Gaston, and the mantle or press down. As in
training the finger positions described above, it’s essential that you
incorporate all five arm positions into your training. Later on you’ll learn
about System Wall Training, the best method of targeted strength and
endurance training for the various arm positions.

DOWN PULL
The down pull is by far the most common arm position used in climbing, as
it’s the arm position you would use to ascend a ladder hand-over-hand. With

each grip on the rock, the arm begins in a position above your head with the
palm facing downward. From this starting position you can either hang
straight-arm in a static rest position or pull downward to aid in upward
movement. When used to aid in locomotion, the down-pulling arm often
concludes its work in the lock-off position typified by the arm bent at an
acute angle with the elbow pointing downward and your hand pulled in
tight against the side of your chest. This range of motion from the abovethe-head, straight-arm position to hand-against-chest lock-off is the single
most fundamental arm movement in climbing. Consequently, your strength
and endurance at this pulling motion will increase if you simply climb a few
days per week. Still, targeted pull-down and lock-off training is useful to
accelerate the development of strength and endurance.

UNDERCLING
An inverted, downward-facing handhold demands gripping the usable
surface palm-up while contracting the arm muscles with the arm bent in an
elbow-down or elbow-back position. In a fashion opposite to executing a
down-pull movement, the undercling pull is usually released slowly in an
eccentric contraction as you move up the rock. Although many of the
muscles used are the same as in down-pulling, strength gains at
underclinging largely require training that isolates the arm in this invert
position.

SIDE PULL
As the name implies, this arm position involves pulling inward on a hold
that’s out to your side and facing away from your body. This position places
your arm in a naturally strong position, and thus difficulties in using side
pulls often relate to poor body position and foot placement (bad technique)
rather than lack of strength. Consequently, the most effective methods of

training the side-pull position are those that involve actual climbing. For
example, System Wall Training (described later in this chapter) provides
highly specific training that fosters improvements in body position and use
of the feet while side pulling. Similarly, climbing a gym route using only
side-pull arm positions and the associated body and foot techniques is a
highly effective form of isolation training.

REVERSE SIDE PULL (AKA GASTON)
The more difficult reverse side pull is called into play in using side-facing
edges that are located in front of your body or just above your head. For
instance, imagine a left-facing vertical edge in front of your face. The best
use of this hold would often be to grab it with your right hand (thumb
down) and pull outward to the right. This is the classic Gaston move, and
this shoulder-wrenching move requires targeted training. In addition to
training the Gaston position while bouldering or on a System Wall, it’s
imperative that you engage in the antagonist-muscle training described in
chapter 6. The Gaston position places the shoulder joint at risk of
subluxation; only through regular push-muscle training will you be able to
fortify your shoulder joints and lower injury risk.
Arm Positions and Movements

1. Down pull.

2. Undercling.

3. Side pull.

4. Reverse side pull.

5. Mantle.

MANTLE
Mantling is the exact opposite of down pulling: Your arm begins in a bent
position near your torso and then pushes downward. An ordinary life use of
mantling is the simple act of pushing yourself out of water at the edge of a
swimming pull—both hands contact the edge of the pool palms-downward
as they push down from near your chest to below your waist. In climbing,
the mantle move is significantly more difficult since there’s no water to
provide the lightening effect of buoyancy. Furthermore, it is rare in

climbing to come upon a large, flat surface on which to mantle (except at
the top of a boulder problem). Instead you will often need to mantle with
your fingertips on a shallow edge or pocket, and in extreme cases even
press down with only your thumb resting on the top edge of a hold.
Regardless of the amount of finger or hand contact with the rock, however,
the mantle arm position requires targeted training if you are to become a
master of throwdowns!

Finger and Forearm Training
The following pages on finger and forearm training will likely be the most
referred to in this entire book. This is completely understandable given that
many failed attempts on a boulder problem or climb are accompanied by
pumped forearm muscles. Of course, the intelligent climber will always
analyze whether failure was actually the result of an underlying problem in
sequencing, technique and tactics, or mental control. This is a crucial
distinction that all climbers must consider in evaluating their performance
and training-for-climbing focus. This being said, more finger strength and
forearm endurance certainly can’t hurt—and if you are looking to increase
your capabilities in these areas, well, you’ve come to the right place!
Before we move on to the exercise details, I must proclaim the number
one rule in finger training: Don’t get injured! While this rule is presumably
self-evident, a surprising number of enthusiastic climbers get injured by
training too much or in attempting advanced exercises for which they are
not ready. You can best reduce your risk of injury by employing a prudent
approach to finger training and by following these basic guidelines.
• Always perform a progressive warm-up that gradually builds from
easy full-body activity to difficult, sport-specific exercises.
• Make a conscious effort to avoid the most painful and stressful holds
(such as sharp, small-radius edges and pockets that feel tweaky).
• Eliminate redundancy by using a few different exercises each
session. Don’t just train for an hour on a single apparatus (such as
the fingerboard or campus board) or keep attempting the same
heinous boulder problem over and over again.
• Immediately stop training at the first sign you may be injuring
yourself. Break for a few minutes—or days—to assess the cause of
the pang and severity of the potential injury.

• Rest more than you think you need to—your muscles and precious
digits will thank you! Consider three or four days of aggregate
training and climbing per week to be the limit. Any more than this
tempts injury and certainly doesn’t allow enough recovery time to
maximally benefit from your training.

Maximum-Strength Exercises

According to the principle of specificity, efficacy of training to improve
grip strength for climbing is proportionate to how well it targets the
neuromuscular system in ways similar to its use in climbing. For example,
squeezing a tennis ball or rubber doughnut works some of the same muscles
used in gripping a climbing handhold; however, the muscle force, hand and
finger positions, and energy system used are very different. Therefore,
squeezing a rubber doughnut is ineffective for increasing functional grip
strength for climbing. Conversely, hanging on a fingerboard or bouldering
on small, strenuous-to-grip handholds is very specific and, thus, highly
effective training.

Table 7.1 Classification of Finger- and Forearm-Training Exercises
The degree to which a given exercise will produce gains in functional
grip strength for climbing can be estimated by considering the following
requirements. The more of these requirements an exercise meets, the more
effective it will be at producing gains in usable grip strength.
1. The exercise must be high intensity throughout the entire set. In
climbing, higher intensity is created by increasing wall angle,
decreasing hold size, or increasing hold spacing. Unfortunately,
there’s a definite limit to how far you can go with each of these.
Beyond a certain point, it’s more effective to increase intensity by
adding weight to your body. Adding just ten pounds can make a
huge difference in training intensity on overhanging walls and can
yield a leap in finger strength in just a couple of weeks.
Interestingly, very few climbers are aware of this fact!
2. The exercise must produce rapid muscular failure, not failure
due to technique. In the weight-lifting world, muscular failure in
three to ten reps is considered ideal (though different texts prescribe
slightly different values). This is also valid for climbing, but
translates to strenuous climbing with failure in six to twenty total
hand movements (three to ten moves per hand). In climbing,
however, there’s always the lingering

Table 7.2 Determining Specificity and Effectiveness of Common
Finger-Strength-Training Exercises

question of whether failure resulted from muscle failure or failure of
technique. Thus, the best exercise for training grip strength would
reduce the technical requirements as much as possible and eliminate
training of footwork or arm positions.
3. The exercise must be specific to climbing positions and
movements. The principle of specificity instructs us that strength
gains resulting from a certain exercise are specific to situations
involving similar position and movement. The greater the difference
between the exercise and sport use, the less the strength will
transfer. Thus, the best grip-strength-training exercises involve
actual climbing movements, whereas an exercise performed while
standing or hanging would transfer less.
4. The exercise must focus on a specific grip position for an entire
set. In climbing, the rock dictates a random use of varying grip
positions. Since strength is specific to each grip position, such
cycling of grips allows you to climb much longer than you could if
you used the same grip repeatedly. That’s great if you are climbing
for performance; however, it’s not ideal for training finger strength.
That’s why a full season of climbing builds local forearm endurance
but may leave you with about the same maximum grip strength as
last year. Effective grip-strength training must hammer a specific
grip position until failure. Due to the limited transfer of strength
among grip positions, you’ll need to train several, including open
hand, half crimp, full crimp, pinch, and the three two-finger pocket
combinations or “teams.”
Let’s examine seven exercises that will produce beneficial gains in finger
strength. They are listed in order, from the most basic exercises appropriate
for all climbers to the most highly targeted advanced exercises.

BOULDERING

Bouldering is the most straightforward way to train grip strength. Without
the constraints of a rope and gear, bouldering allows you to focus on
climbing the hardest moves possible. Inherent to hard bouldering, however,
are some limiting factors that diminish the potential to build maximum grip
strength. Consider that technical difficulties may prevent you from climbing
up to the point of muscular failure. Furthermore, the rock dictates the use of
many different grip positions, thus, making it difficult to isolate a single
grip position and work it to failure.
Despite these limitations, bouldering should be a staple of your training
program. It will build some functional strength while at the same time
developing mental and technical skills. Consequently it’s a good training
strategy to couple bouldering with one of the other finger-strength-training
exercises described in this section. Use the following training strategy to
best stimulate gains in finger strength via bouldering.
Select a boulder problem that appears to be strenuous, but not technically
difficult. Favor overhanging problems, which will place more weight on
your hands and maximize the training effect. When bouldering indoors, try
to locate—or consider setting—problems that isolate a specific grip
position. For example, a problem that possesses a lot of crimp holds will be
best for training crimp strength. Attempt to climb the problem two or three
times with sufficient rest between each ascent to allow a good effort. As a
guideline, rest for at least three minutes between attempts of short
bouldering problems and five minutes or more between longer problems.
Move on to another strenuous-looking problem that appears to target a
different grip position, such as pinch, two finger pockets, open hand, and
such. Ascend this problem two or three times, with adequate rest between
attempts. Continue bouldering for thirty to ninety minutes, and then finish
your finger training with one of the isolation exercises described below.

HYPERGRAVITY BOULDERING
Advanced climbers with several years of bouldering under their belt
eventually reach a point where they no longer achieve significant gains in
finger strength despite regular, hard bouldering. Fortunately, hypergravity

bouldering and the HIT workout (described later in this chapter) are
powerful training strategies that will yield further gains in high-end finger
strength. To do this, you’ll need to invest in a ten-pound weight belt (a fivepound belt for climbers weighing less than one hundred pounds) or fill a
fanny pack with five or ten pounds of scuba diver’s weights (check
TrainingForClimbing. com for a current weight belt retailer). Here is the
best strategy for engaging in hypergravity bouldering—this is an indoor
training strategy only!

Hypergravity bouldering with a twenty-pound weight belt.

Overview of Fingerboard Training
Since its advent in the mid-1980s, the fingerboard has become the
standard apparatus for performing pull-ups and straight-armed hangs.
What’s more, the fingerboard is economical (less than $100) and can
mount in just about any apartment or home. So if you don’t have the
space or resources for a home climbing wall, consider a fingerboard
mandatory. In fact, even those with home walls find the fingerboard an
excellent tool for warm-ups and the many pull-muscle exercises to be
discussed later.
The obvious strengths of fingerboard training are its ease of access
and the ability to isolate a wide variety of grip positions. Advanced
climbers progressively add weight to their body (hypergravity) to train
maximum grip strength with a series of brief, high-intensity hangs.
The strategy for training endurance requires a lighter load (less than
body weight), best achieved by placing your feet on a chair (or
footholds on the wall) so that you can circulate your grip around the
board for several minutes in a manner similar to climbing.
To maximize effectiveness of fingerboard training, it is important to
know about the grip-relax repeating sequence (GRRS) and to try to
mimic this action in your training. Consider that it’s a good climbing
tactic to move quickly through cruxes and to get on and off difficult
holds (the grip-relax) as fast as possible. This conserves energy
reserves and even allows for brief, but invaluable steps in recovery
between each grip. The physiology behind this process relates to the
fact that blood flow is occluded (closed off) during peak contractions
and resumes only when the muscle relaxes. Inevitably, if you have to
grip a hold maximally to stick it, then the blood flow in your forearms
is occluded and your grip will ultimately fail in a matter of fifteen
seconds or less. Given a brief “relax” period between each maximum
grip (the few seconds while your other hand grips), however, you can
climb on for a surprisingly long time. Top climbers use the GRRS to
keep them going and going up the most improbable-looking routes.

Of course, a complete warm-up is imperative before any fingerboard
training. Ideally, perform some light general exercise to elevate your
heart rate and muscle temperature. Proceed to crank out a few sets of
pull-ups along with gentle stretching of your fingers and upper body.
Complete your warm-up with some self-massage of the fingers,
forearms, and arms, and consider reinforcing the tendons at the base of
your fingers with a few tight turns of tape (especially if you plan to
train with added weight). Limit your use of the fingerboard to a

maximum of three days per week—any more than that and injury risk
skyrockets! Furthermore, stop training at the first sign of pain in joints
or tendons, and consider taking a few days or more rest from training.
Complete a general and specific warm-up. That is, work through various
basic warm-up and stretching exercises, and then move on to some general
climbing and bouldering lasting at least thirty minutes. Now clip on your
weight belt and predetermine a target number of “burns” (attempts and
ascents) that you will perform at hypergravity. As a guideline, limit yourself
to about five burns on your initial session, then build to fifteen to twenty
burns as you gain confidence and strength.
Select nontechnical, overhanging boulder problems that possess small- to
medium-size holds, but no tiny and tweaky features. Since you are climbing
with a weight belt, favor problems that are a couple of grades or more
below your limit. It’s important to avoid taking an out-of-control fall while
climbing with the extra weight on your body. Climb the problem two or
three times with a rest for three to five minutes between ascents.
Move on to another strenuous-looking problem that appears to target a
different grip position. Consider taking the time to set “theme problems”
that possess only holds of a certain shape and size—this is the best way to
target and train a weak grip position. Ascend this problem two or three
times, with adequate rest between attempts.
It’s important to remember that hypergravity bouldering is stressful on
the fingers, elbows, and shoulders, and it’s critical that you stop training at
the first sign of pain in any of these areas. Gradually work into hypergravity
bouldering over the course of a few weeks. Begin with five burns, one day
per week, and work toward the advanced program of fifteen to twenty
burns, twice per week.

FINGERBOARD PULL-UPS
When I first began climbing in the mid-1970s, fingertip pull-ups on a
doorjamb were the main form of home training for climbers! All these years
later, performing these crimpy pull-ups on a 0.75-inch-deep fingerboard

edge is still good for a quick training fix if you have no access to a climbing
gym or other equipment. Perform one to two sets of pull-ups using each of
the three primary grip positions—full crimp, half crimp, and open hand—
and perhaps a couple more sets using the finger pocket holds if you are
accustomed to this grip. Always perform the finger warm-up and stretching
exercises detailed on page 102 before training.

FINGERBOARD REPEATERS
Repeaters are the best fingerboard exercise for developing maximum grip
strength, since they target specific grip positions with repeated highintensity contractions. Before you get started, however, it’s imperative that
you perform a complete warm-up—otherwise your fingerboard may
become the “injury board.” Don’t take chances; use the upper-body warmup and stretching exercises detailed in Chapter 6. Consider reinforcing the
tendons at the base of your fingers with a few tight turns of tape (see
Prophylactic Taping Methods in chapter 11).
Begin by surveying your fingerboard to identify pairs of grips that you
can use—both hands must engage identical holds! Select five to ten grip
positions to be trained: for example, open hand, pinch, crimp, sloper, threefinger pocket, and various two-finger pocket combinations. Begin by
training your weakest grip position—the one that is most difficult to use
when climbing—and end with your strongest.
Execute one set of ten Repeaters. Each hang should last just three to five
seconds with a rest between hangs of less than five seconds. To be effective,
the hangs must be high intensity and require that you bear down hard to
maintain the grip for a three- to five-second count (count one thousand one,
one thousand two, and so on). You may need to add anywhere from five to
twenty pounds of weight around your waist (hypergravity training) to make
the task this difficult. It may take you a few sessions to determine the exact
amount of weight needed for a specific grip position. Use a smaller
fingerboard feature if you need more than twenty pounds to make this
exercise difficult (see table 7.3).

After completing a full set of Repeaters, take a three- to five-minute rest.
Perform light stretching or self-message during this recovery period. Select
a different pair of holds and begin a second set of Repeaters. You may need
a different amount of weight around your waist for this new grip position.
Rest again for three to five minutes, and then begin a third set of Repeaters
using a different set of holds. Continue alternating sets of Repeaters with
rest periods for a total of five to ten sets.

Table 7.3 Sample Fingerboard Repeater Workout

Figure 7.1 Fingerboard Pyramid Training

FINGERBOARD PYRAMIDS
According to the Principle of Variation, it’s beneficial to regularly vary your
fingerboard training. The pyramid method is a good alternative for training
maximum grip strength. Using the same pair of holds, progress through the
full seven-step pyramid shown in figure 7.1. After a three-minute rest,
perform another pyramid on a different set of holds. Ideally, you want to
work all the primary grip positions (as in doing repeaters) over the course of
seven to fifteen full pyramid sets. Limit yourself to only a three-minute rest
between sets. Use smaller holds or add weight to your body if this regimen
seems less than maximum (the last few steps of each pyramid should be
difficult to execute).

HEAVY FINGER ROLLS
Todd Skinner turned me on to this exercise back in 1990, and I’ve since
become a true believer. Muscular gains from this exercise are reasonably
quick and obvious, and they seem to translate fairly well to climbing despite
the obvious lack of specificity to climbing. Todd credited these finger rolls
for some of his most significant gains in finger strength since he first picked
up on this exercise from a couple of Soviet climbers he met on the World
Cup circuit in 1987.
The Soviet climbers claimed that heavy finger rolls produce measurable
gains in forearm circumference (a sign of muscle hypertrophy), whereas
strength gains from fingerboard or campus training are primarily the result
of neurological adaptations. This statement seems reasonable, because the
heavy finger rolls cause repeated, high-intensity eccentric and concentric
contractions of the forearm muscles. Therefore, pairing up heavy finger
rolls with a reactive training exercise may produce the synergistic gains that
have been shown to result from such complex training (see page 92).
Performing these heavy finger rolls is quite simple and requires twenty to
thirty minutes. You will need access to a set of free weights and a bench-

press bar with ball-bearing sleeves—maybe the only good reason for a
climber to join a health club. A squat rack is also essential as your “spotter.”
The body position for this exercise is critical to reduce strain on the lower
back, elbows, and wrists. Stand with good posture and hold the bar (palms
away) in front of your thighs. Focus on keeping a slight bend at your knees,
elbows, and hips. The motion of the finger curl is only the few inches from
the open-hand position to the closed-hand position. Ideally you want to
lower the bar as far as possible without it falling from your hand—perform
the exercise over a squat rack so that it will catch the weight should it slip
from your fingers.
As far as weight is concerned, it must be heavy! Maximum-strength
training demands the use of an appropriately heavy weight that only allows
you three to ten very intense repetitions. While finger rolls with a “light”
weight (such as thirty- or forty-pound dumbbells) may pump you up, they
are ineffective for developing maximum finger strength. After a warm-up
set with the bar weighted to about 50 percent of your body weight, the goal
is three to six heavy sets with a rest of at least three minutes between sets. A
weight about equal to your body weight is a good first guess for a working
weight. Add more weight if you can do more than six reps; remove it if you
can’t do at least three repetitions per set. With practice, you should be able
to build to 150 percent of body weight.

Performing heavy finger rolls with squat rack as “spotter.”

A few other suggestions: Never train the heavy finger rolls more than
twice a week and, in accordance with the Principle of Variation, cycle on
and off this exercise every few weeks. Also, tape the base of your fingers
and consider placing a few turns of 1.5-inch tape around your wrist when
your working weight is greater than your body weight. Focus on keeping
your wrists nearly straight throughout—you are not doing wrist curls!
Finally, take a week or two off at the first sign of any pain in your finger
tendons or wrists.

HYPERGRAVITY ISOLATION TRAINING
Hypergravity Isolation Training is unquestionably the best method of
developing climbing-specific grip strength. Use the HIT workout as part of
a training cycle or an off-season program during which time you can
dedicate yourself to performing the exact protocol described below. Given
its stressful nature, it’s best to cycle on and off HIT every couple of weeks.
For instance, as part of an off-season (winter) program, you might do four
HIT workouts over the course of two weeks of maximum-strength training,
and then spend two weeks training anaerobic endurance by climbing for
volume (bouldering intervals or laps on routes). Another popular schedule
is to incorporate HIT into the three-week maximum-strength phase of the 43-2-1 Cycle described in chapter 8.
Always perform a thirty-minute warm-up comprised of gentle stretching
and bouldering of increasing difficulty. The HIT workout trains six basic
grip positions, beginning with your weakest grip position and concluding
with your strongest. For most people the training order will be: pinch grip,
two-finger third team (pinkie and ring finger), two-finger second team
(index and middle finger), two-finger first team (middle and ring finger),
full crimp, and half crimp. Here’s how you do it.
1. Sit on the floor below the first HIT Strip, and then grab onto the
lowest pair of pinch holds. Pull up and grab the next higher lefthand pinch hold. Adjust your feet as needed and then upgrade your
right hand to the next higher pinch hold. Continue up the pinch

holds until both hands are grasping the top pair of pinches (four total
hand moves).
2. Immediately begin reversing the sequence by alternating left and
right pinch holds to descend the wall. Again, your feet can use any
holds and your body can turn naturally to provide optimal body
position and tension for each hand move.
3. Upon reaching the starting pinch holds, immediately start back up
the wall using only alternating pinch handholds. Continue up and
down the wall until your pinch grip fails.
4. Upon stepping off the wall, use a stopwatch to time a rest of exactly
three minutes before beginning the next set. Meanwhile, record the
total number of hand movements (or reps) into your training
notebook.
5. If you were able to do twenty or more hand moves, then you must
add weight when training the pinch grip in the future. Add five
pounds if you just barely succeeded at climbing twenty hand
movements; and ten pounds if the twenty movements felt easy. Note
that doing more than twenty reps (ten movements per hand) will
train anaerobic endurance, while adding weight to produce failure in
ten or fewer reps per hand trains maximum grip strength, which is of
course the goal here.
6. After your three-minute rest, proceed immediately with your next
set on the HIT Strips. Advanced climbers with experience at HIT
should perform a second set of the pinch grip, while those new to
HIT should move onto the next grip position.
7. Continue alternating training burns with rests of exactly three
minutes, until you have worked through all the grip positions.
Always record the number of hand movements performed as well as
the amount of weight added for each grip position. This information
will be helpful in doing future HIT workouts and it will quantify—
finally—that your finger strength is indeed increasing!
8. Safety note: Tape your middle and ring fingers using the X method
shown on page 228. This is imperative when training with twenty or
more pounds added to your body. End your HIT workout early if
you experience any pain in the joints or tendons of your fingers or
arms.

This completes your HIT workout, though you may wish to do a few sets
of hypergravity pull-ups or some lock-off exercises to complete strength
training of your upper body. As a cool-down, do ten minutes of light
bouldering. Take two or three rest days before engaging in another workout
or going climbing—although you can do antagonist or aerobic training on
these rest days.

The History of Hypergravity Isolation
Training
In the mid-1990s I set out to develop the most targeted training method
for developing maximum finger strength. Much experimentation with
equipment designs and training protocols led to what I call
Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT). While similar to the System
Wall Training described later in this chapter, HIT is more highly
refined and better targets the forearm muscles. By removing the
training of arm positions (as in System Training) and through the
progressive addition of weight, HIT is the ultimate maximum gripstrength-training method for climbers. Since I first promoted this
exciting training method in my book How to Climb 5.12 in 1997, HIT
has been adopted by thousands of climbers around the world as their
top choice for training finger strength. (Note: This HIT workout is not
to be confused with the popular bodybuilders’ “HIT program.”)
In the adjacent photo you see me training on third-generation HIT
Strips (available from Nicros, Inc.), a unique platform I develop for
optimal HIT workouts. Each HIT Strip possesses identical crimp edges
and two-finger pockets that are ideal for laddering up and down until
failure. Weight added around the waist is increased or decreased to
produce grip failure in twenty or fewer total hand movements (ten or
fewer per hand). Feet simply step on resident holds on the wall, and
the body should twist and move just as it would in climbing a steep
route. This is obviously an extremely specific exercise that targets—
and indeed hammers!—all the major grip positions used in climbing.
For intermediate and advanced climbers, there is simply no better way
to train grip strength.

The author (plus twenty pounds) on a HIT wall.

The effectiveness of HIT is a result of its fulfillment of the four
fundamental requisites for training maximum grip strength explained
on page 137. While the other finger-training exercises meet one, two,
or three of these requirements, only HIT meets all four. Visit the
Nicros.com Training Center for more information on the HIT Strip
System and how to build a HIT wall.

Table 7.4 Sample HIT Workouts

HIT Workout Tips
1. Always engage in an extended period of warm-up activities
and bouldering before beginning a HIT workout.
2. Limit your total hand moves per set to twenty or fewer (ten
or fewer per hand) by adding weight around your waist.
Purchase one or more ten-pound weight belts or, alternatively,
place several scuba divers’ weights into a fanny pack. Do not
use a weighted backpack—this weight would be cumbersome
and unnatural due to its displacement from your center of
gravity.
3. Climb briskly and without hesitation—do not stop or pause
midset to rest or chalk up. Consider using a spotter so that you
can climb confidently up to the point of failure.

4. Try to climb through the reps with normal foot movements
and body turns. Smaller footholds (about an inch deep) are
better, yet giving too much thought to footwork will slow you
down—the goal is to train your fingers, not footwork and
technique.
5. Limit rests between sets to exactly three minutes. Use a
stopwatch and stick to the planned order and schedule of
exercises. Only this way will you be able to quantify and track
your gains in finger strength! If you’re sloppy about the length
of rests, the numbers become meaningless.
6. Keep a training book in which you log the weight added and
reps performed for each set. Then you’ll always know what
weight you need for a given set and can easily track your gains
(weight and rep increases) from workout to workout.
7. Always do your HIT workout in the same order, and never
perform more than two sets per grip position! Performing a
third set will provide few added stimuli, but it will dig a deeper
hole for you to recover from (requiring more rest days) and add
to your risk of injury.
8. Tape your fingers (X method) to help protect your tendons
and increase skin comfort.
9. Sand down the HIT Strips slightly if the texture causes pain
that prevents you from completing each set to muscular failure.
10. Increase rest days if you find your HIT reps and weights
decreasing. If you ever feel weak on the rock after a HIT
workout, it’s due to insufficient rest—it can take up to three or
four days to recover from a HIT workout. Expect initial
workouts to require a longer recovery period, whereas your
future adaptations will speed recovery to just two or three days.
11. Cycle on and off HIT every two weeks, or employ HIT
workouts during the three-week maximum-strength phase of
the 4-3-2-1 or 3-2-1 Training Cycles (see chapter 8).

Contact Strength Exercises

Contact strength is your ability to quickly grab a hold and stick it. This
capacity is directly related to the speed at which you can recruit the
forearm’s muscular motor units and summon peak strength. While the
maximum-strength-training exercises described earlier will yield some
improvement in contact strength, reactive training exercises that emphasize
speed and shock loading is the optimal method for increasing contact
strength. Since fast, dynamic movements are fundamental to effective
reactive training, the resistance used (training load) must be significantly
less than in the maximum-strength training exercises. For many climbers,
the resistance will need to be less than body weight to allow for the rapid
movement and turnover (change in direction) that’s essential for effective
reactive training.
As explained in chapter 5, reactive training is appropriate for only
intermediate and advanced climbers with no recent history of finger, elbow,
or shoulder injury. Begin with the tamer feet-on exercises (less than body
weight) and progress gradually to the feet-off exercises over the course of
months or years. A few sets of reactive training will impart all the stimuli
that are necessary for favorable adaptations—resist the urge to perform
additional sets. Remind yourself that such neural training does not produce
extreme fatigue, so if you train to the point of high fatigue, you are doing
far too much and tempting injury.
Following are five reactive training exercises listed in order from least
stressful (lowest force load and injury risk) to most severe (highest force
and injury risk). Controlled One-Arm Traversing and One-Arm Lunging are
ideal icebreaker exercises for climbers wishing to add some reactive
training to their routines. Both exercises are to be executed on a vertical to
slightly overhanging (harder) modular wall, so that each one-arm
movement results in a dynamic catch that “shocks” the forearm muscles.
Contact strength gains achieved through this form of feet-on “reactive

light” training are limited, however—beyond a certain point you will need
to graduate to feet-off campus training to stimulate further gains.

ONE-ARM TRAVERSING
One-Arm Traversing is a simple exercise with two big payoffs: increased
grip strength and speed of contraction (contact strength). Use this exercise
twice per week as a complement to maximum-strength-training exercises
such as hypergravity bouldering, heavy finger rolls, and such.
Select a vertical section of an indoor wall with enough room to traverse
ten to twenty feet on medium-size handholds and small- to medium-size
footholds. Climb up onto the wall so that your feet are just a foot or two off
the floor. Now remove one hand from the wall and hold it behind your
back. Begin traversing with small, quick lunges from one handhold to the
next. Optimal technique is to draw in your body toward the wall and lunge
to the next handhold, doing so all in one smooth motion. This drawing-in of
the body facilitates a quick grab at the next hold while upward momentum
briefly reduces your load—this is commonly called a deadpoint move.
Advance your feet onto new footholds as needed to keep your center of
gravity over your feet and maintain balance. Continue traversing in this way
for eight to twelve total hand moves, and then step off the wall. After a brief
rest, step back up on to the wall and traverse the opposite direct using the
other hand. Perform two or three One-Arm Traverses with each hand.
As a final note, it’s important to perform only small, controlled lunges
that allow you to catch the next hold with a slight bend in your elbow.
Shoulder and elbow injuries could result from consistently catching lunges
with a fully extended arm. Stop using this exercise if you feel pain in your
fingers, elbows, or shoulders.

ONE-ARM LUNGING

Once you are proficient at One-Arm Traversing on vertical walls, you can
proceed to one-arm up-and-down lunges on a slightly overhanging wall.
This exercise is also done feet-on, although the up-and-down motion creates
greater dynamic force, especially on the downward catch. This extra stress
will trigger further neuromuscular adaptations, and it’s a good icebreaker
before graduating to campus training.
Select a section of indoor wall that overhangs anywhere from five to
twenty-five degrees past vertical—the steeper the wall, the more difficult
the exercise—and possesses numerous medium- to large-size hand- and
footholds. Ideally you can set a few modular holds specifically for
performing this exercise. Set two footholds about a foot off the ground, and
then set two nontweaky medium- to large-size handholds, one in front of
your face and the other about 2 feet above that.
Climb onto the wall and balance your weight evenly on the two footholds
(on a steeper wall it’s best to simply stand on the floor, as shown in the
photos). Grip the higher of the two handholds with one hand, then let go
with the other hand and hold it behind your back. Now drop down, catch
the lower handhold, and immediately lunge back up to the higher starting
handhold. Continue lunging up and down for eight to twelve total hand
movements, then step down off the wall.
After a brief rest, step back up on the wall and perform a set of One-Arm
Lunges with the other hand. Perform two or three total sets with each hand.
One cautionary note: This exercise dynamically loads all components of the
fingers and arms. Proceed with caution, and cease using this exercise if you
experience any joint or tendon pain.
One-Arm Lunging

1. Grip the higher handhold.

2. Drop down to the lower.

3. Lunge back to the higher.

CAMPUS LADDERING

As the name implies, this exercise involves climbing in a hand-over-hand,
ladderlike motion up the campus board with no aid from the feet. Unlike
Double Dynos (described later), this laddering exercise uses controlled
dynamic movements that are less likely to result in injury. Consequently,
this is a better staple exercise for regular use, and it is the perfect icebreaker
exercise for climbers new to campus training.
Hang with nearly straight arms from the bottom rung of the campus
board. Your hands should be about shoulder width or slightly less apart.
Striving for brisk, fluid motion, climb hand-over-hand up the campus board
using alternating rungs for your left and right hands. Your goal is to ascend
the board as fast as possible. Match hands on the top rung, and then descend
carefully by dropping hand-underhand down alternating rungs to the bottom
position.

Overview of Campus Board Training
Campus board training is an invaluable exercise for advanced climbers
specializing in bouldering or sport climbing. No matter how naturally
strong you are or how hard or often you climb, I speculate that you can
quickly add another 10 percent (or more) to your contact strength and
power with just a few weeks of campus training. Unfortunately, the
dynamic nature of campus training exposes the tendons and joints to
potentially dangerous force loads—your fingers, elbows, and shoulders
are all at risk. Engage in too much campus training, or experiment with
this technique before you are ready, and you will get injured. Here are
some important guidelines that will help reduce your risk.
• Engage in campus training only if you are an advanced
intermediate to elite climber (leading 5.11 or bouldering V5)
with at least three years of climbing experience and no recent
history of finger or arm injury. The most stressful Double
Dynos exercise must be reserved for only highly conditioned,
elite climbers (leading solid 5.12 or bouldering V8).
• Warm up thoroughly. Spend at least an hour performing various
warm-up activities and bouldering on increasingly more
difficult problems before beginning your campus training.

• Reinforce your finger tendons with a few tight turns of athletic
tape. See page 228 for instructions.
• Emphasize speed over volume. Three high-speed, explosive sets
are far more beneficial than six sloppy, poorly executed sets
with frequent pauses between hand moves.
• Do not campus train while in a state of high fatigue or if you
have any doubts about the health of your fingers, arms, or
shoulders.
• Immediately terminate your campus training at the first
sensation of pain in your joint or tendons.
• Rest a minimum of two days after a campus training workout.
Limit yourself to two modest-length sessions per week, and
cycle two weeks on and two weeks off.
You will need to build a campus board separate from your home
climbing wall, or talk the owner of your local gym into building a
campus board if there isn’t one already. At home you’ll likely be able
to only build a modest-size board if you have standard-height ceilings.
Since the bottom of the board needs to be around 4 feet off the floor,
you’ll be limited in the number of rungs you can mount. The plywood
board onto which you mount the rungs should be angled at precisely
fifteen degrees past vertical. Make or purchase rungs that range in
depth from 0.75 inch to 1.5 inches. Mount small rungs about 6 to 8
inches apart; the largest rungs are best spaced about 8 to 12 inches
apart. I’d advise you purchase campus rungs from one of the indoor
training companies—these rungs are quite affordable, and some
companies provide detailed construction plans.
The three primary campus training exercises are Laddering, LockOffs, and Double Dynos. Gradually introduce yourself to this new
training method over the course of a few months. Begin with laddering
during the initial sessions and progress to Lock-Offs and Double
Dynos as your strength and confidence allow.
Perform a total of six to twelve hand moves, never more. To increase
difficulty, skip rungs as you hand-over-hand up the board or, if available,
use smaller-size rungs. (Laddering on small rungs tends to train contact
strength more than upper-body power, whereas longer reaches on larger

rungs better isolates one-arm power and lock-off strength.) Rest for three to
five minutes before you engage in a second set. Limit yourself to a total of
three sets during your initial campus workouts. As you gain conditioning,
you can do up to six sets or begin a gradual shift to training with the Double
Dynos.

CAMPUS LOCK-OFFS
Campus Lock-Offs, also known as Campus Touches, train contact strength
and the one-arm lock-off ability that’s often called on for making a long
reach on steep climbing terrain.
Begin by hanging with both hands from the bot tom (or second to
bottom) rung of the board. Pull up forcefully with both hands, and then in a
fast, continuous motion lunge up with one hand to grab the highest rung
possible (usually the third, fourth, or fifth rung, depending on the spacing).
Engage the high rung for an instant, and then drop back down to the starting
hold and lower to the starting (hanging) position. Immediately, pull back up
and lunge with the opposite hand to grab a high rung. Again, engage the
high rung for a moment, before dropping down to the starting hold and
lowering to the starting position. Continue in this alternating fashion for up
to twelve total touches (six per hand).
Campus Lock-Offs

1. Hang from a lower rung.

2. Lunge up to grab a high rung.

3. Drop back to the lower rung.

4. Lunge up with your other hand.
Rest for three to five minutes before you perform another set. Do two to
four sets. You can make this exercise much harder by touching, but not
grabbing onto, the high hold at the top of each lunge. The goal is to hold the

one-arm lock-off position for one second before dropping back down to the
bottom position. Hard!

CAMPUS DOUBLE DYNOS
This dynamic up-and-down, fully airborne exercise is most recognized as
true campus training, and it’s the most effective at producing neural
disinhibition and building maximum contact strength and pulling power.
This is also the most stressful and potentially injurious exercise that
climbers engage in, since the dynamic double-handed drops generate a
force several times your body weight. Are your fingers and tendons ready
for this level of stress? It’s my belief that the answer is no for over 95
percent of climbers. If you think you are ready for this exercise—are you an
elite climber with no recent finger, elbow, or shoulder injuries?—then
introduce it gradually and cautiously.
Begin by hanging from the third or fourth rung on the campus board. (It’s
good to number your rungs beginning with the bottom rung as “number
one.”) Simultaneously let go with both hands and drop to catch the second
rung. Immediately explode upward with both hands to catch the third or
fourth (harder) rung. This is one full repetition, but don’t stop! Without
hesitation, drop down to and again catch the second rung. Explode back up
to the third or fourth rung. Continue this double-handed, drop-down-andexplode-up sequence for up to six repetitions (up-down couplets). Stop
prematurely instead of risking a failed downward catch—and have a
bouldering crash pad in place just in case.
Campus Double Dynos

1. Hang from the third or fourth rung.

2. Drop down two-handed to the second rung.

3. Immediately explode upward.

4. Catch starting rung and repeat.
Rest for three to five minutes before you engage in a second set. Perform
a total of just two or three sets during your formative workouts; however,
you can build up to six or eight sets as you gain conditioning and

confidence. Limit yourself to just one or two sessions per week, and cycle
on and off campus training every two weeks.
A few important training tips: Execute Double Dynos only on rungs that
are 0.75 inch or more in depth. In terms of training stimulus, speed of
repetitions is more important than the number of reps, distance traveled, or
size of rungs. Specifically, strive to turn around the catch on the lower rung
and lunge upward in about a quarter of one second (hard, but ideal). And, as
stated earlier, it’s wise to firmly tape the base of your fingers (use A2 ring
method in this case, depicted on page 228). Finally, terminate your campus
training at the first sign of pain in your fingers, arms, or shoulders.

Forearm Endurance Exercises

Endurance local to the forearm muscles, physiologically known as
anaerobic endurance, is what enables you to hang on and pull through many
hard moves in a row. Your ability to persevere through a long sequence of
strenuous moves, despite a growing forearm pump, is a function of several
attributes including your limit strength, your body’s ability to remove blood
lactate, and the mind and body’s tolerance to the fatiguing effects of lactic
acid. Central to the removal of lactic acid is the density of the capillary
network that innervates the forearm muscles—the more capillaries are
present and the larger their diameter, the faster lactic acid can be cleared
from the muscle.

Traversing is a popular method for training forearm endurance. Here
Front Range icon Christian Griffith gets a pump on at Morrison,
Colorado, circa 1998. ERIC J. HÖRST
Simply climbing a few days per week is moderately effective for building
local endurance. A few of the more popular strategies are climbing laps on
routes, interval training on boulder problems, and performing long

traverses. As long as your climbing activities produce a muscular burn and
pump, you can rest assured that your body will adapt favorably to your
endurance training. Following is a full breakdown of the exercises you can
use to increase your forearm endurance.

TRAVERSE TRAINING
Traverse training is an effective endurance-building strategy that dates back
to John Gill’s training in the 1950s. Select a section of cliff base or indoor
wall that will allow you to traverse for at least two to four minutes without
reaching muscular failure or falling off because of technical difficulties. The
ideal traverse will be hard enough to elicit a forearm pump, but not so
severe that you pump out and fall off—you actually want to end your
traverse before your muscles give out. Upon stepping off the wall, take a
rest of about equal length to the time you spent traversing. Do three to five
total traverses.

STRAIGHT-ARM FINGERBOARD HANGS
Though it’s a very basic exercise, novice climbers can find it quite
challenging to attempt to hang from a fingerboard or pull-up bar for a
minute or two. An untrained forearm muscle will typically begin to burn
from lactic acid accumulation after the first minute, making the second
minute an exercise in stretching both the physical and mental boundaries.
While you would rarely have to hang out on a single hold this long on a
route, this exercise does seem to benefit beginner climbers by increasing
forearm endurance and through the developed sense of just how long the
forearm will perform while in the burning mode. Persistent hanging in a
single position can cause injury in a small number of individuals with loose
shoulders as well as in those who are significantly overweight. Cease doing
these straight-arm hangs at the first sign of any shoulder pain.

There are two possible training strategies. Many people simply time how
long they can hang until muscular failure, then rest for five minutes and
repeat for a total of five sets. A better approach would be to employ an
interval-training strategy in which you end each interval before reaching
muscular failure while decreasing the rest interval. In effect, this will
increase the total amount of time you will be hanging and likely produce a
better training effect. A true novice would want to do brief intervals—say,
hang for twenty seconds then rest for forty seconds, and repeat ten to
twenty times. As endurance improves, graduate to using the Tabata Protocol
(see page 94) in which you hang for 20 seconds and then rest for just 10
seconds. Repeat this hang-rest interval for a total of six to eight sets before
taking an extended rest of two to five minutes. You can then repeat the
Tabata with two to five other gripping positions—a heck of a forearm
endurance workout!
One important safety tip for Straight-Arm Hangs: Maintain tension in
your shoulders by consciously contracting the muscles surrounding the joint
—this will help protect the shoulder from injury.

FINGERBOARD MOVING HANGS
This exercise allows you to work the board continuously for several
minutes, much like climbing a long sustained sequence on the rock. Doing
this requires somewhere to place your feet while your hands circulate
around the board using the grip-relax repeating sequence (GRRS). The best
way to do this is to mount your fingerboard so that it’s set a foot or two out
from a wall onto which you have mounted a few small footholds. Another
possibility is to hang the board above a doorway, then position a chair or
stool a couple of feet behind the board. Either way, you will be able to use
your toes for support as you circulate your hands around the fingerboard.
Perform a twenty- to thirty-minute warm-up comprising some aerobic
activity, stretching, and some pull-ups and easy hangs on the fingerboard.
You should break a light sweat and feel a slight pump in your arms.

Fingerboard moving hang with feet on wall.
Mount the board and then place your feet on footholds or on the edge of a
chair. Begin moving your hands around the fingerboard, changing hand
positions every three to five seconds. After a minute or two, you will begin
to develop a pump in your forearms. Move both hands on to the largest
handholds on the board, and shake out each arm for about thirty seconds in

an attempt to recovery a little. After this brief shakeout, continue moving
your hands around the board for another minute or two. Once again, move
to the large holds if you need to shake out and rest your muscles a little.
Continue in this fashion with the goal of staying on the board for a total of
five to ten minutes. Dismount the board, and take a rest of about ten
minutes before proceeding with a second and third set.

BOULDERING AND ROUTE CLIMBING
INTERVALS
This is one of the most effective exercises for building forearm endurance,
and it should be a staple of every serious climber’s workout program. As
the name implies, climbing intervals involves repeating laps on a
moderately difficult boulder problem or climb. The training protocol is to
alternate climbing burns with rest intervals, much like the interval training
performed by runners. The rest phase should be roughly proportionate to
the length of the climbing phase. Therefore, if your climbing phase involves
sending a ten-move boulder problem (which might take about thirty
seconds), you’d want to take a rest of only thirty seconds to, at most, one
minute between burns. A longer climbing phase, such as lapping a steep
sport climb or moving around your home wall for four minutes, should be
followed by a similarly long rest. The climbing-to-rest ratio should be
between 1:1 and 1:2.
Select a boulder problem or route that will be strenuous, yet at a level of
difficulty that you will be able to successfully ascend several times. It’s also
important that the route is void of tweaky holds or severe moves that might
be injurious when climbed repeatedly and in an increasing state of fatigue.
Climb the route, and then begin a rest period that’s about equal to the
length of time you were climbing. Resting any more than double the length
of the climbing phase will diminish the training effect. Use a stopwatch so
you stay within these guidelines.
After the rest period, begin your next interval. Climb the boulder problem
or route and then take the prescribed rest break. Continue with these
climbing intervals until you can no longer complete the boulder problem or

climb. If you can successfully perform more than five intervals, then select
a slightly more strenuous climb for your next workout.
A most important training aid is a climbing partner to join you in this
workout—your partner will climb during your rest breaks, and vice versa.
The camaraderie and encouragement will help you hang on through the
increasing pump and pain of interval training.

HIT OR SYSTEM WALL INTERVAL TRAINING
The HIT Strip platform or a specialized System Wall can also be used to
train anaerobic endurance via an interval-training strategy. This requires an
approach that’s completely different from the HIT maximum-strength
workout described earlier. The goal now is to climb thirty to sixty total hand
moves with only brief rest periods and no weight added to your body. For
most climbers, it will be impossible to climb enough hand movements using
the weaker pinch and two-finger pocket third team on the HIT system.
Therefore, I suggest you train two different general finger positions: the
two-finger pocket (in which you cycle through all three two-finger teams)
and crimp (in which you alternate full- and half-crimp as you climb).
Perform a comprehensive warm-up of moderate climbing and stretching
before engaging in this form of isolation training. Moreover, it’s important
to tape your middle and rings fingers (use the X method shown on page
228) so that you won’t have to stop prematurely due to skin pain.
Train two-finger pocket endurance first. Sit on the floor below the first
HIT Strip or pair of System Holds, and then grab onto the lowest pair of
pocket holds using the two-finger third team. Begin laddering upward by
grabbing alternating strips with the left and right hand. Upon reaching the
top strip, immediately reverse the sequence back down the wall. Climb with
open feet (use any footholds you like) and allow your body to naturally
twist and turn to provide optimal position. Use the two-finger pocket third
team for as many hand moves as possible, then switch to the second team
and finally the first team. Continue laddering up and down for thirty to sixty
total hand moves.

Rest for two or three minutes, and then commence with a high-rep set
using just the full- and half-crimp grips. Again, strive for a total of thirty to
sixty repetitions. Upon completing the two sets, take a five-minute rest.
Consider repeating the above sequence one or two more times. This should
result in a deep pump and lactic acid burn—a highly specific and effective
local endurance workout!

THE TABATA PROTOCOL
As introduced in chapter 5, the Tabata Protocol is not an exercise per se, but
instead a highly specific method of interval training that can be applied to a
wide variety of exercises and activities. Research has shown this protocol to
be uncommonly effective in training both the anaerobic and aerobic
pathways, despite what is a small time investment in training (Tabata 1997).
In the context of training forearm endurance, the Tabata couples twenty
seconds of maximum-intensity climbing with a ten-second rest interval.
This climb-rest couplet is repeated up to eight times before any addition rest
is taken. The result is four minutes of forearm-pumping, finger-cramping
exercise!
Following is one application of the Tabata Protocol for training anaerobic
endurance of the forearm muscles on the HIT System. You can also apply
this same training strategy to other climbing exercises such as Heavy Finger
Rolls, Straight-Arm Fingerboard Hangs, and Lat Pull-Downs.
Sit on the floor below the first HIT Strip, and then grab onto the lowest
HIT Strip using either the two-finger pocket or crimp-grip holds. Begin the
first twenty-second work interval by briskly laddering up and down using
alternating HIT Strips. Most climbers achieve about fifteen hand moves
(1.5 laps on the strips) in twenty seconds, but you’ll need to determine
exactly how many hand moves you can do in twenty seconds. Rest for
exactly ten seconds, and then resume climbing up and down the HIT Strips
for another twenty seconds. Climb with open feet (use any footholds you
like) and allow your body to naturally twist and turn to provide optimal
position. Rest again for exactly ten seconds, and then begin your third
twenty-second climbing interval. Continue for six to eight total intervals,

which will take three or four minutes, respectively. Rest for five minutes
before you ponder a second HIT System Tabata!
Remember, the efficacy of the Tabata Protocol depends on precise work
and rest intervals and maximum exertion. Stick to the schedule exactly—the
ten-second rest is barely enough to quickly rechalk your hands and
reposition below the first HIT Strip. Similarly, the climbing intervals should
be intense and exactly twenty seconds in length. If you aren’t exhausted and
gasping for breath by the seventh and eighth intervals, then you need to add
a ten- or twenty-pound weight belt to simulate hypergravity for future
sessions. Finally, vary the grip position you use every set to help you
persevere through the Tabata, and consider taping your fingers to limit skin
wear and pain. Do no more than two Tabata sequences per workout, and
limit use of Tabata to just two days per week.
Enlist a partner to time (use a stopwatch) exact work-rest intervals of
twenty and ten seconds, respectively. Have your partner call out the “start”
and “stop” points for each interval over the four-minute Tabata. Upon
completing your four minutes of training, switch roles and direct your
partner through the arduous four minutes—it’s payback time!

Pull-Muscle Training
In this section you will learn how to train for maximum strength, power,
and anaerobic endurance in the large pulling muscles that help propel you
upward and enable static lock-off positions. While the standard pull-up has
long been a staple exercise for climbers, its effectiveness is greatly limited
for anyone beyond novice ability. Upon reaching a modest level of pull-up
strength—can you do fifteen to twenty pull-ups?—it becomes more
important to train lock-off ability, one-arm strength, and raw power.
Following are details on sixteen exercises for training the large pulling
muscles of the upper arms, shoulders, and back.

Maximum-Strength Exercises

As in building maximum finger strength, training to increase pulling and
lock-off strength requires high-intensity stimulus that will produce rapid
muscular failure. This is a vastly different workout strategy from that
described for building anaerobic endurance (in which you want to avoid
muscular failure). Revisit the training methodology described in chapter 5 if
you need clarification of the ideal protocols for training maximum strength,
power, and endurance. Described below are six exercises for training
maximum strength.

Table 7.5 Classification of Pull-Muscle Exercises

PULL-UPS AND LAT PULL-DOWNS
As mentioned above, pull-ups are the most obvious exercise for climbers,
and they are highly effective for beginner-level climbers. If you are unable
to do a single set of fifteen pull-ups, then you should make pull-ups a staple
exercise that you engage in three days per week. Perform your pull-ups on a
bar, the bucket hold of a fingerboard, or a set of free-hanging Pump Rocks.
Use the Aided Pull-Up method described below if you are unable to do at
least eight pull-ups.
Mount the bar or board with your hands in a palms-away position (the
way you usually grip the rock) and about shoulder width apart. Pull up at a
relatively fast rate in order to reach the top position in one second or less.
Pause at the top position for just a moment, and then lower yourself to a
two-second count. Subvocalize one thousand one, one thousand two. Upon
reaching the bottom position, immediately begin your next pull-up.
Continue in this fashion until you can no longer perform a complete pullup.
Do three to five sets with a rest interval of at least three minutes between
sets. As your pull-up strength improves, begin to vary the distance between
your hands to better simulate the wide range of hand positions you’ll
encounter in climbing. Switch to Hypergravity Pull-Ups (described below)
when you are able to do three sets of fifteen or more pull-ups.

AIDED PULL-UPS
Use the Aided Pull-Up if you can not do at least three sets of eight pull-ups.
The strategy is simply to have a spotter hold you around your waist and lift
a portion of your body weight so that you can do eight to twelve less-thanbody-weight pull-ups. Use this exercise three days per week, and soon
you’ll be doing pull-ups on your own!
Mount the bar or hangboard with your hands in a palms-away position
and about shoulder width apart. With the spotter standing behind you and
holding lightly around your waist, begin doing pull-ups with the spotter

providing help only on the upward phase. Pause for a moment at the top
position, and then lower yourself to a slow two-second count. The spotter
should let go during the down phase so that you are lowering your full body
weight. Continue doing pull-ups in this manner until you reach eight to
twelve total repetitions. Rest for five minutes and then perform two more
sets.
Eventually you’ll find that doing the same pull-up training becomes
monotonous and provides little additional gain in climbing strength. At this
point it’s best to employ one of the following variations on the pull-up, or
even to cut back on pull-ups, replacing them with other pull-muscle
exercises on the pages that follow.

HYPERGRAVITY PULL-UPS
As your pull-up ability improves, you will need to add resistance to
continue training maximum strength. Remember, pull-ups in sets of more
than about ten reps will train muscular endurance more than strength.
Fortunately you can employ the hypergravity training technique described
earlier to train for higher levels of pull-ups strength. Weighted pull-ups are
a simple yet highly effective way to notch up your training and strength
gains! Wearing a ten-pound weight belt (or more) while doing your pull-up
training will trigger the neuromuscular system to adapt to your higher
apparent body weight. Upon returning to the rock to climb at body weight,
you will feel noticeably lighter and climb stronger given this newfound
überstrength. Here’s how to do it.
Attach a ten-pound weight belt around your waist. Extremely fit
individuals may need to use a twenty-pound belt or a heavy weight vest.
Grip a pull-up bar in the palms-away position or use the largest holds on a
fingerboard. Your hands should be about shoulder width apart. Pull up at a
relatively fast rate in order to reach the top position in one second or less.
Pause at the top position for just a moment, and then lower to a two-second
count. Subvocalize one one thousand, two one thousand. Upon reaching the
bottom position immediately begin your next pull-up. Continue in this
fashion until you can no longer perform a complete pull-up.

Hypergravity pull-up with a sixty-pound vest.
Perform two to four sets with a rest interval of at least three minutes
between sets. Increase the weight added by ten pounds when you are able to

do three sets of twelve repetitions. One important safety note: Do not hang
in the straight-arm position to rest between repetitions—this is extremely
stressful on the shoulders. Stop using weighted pull-ups if you sense any
unusual pain in your shoulders or elbow.

UNEVEN-GRIP PULL-UPS
This is an excellent exercise for developing one-arm strength and lock-off
ability. Train with Uneven Grip Pull-Ups long enough and you’ll eventually
develop the rare ability to do a One-Arm Pull-Up. This exercise requires a
setup that offsets one hand 12 to 24 inches lower than the other. You can
loop a sling over a pull-up bar or extend one of a pair of free-floating Pump
Rocks.
Begin with your hands offset vertically by about 18 inches. Pull up with a
focus on pulling hardest with the high hand. As you ascend to the height of
your lower hand, begin pushing downward (think mantle) with it to
continue in aiding further upward motion. Continue to pull up with your
high hand until it is drawn in tight against the front of your shoulder. Lower
to a two-second count in returning to the start position, then immediately
begin the next repetition. Continue in this manner until you can no longer
pull up the whole way with your high hand. Rest for a minute or two, and
then switch hands to train the opposite side. Perform two or three sets on
each side with the goal of five to ten repetitions per set. Increase the vertical
distance between hands if you can do more than ten reps; decrease the
distance if you cannot do at least five repetitions.
Uneven Grip Pull-Up

1. Pull mostly with your higher hand.

2. Lock off on higher hand, lower, repeat.

STEEP-WALL LOCK-OFF

This exercise is highly functional in that the strength gains will transfer
completely to the rock. Although you will perform this exercise on an
overhanging bouldering wall, the goal is not to actually climb a problem.
Instead, you will be performing repeated One-Arm Lock-Offs while using
the same hand- and footholds. This is very similar to the lock-off exercise
described above in the campus training section, although it’s less dynamic
and allows for use of your feet on the wall. This way, you can turn and
tense your body as needed to facilitate a solid, efficient lock-off position.
Such extreme specificity is what makes for the high level of transfer to the
rock.
Execute this exercise on an overhanging wall that’s between thirty and
fifty degrees past vertical. Begin in a sit-down position below the wall so
that you can grip onto two similar starting holds. A deep, positive hold or
an incut HIT Strip or System Hold is best, since the goal of this exercise is
to train lock-off endurance, not your grip. Place your feet on any two holds
on the kickboard at the base of the wall and lift your rear end off the floor.
This is your starting position.
Steep-Wall Lock-Off

1. Reach upward while locking off one arm.

2. Hold, then drop back down.
Now pull up on the handholds and lock off one arm, so that you can
reach up with the other hand to touch—not grab onto—a hold at full arm
reach. Allow your body to twist and tense as needed to make the lock-off
solid. Hold this lock-off position for two seconds, before dropping back to
the starting position. Immediately pull back up and lock off on the same

arm. Hold this lock-off for two seconds, then return to the starting position.
Continue this lock-off-and-reach motion with the same arm locking off for
a total of six to twelve repetitions. Use large hand- and foot-holds if you
cannot do at least six lock-offs, whereas you will need to add weight (tenpound weight belt) if you can do more than twelve lock-offs.
Rest for a minute or two, then perform a set with the other arm locking
off. After training each arm you’ll want to take a five-minute rest before
performing a second set with each arm.

ONE-ARM LOCK-OFFS
The ability to hold a steady one-arm lock-off is vital for hard bouldering
and roped climbing. This exercise is obviously very specific to this need—
but it does demand a high level of base strength for proper execution. If you
cannot hold a solid one-arm lock-off, it would be best to train with
Hypergravity Pull-Ups or Uneven-Grip Pull-Ups instead of this exercise.
Begin with both hands grasping the top of a single Pump Rock. If you
plan to lock off on your left arm, for example, place your right hand on top
of your left—but with your right hand grabbing from the opposite side of
the Pump Rock. Using a pull-up bar, grip the bar with your hands side by
side and the palms facing each other. Pull up into the lock-off position, and
then immediately let go with the top hand (in this case the right). Hold the
static lock-off position as long as possible, ideally for between five and
fifteen seconds (hard). It helps to think about pulling the Pump Rock toward
your armpit. When you begin to lose the lock-off, either grab back on with
the other hand or lower yourself slowly to the straight-arm position. Take
caution not to drop yourself rapidly into the straight-arm position!

One-arm lock-off.
Dismount and rest for one minute before executing a one-arm lock-off in
the same fashion with the other arm. After executing one lock-off with each
arm, take a three-minute rest before performing another one-arm lock with
each arm. Do a total of two to four lock-offs with each hand.

Power-Training Exercises

When climbers talk about power, they are typically referring to the need to
make quick, strenuous reaches or handhold grasps on steep terrain. This
type of movement is the stuff of steep sport climbs and V-hard boulder
problems.
Physiologically, your ability to move powerfully is a function of how fast
muscular motor units can be called into play and how well they are trained
to fire in unison. Effective power-training exercises must then target the
nervous system with fast, dynamic motions that are far different from the
strength- and endurance-training exercises covered in this chapter. Inherent
to power training are high dynamic force loads, which provide beneficial
training stimuli but also threaten the joints and tendons of the fingers, arms,
and shoulders. For this reason, the following power-training exercises are
inappropriate for beginner or recently injured climbers, as well as anyone
lacking the maturity and discipline to follow the training and rest
guidelines.
Adequate rest between power exercises and workout sessions is also
crucial. As a rule you should not engage in more than two power workouts
per week. Furthermore, individual workouts should be relatively brief:
Training intensity and speed are more important than training volume. In
fact, performing a high volume of power exercises (or training power more
than twice per week) is a prescription for injury. Constantly remind yourself
that in training power, less is more.

POWER PULL-UPS
This simple power-building exercise can be performed on any pull-up bar
or fingerboard. Initially, you may train power exclusively by doing a few

sets with this exercise; or you could just do a single set as a sort of power
warm-up before executing one of the other exercises described below.
Grip a pull-up bar or the largest holds on a fingerboard in the palms-away
position. Your hands should be about shoulder width apart. Now explode
upward with the goal of doing the upward phase of the pull-up as fast as
possible. Pause at the top position for an instant, and then lower to the
starting position at a slightly slower rate. Upon reaching the bottom
position, immediately explode upward with the next pull-up. Strive to
rapidly change directions slightly before your arms reach full extension—
this rapid turnover is essential to optimal training. Never drop forcefully
onto straight arms and cease using this exercise if you experience any
elbow or shoulder pain. Continue with these explosive pull-ups for a total of
five to ten repetitions. Do not do more than ten reps, regardless of the
feeling that you could continue on with the exercise. Rest for three minutes
before doing a second and third set.

BIG-MOVE BOULDER PROBLEMS
If you are an avid boulderer, then you are likely already using this training
strategy. The goal is to climb several powerful six- to ten-move boulder
problems that demand full effort in throwing and sticking several big
moves. The ideal route will feature mostly positive, medium-size holds that
will not test your grip strength—the goal here is long, powerful movements
that fully call into play the pulling and lock-off muscles. Moreover, the
climbing movements do not need to be all-out lunges, but instead
controlled, powerful reaches between reasonably good holds. When you
find the right route (or set it), try to send it five times with about a threeminute rest between sends.

INVERTED LADDER AND ROPE CLIMBING

Rope or ladder climbing is one of the very best ways to develop awesome
upper-body power. Legendary boulderer John Gill used rope climbing as a
staple training exercise, and years later John Bachar popularized inverted
ladder training among climbers. The Bachar Ladder, as it became known,
was a popular training exercise of high-end climbers throughout the 1980s.
Since the advent of indoor climbing walls, however, rope and ladder
climbing have fallen largely out of use. Still, serious climbers would be
wise to incorporate some rope or ladder climbing into their training
program. Both apparati provide for feet-off, campuslike movements, thus
requiring a high level of base strength to execute. The equipment needs are
either a 1.5-inch manila gym rope or a homemade inverted rope ladder.
After a lengthy warm-up of pull-ups and mild upper-body stretching,
begin from either a standing or sit-down (harder) position. Grip either the
rope or ladder rung with both arms at near-full extension. With an explosive
two-arm pull, begin climbing up the rope or ladder in a fast, smooth, yet
dynamic motion. The goal is to maintain steady upward motion for the
duration of the ascent, although it will likely take some time to develop this
ability. Upon reaching the top, slowly lower yourself down arm-over-arm in
a smooth, controlled motion; do not drop down in a fast, jerky manner that
will shock-load the elbows and shoulders. Dismount the rope or ladder—do
not climb additional distance without a rest.

The author on his Bachar ladder, circa 1990. HÖRST COLLECTION

Rest for three to five minutes before you make your next climb. Perform
three to five total laps on the rope or ladder, always taking an adequate rest
so that you can make a quality effort. Highly conditioned individuals should
strive to increase the speed of ascent instead of doing additional sets. As
with all high-intensity exercises, it’s best to cycle on and off this exercise
every few weeks. Only use Bachar Ladders constructed with static rope.
Stop rope or ladder training if you feel any pain in your elbows or
shoulders.

CAMPUS TRAINING
As described in the contact strength section earlier in this chapter, campus
training is a highly effective reactive training method for developing raw
power. Use of the campus training exercises described on pages 149-53 will
build power in your large pull muscles as well as your fingers. So in using
these exercises, you are getting a training two-for-one—that is, training
contact strength and pulling power! Still, campus training is appropriate
only for fit, healthy intermediate to advanced climbers. Proceed with
caution!

FEET-OFF BOULDERING
Often called campusing, this is another popular indoor training exercise
among advanced boulderers. The goal is simply to ascend a section of
overhanging wall by climbing hand-over-hand with no use of the feet. Such
no-feet climbing is extremely difficult and certainly an elite-only training
method. As in the big-move bouldering described above, select six to ten
move problems with medium to large holds that are void of sharp, tweaky
features. An appropriate training goal is to do five feet-off ascents with a
three- to five-minute rest between ascents.

Endurance-Training Exercises

Detailed in this section are five of the more grueling exercises in the book.
Training anaerobic endurance requires repeated, sustained bouts of exercise
of a length and intensity that will elicit a significant release of lactic acid.
These exercises are designed to do just that, and the result of doing each
will be a wicked muscular pump and the hallmark burn of lactic acid. Of
course, the payoff is that your body will respond to this stimulus in ways
that will gradually improve anaerobic endurance and, thus, your ability to
climb at a high intensity for an extended period.

SLOW-MOTION PULL-UPS
These are, as the name implies, regular pull-ups performed in slow motion.
Take five seconds to go up, and come down to a slow count of ten. Your
goal is to perform between four and eight pull-ups, which will take between
one and two minutes. Terminate the exercise, however, before you reach
failure. Attempt to do three sets with only a three-minute rest between sets.

PULL-UP INTERVALS
This is a great exercise that trains the pull muscles to persevere during
periods of elevated blood lactate. The goal here is to complete twenty PullUp Intervals that each comprise a set number of pull-ups and a rest period
for a total of exactly one minute (aggregate). Use a stopwatch or clock with
a second hand so that you can stay on an exact training schedule.

Start the stopwatch, mount the pull-up bar or fingerboard (use the bucket
holds), and immediately commence doing five pull-ups. Strive for a
smooth, steady pace that takes about two seconds for each complete
repetition. After five pull-ups, dismount and rest for the remainder of the
one-minute interval.

Feet-off bouldering is an advanced method for training power.
Frenchies

1. Lock off at top position.

2. Lock off at ninety degrees.

3. Lock off at 120 degrees.
At the one-minute mark, begin your next set of five pull-ups. Upon
completion of the fifth pull-up, dismount and rest for the remainder of the
second one-minute-long pull-up interval. Continue performing these five-

repetition, one-minute intervals for a total of ten to twenty minutes. If you
make it to ten minutes, you will have completed fifty pull-ups in aggregate
—a pretty good intermediate-level pull-up workout. If you make it the full
twenty minutes, add one more pull-up per set next time. If you cannot make
it to at least the ten-minute mark, however, reduce the number of pull-ups
per set to just three or four.

FRENCHIES
These babies may be the best anaerobic endurance pull-muscle exercise on
the planet! Not only will they fry your muscles with a wicked lactic acid
burn, but you will notice a marked improvement in your pull-up and lockoff ability after just a few weeks of training. The efficacy of this exercise
results from the unique combination of isometric contractions superimposed
over the pull-up motion.
Begin with a single pull-up (palms away, hands shoulder width apart) and
lock off in the top position for a five-second count. Now lower to the
bottom and pull up to the top again, but this time immediately lower
yourself halfway down to an arm angle of ninety degrees. Hold a solid lockoff here for a five-second count, then lower yourself to the bottom.
Immediately crank another pull-up, but this time lower to a lock-off with an
arm angle of about 120 degrees. Again hold for five seconds, then lower to
the bottom position. This sequence of three lock-offs constitutes a single
cycle, but you should continue on with another cycle (or more) until you
can no longer pull up. Record the number of cycles (or partial cycles) in
your training notebook as you take a five-minute rest. Do a total of two or
three sets.
Use bungee cords or a spotter to remove some body weight if you cannot
do at least two full cycles per set. Conversely, you should add a ten- or
twenty-pound weight belt once you are able to do five full cycles in any
given set.

ENDURO STEEP-WALL LOCK-OFFS
This exercise is identical to the Steep-Wall Lock-Offs described on page
161, except that you will alternate arms with each lock-off you make. This
way the muscles on each side get a brief rest while the other side is
performing a lock-off. This training strategy will allow you to train much
longer (compared with performing the lock-off on the same side, as in the
strength-training strategy earlier) and therefore train anaerobic endurance in
the crucial lock-off muscles. Your training goal is a total of twenty to fifty
lock-offs, which will result in between one to two minutes of exhaustive
exercise. Use larger hand- and footholds or a less overhanging wall if you
cannot do at least twenty total lock-offs.
Take a rest break, and then perform a second and third set. The length of
rest to take will depend on your level of conditioning. For initial training
sessions, take up to a five-minute rest between sets. As your conditioning
improves, reduce your rest to as little as one minute—an elite-level
anaerobic endurance workout!

SYSTEM WALL TRAINING
System Wall Training is one of the best comprehensive training methods
available to climbers. While it’s not the best method of training absolute
finger strength, it does provide a highly specific workout of the entire body
—from the fingers to the toes—that will develop functional strength in the
crucial muscles of the arms, upper body, and core. The efficacy of System
Training results from its ability to fatigue a specific combination of grip and
arm position while you perform actual climbing movements up a steep wall.
For instance, you can lap a System Wall using only the undercling arm
position and the open-hand grip position, or you could climb the wall using
identical side-pull arm positions and half-crimp grip positions. On a wellbuilt System Wall, there are many other possibilities.
The base wall for System Training should be at least 6 feet wide, 8 to 10
feet in length, and at an angle of between twenty and thirty degrees past

vertical. Still, it’s the type and arrangement of holds that make System
Training work. You need to obtain (or make) a large number of identical
holds that can be mounted symmetrically to enable training of all the
different finger and arm positions (introduced earlier in this chapter). The
best bet would be to purchase eight to twelve system holds that can be
mounted in pairs side by side and at shoulder width going up the wall. You
could also use matching modular holds or cut different-size blocks of wood
to create a variety of routes up your wall. Regardless of the hold type, space
the identical pairs of holds about 15 to 20 inches apart so you can move up
and down them in a ladderlike sequence. Complete the wall with a variety
of small footholds scattered about—again, the ideal setup would possess
perfect symmetry of both hand- and footholds.
There are many creative ways to train on a System Wall, but the most
fundamental is to climb the wall while isolating a specific combination of
grip and arm positions. As shown in figure 7.2, there are many possible
permutations of grip and arm positions to train. One training strategy would
be to do a single set (one up-and-down lap) using each grip- arm couplet.
Another strategy would be to do sev-eral sets that train a specific grip-arm
pair that’s either a known weakness or common feature on some project you
are working.

Figure 7.2 System Training Permutations
In System Training it’s important to leverage the knowledge you gained
in reading chapter 5. If you lack anaerobic endurance, for instance, use
larger hand- and footholds that will allow you to lap the System Wall a few
times (in other words, shoot for twenty to fifty total hand movements). To
train pure strength, however, you would want to climb on smaller holds and

with more difficult arm positions that produce failure in ten to twenty hand
moves (five to ten per arm). Rest between sets for at least two to three
minutes. Finally, keep a training log in which you detail the exact positions
and holds used, the number of reps and sets, and the amount of rest between
sets. This will help maintain motivation as well as quantify your strength
gains.

Complex Training
Complex training is a cutting-edge training method used by elite athletes in
many sports, including most power-oriented Olympic events. Applied to
climbing, the complex training protocol described below is one of the most
advanced strength-training concepts available. Since introducing complex
training in the first edition of Training for Climbing in 2002, I have heard
from countless climbers around the world who have leveraged this
technique to increase their grip strength and upper-body power. You can,
too, as long as you are a relatively advanced climber (solidly 5.11 or V5)
with no recent history of finger, elbow, or shoulder injuries.
Complex training involves a coupling of a high-resistance, maximumstrength exercise with a power-oriented, high-speed exercise. Research has
shown that performing these two very different exercises back-to-back—
and in the order of strength first, power second—produces gains in strength
and power beyond those achieved by performing either exercise alone.
Incorporating complex training into your program can be done several
different ways; the key is the back-to-back coupling of a maximum-strength
exercise and a power exercise (see table 7.6). To get started, you might
climb a very fingery near-maximal boulder problem and then immediately
do a set of One-Arm Lunges with each hand. Taking things up a notch, you
could send a hard boulder problem with a ten-pound weight belt around
your waist and then immediately ladder hand-over-hand up a campus board
(sans weight belt). To up the ante further, you could do a Hypergravity
Isolation Training set (with ten to forty pounds around the waist), then
immediately perform a set of Double Dynos on the campus board (at body
weight). This later strategy of combining HIT and a reactive-training
exercise like campus training should be a staple technique of elite climbers,
and it may represent the single best training protocol for pursuing absolute
genetic potential for finger strength and upper-body power. Begin by doing

just three coupled sets; increase to a maximum of six to eight coupled sets
over the course of a few months. Rest for five minutes between sets.
Obviously, complex training is an advanced technique that produces both
high passive stress and high dynamic stress. It should thus be utilized only
by well-conditioned climbers with no recent history of injury. Furthermore,
its use should be limited to once every three or four days, and it should be
cycled on and off about every two weeks. Finally, complete recovery from a
complex workout could take as long as three to five days. Any other
strenuous training or climbing during the supercompensation period would
slow recovery and may limit the benefits of complex training.

Table 7.6 Complex Training Combinations (pick one exercise from each
column and perform back-to-back)

Andy Raether on the first ascent of Gutless Wonder (5.14b), Puoux,
Colorado. KEITH LADZINSKI

CHAPTER EIGHT
Designing Your Training Program

Action without thought is a form of insanity; thought without action is
a crime.
—Albert Einstein

For much of the twentieth century, the American climbing scene was
dominated by eccentric, alternative types who, as a rule, rejected
conventional styles of living and recreation. While this renegade bunch
pushed the limits of difficulty and boldness on the rock, they were hardly of
a mind-set that would consider doing any supplemental training (other than
drinking!). In fact, the handful of individuals who did train, outside of
climbing itself, were viewed with amusement and even called “cheaters” by
a few traditionalists.
This all changed in the 1980s and 1990s as climbing went mainstream.
Supplemental training just seemed natural to the large number of
individuals entering climbing with backgrounds in other sports. At the same
time, a growing number of elite climbers trained fervently while pushing
the envelope of difficulty on the rocks. Suddenly the masses of climbers
“got it”—there was indeed a causal connection between sport-specific
training and climbing ability! Of course, John Gill exemplified this way
back in the 1950s.
Today most serious climbers perform supplemental training, and tens of
thousands of beginner and intermediate climbers are enamored of the idea
of training to climb harder. Commercial climbing gyms have opened in

almost every major city, and home training walls are now viewed as a
necessity among serious climbers. Consequently, there is a growing need
for information on how to structure a training program and effectively
integrate it with indoor and outdoor climbing activities. This, of course, is
the purpose of this chapter—to help you craft a safe and effective training
program given your current fitness level and climbing ability.
Before getting started, we’ll take a look at the keys to designing an
effective program. You will learn the value in premeditating your workout,
the importance of targeting your weaknesses, and the ways to sustain
motivation and provide a peaking effect. Next up, you will learn how to
structure your program to include microcycles, mesocycles, and an annual
macrocycle—this form of periodization is essential to making the most of
your daily workouts and obtaining maximal gains season after season. With
this understanding you will be empowered to craft a highly effective
training program, according to your current ability level—this chapter
provides detailed guidance for designing a beginner-, intermediate-, and
elite-level program. The chapter then concludes with some unique training
considerations for youth, female, and over-fifty climbers.

Keys to an Effective Training Program
The premise of this book is that a well-informed, motivated, and mature
individual can grow to climb at an exceedingly high level in just a few
years. The preceding chapters provided a comprehensive look at the
fundamental elements of climbing perform-ance—mental, technical, and
physical—and you’ve also been armed with the knowledge of an
introspective self-assessment test. You are now in a position to execute an
uncommonly effective training program—one that will help you outperform
the masses! To do so, the program must be designed to optimize your body
composition, improve flexibility, increase antagonist-muscle conditioning,
enhance stamina and recovery ability, and increase climbing-specific
strength, power, and endurance (see figure 8.1).

Figure 8.1 Training Goals

Premeditate Your Training

The mass of people who engage in some form of conditioning program do
so in a haphazard, ad-lib manner. There is little or no method to their
madness other than to “climb a lot” and “get pumped.” This unsystematic
approach will produce mediocre results and can often end in injury.
Conversely, savvy climbers are proactive in designing and modifying
their training program for maximum effectiveness. Wisely, the program
targets their weaknesses, is modified regularly to stave off mental or
physical stagnation, and is crafted in a way to produce a peaking effect for
an upcoming road trip or competition.

TARGET YOUR WEAKNESSES
Several times throughout this book, I’ve highlighted the importance of
training the weakest link. For many climbers this weakest link involves
poor technique, tactics, and mental control. While the unintelligent climber
trains only for more physical strength, you know that it’s paramount to train
your weaknesses in all aspects of the performance triad. The amount of time
you dedicate to training technique, the mind, and physical strength depends
on both the results of your self-assessment and your current ability level.
As a rough rule of thumb, beginner and intermediate climbers should
focus about 70 percent of their training time on improving technique,
tactics, and the mental game. For these climbers, only 30 percent of their
training time should be invested in general and sport-specific conditioning.
Conversely, elite climbers (who possess highly honed technical skills)
would be wise to invest much more training time in the pursuit of
maximizing strength, power, and anaerobic endurance.

MANIPULATE THE WORKOUT TO
“CONFUSE” THE BODY AND INCREASE
MOTIVATION
Chapter 5 explained the importance of regularly modifying your training for
climbing. Sadly, many individuals go through the same basic workout ritual
week after week and get frustrated with their lack of progress. Furthermore,
engaging in the same weekday training or weekend at the crags will slowly
quell your motivation to work hard and push beyond your current limits.
Clearly, an intelligently designed program must regularly vary the focus
of your training and climbing. In the gym it’s vital to vary the fundamental
details of workout intensity, volume, length, and the amount of rest between
sets (or climbs). On the rock motivation and achievement often come in
proportion to your willingness to try new types of climbing, visit new areas,
and test the limits of what is possible (given your current ability). Later in
this chapter you will learn how to use a ten-week mesocycle and fifty-twoweek macrocycle to optimize the effectiveness of your training-forclimbing program.

PRODUCE A PEAKING EFFECT FOR A ROAD
TRIP OR COMPETITION
Olympic and professional athletes design their training schedules to
produce a peaking phase around the time of a major event or competition.
No doubt some of the best competition climbers also use peaking strategies;
I sense, however, that the majority of climbers do not deliberately plan their
training in order to produce a peaking effect.
Really, it’s not that difficult to structure your workout schedule to elevate
yourself to peak form for a personal-best (hardest-ever) route or annual road
trip. If you currently train and climb a few days per week, you’re already
doing the hardest part. All that’s required now is to manipulate the intensity,

volume, and rest frequency according to certain guidelines, and then track
your progress in a training notebook. Details on all of the above are
forthcoming.

Structuring Your Workout Schedule

In this section you will learn to manipulate your workout schedule over the
time frame of several days, a few weeks or months, and a full year in order
to gain optimal results. In the lexicon of sports scientists, these crucial time
frames are known as the microcycle, mesocycle, and macrocycle,
respectively.

MICROCYCLE
A microcycle relates to the structure, content, and volume of your training
over the course of a given week. Since it is in the microcycle where you
choose what to train and how much to train (or whether to rest) on a given
day, it is the most important factor in determining the effectiveness of your
program. Many climbers’ programs are flawed from the get-go, because
they incorrectly prioritize their training during the course of a single
workout or week. Maximizing effectiveness requires training the right
things in the right way and the right order. Hopefully, you gained a sense of
the optimal workout hierarchy in reading the previous chapters. After a
complete warm-up, the best order of training and exercise is:
1. Actual climbing to learn skill and strategy, and improve technique.
2. Climbing and exercises that target maximum strength and power.
3. Climbing and exercises that target anaerobic endurance.
4. Antagonist-muscle, core, and other general conditioning exercises.
5. Aerobic training activities to improve stamina.
Certainly you can’t effectively train all five of these areas every day.
Instead, you must develop a list of short-term goals and an overall mission

that narrows the focus of your actions in the microcycle. Whether you plan
to train in two, three, or four of these areas, it’s vital that you execute the
training in accordance to this hierarchy. For instance, a beginner who plans
to work on skill and strategy training as well as perform some general
conditioning exercises would do so in that order. Similarly, an advanced
climber might boulder to train skill and the mind, then proceed to training
maximum strength and power, and conclude with some antagonist-muscle
training. Working out in conflict with this hierarchy will severely
compromise the quality of your training and results.
Planning Adequate Rest: There are two crucial rest phases within the
microcycle: rest between exercises (or climbs) and rest between workouts.
For the enthusiastic climber, it’s quite easy to fall into the trap of underresting—between climbs and between workouts. Therefore, it would be
prudent to rest more than you want or think you need.
The length of rest taken between individual exercises and sets plays a
primary role in the training stimulus. Rest periods of less than a minute or
two (between climbs or exercises) result in high blood lactate
concentrations and thus train anaerobic endurance (that is, muscular
endurance). This mode is the hallmark of the highly effective intervaltraining strategy covered in chapter 7. Conversely, resting three minutes or
more between sets allows for greater recovery and, therefore, higher quality
and intensity of training. Longer rests are best used when training technique
(new skills), maximum strength, and power.
The optimal amount of rest between workouts is more difficult to gauge.
Depending on the intensity of training, it could take anywhere from twentyfour to seventy-two hours (or more) to fully recover and benefit from the
training stimulus. Low-intensity general exercise or easy climbing that
produces little muscle soreness can be done up to five or six days per week.
The highest-intensity training (complex and hypergravity training),
however, might require up to ninety-six hours for full supercompensation,
limiting workouts to twice per week. Chances are, you will be training
somewhere in between these extremes, so three or four days of
training/climbing may be ideal for you.

MESOCYCLE
The Principle of Variation states that you must regularly vary your workouts
in order to avoid long-term training plateaus, and it’s in the mesocycle that
you can best manipulate your schedule toward this end. You can leverage
the proven strategy of periodization by changing your training focus,
intensity, and volume every few days or weeks. Described below are two
powerful mesocycles for climbers.
The 4-3-2-1 Training Cycle: This is the training cycle that I advocate for
most non-novice and non-elite climbers (the so-called average climber).
The phases of this cycle are: four weeks of climbing skill and stamina
training, three weeks of maximum-strength and power training, two weeks
of anaerobic endurance training, and one week of rest (see figure 8.2).
The four-week climbing skill and stamina phase involves, well, climbing
a lot! This climbing can be done indoors, outdoors, or as a combination of
both. You must, however, faithfully obey an important distinction of this
phase—that is, to avoid maximal climbing and “projecting,” and instead log
lots of mileage on a wide variety of routes that are one-half to two number
grades below your maximum ability. The result of this four-week phase will
be improved technique and tactics, acquisition of new motor programs
(climbing skills), and the development of local endurance and general
stamina. Climbing four days a week is ideal as long as you are not climbing
at your limit or to extreme levels of fatigue. You can also engage in general
conditioning exercises and stamina-building activities (aerobic training)
during this phase.

Figure 8.2 The 4-3-2-1 Training Cycle
Three weeks of maximum-strength and power training is the next stop in
the cycle, and chapters 5 and 7 detail numerous methods and exercises you
can employ; hard bouldering, hypergravity training, and reactive training
are ideal choices since powerful movements and maximum effort are
hallmarks of this phase. Given the high intensity and physical stress of such
training, it’s important to take plenty of rest between boulder problems,
exercises, and workout days. Moreover, you should avoid training on
consecutive days. One day on, one day off, or one day on, two days off, is
optimal protocol during this training phase. Therefore, your total
commitment to climbing-specific training and actual climbing will be just
two or three days per week, although you would also perform some
antagonist training twice per week and perhaps engage in some modest
aerobic training on nonclimbing days.
The two-week anaerobic endurance phase is the most fatiguing and
grueling portion of the cycle. Training at moderately high intensity and with
reduced rest between exercise and climbing sets will test your mettle as a
growing muscular pump and the telltale “burn” of increasing blood lactate
adversely affect your physical and mental state. Interval training is the
cornerstone method of developing anaerobic endurance (A-E), although
there are many other exercises to employ as detailed in chapter 7. The
common practice of climbing as many hard routes as possible in, say, a
ninety-minute gym workout (essentially, ninety minutes of interval
training!) is the most popular application of interval training. Unfortunately,
many climbers overuse this method—and some use it exclusively!—and
thus fall victim to overtraining and the resultant plateau or drop in
performance, perhaps even injury. The A-E training stimulus during this
two-week phase should be applied in a one-day-on, two-days-off
(accomplished climbers) or two-days-on, two-days-off (elite climbers)
stratagem.
The final phase of the ten-week cycle is simply seven days away from
climbing and climbing-specific training. Begin with two or three days of
complete rest, and then add in light general conditioning activities (jogging,
biking, hiking, and such) for the remainder of the week, if you like. This

week off is as important as any other week in the cycle, because it allows
both your physical strength and motivation to regenerate. Moreover, your
“feel” for effective movement and climbing technique will peak after a
week off thanks to the phenomenon of reminiscence.
The Reminiscence Effect involves a phenomenon common among skillsport athletes: Their intuitive feel and technical execution peak after a
period away from training or competition. A week or two off every few
months is all it takes to benefit from this “less is more” effect. Upon
returning to the rock, you will feel more relaxed, automatic, and natural as
your body remembers (reminisces) the well-learned motor skills. Of course,
you will also be more physically and mentally fresh after a week off from
training, making this the perfect time to commence a road trip or work a
hardest-ever project.
The 3-2-1 Training Cycle: Since the elite climber possesses highly refined
technical skills and a voluminous library of schemas, there is much less to
be gained during the four-week volume-climbing phase of the 4-3-2-1
Cycle. For these 5.12-and-above climbers, acquiring a higher absolute level
of maximum strength, power, and anaerobic endurance is central to
achieving the next level of performance. Consequently, it would be best to
skip the four weeks of skill and stamina training, and instead engage in a
more focused 3-2-1 training mesocycle (figure 8.3). The resultant program
would commence with three weeks of maximum strength and power
training, followed by two weeks of anaerobic endurance training, ending
with four to seven days of rest from climbing-specific training and
climbing.

Figure 8.3 The 3-2-1 Training Cycle

Given this intense focus on strength training, however, it’s important to
never forget that when you’re climbing at your limit, any tiny technical
flaws or lapse in focus or confidence can bring you down in a nanosecond.
The bottom line: No climber should ever take on the closed-minded attitude
that more strength is the end-all answer to climbing harder—the real
answer is to train your limiting constraints (whatever they are), which of
course includes factors such as raw strength and power.

MACROCYCLE
The macrocycle is your annual game plan of off-season training, on-season
training and climbing, and off-season breaks away from climbing. In
traditional sports the macrocycle is planned around the competitive
calendar, with the goal of peaking for a major competition. In our sport,
however, the idea is to structure a training program to produce a peaking
effect for a major road trip, a competition, or the best climbing season in
your region.

Figure 8.4 Sample Macrocycle
You can loosely map the macrocycle on a calendar by identifying the
months of your on-season road trips or competitions, the months you expect
to perform off-season training, and any downtime you plan to take during
the year. Note that downtime is vital for recharging your motivation and
healing any known (or unknown) injuries that have likely developed during
the course of a long climbing season. For many climbers, taking the month
of December off makes the most sense and offers the nice reward of holiday
parties after a year of dedicated training and tight dietary surveillance.
Figure 8.4 depicts a typical macrocycle. Note that a couple 4-3-2-1
Training Cycles are fit into the off-season training period, along with
another during the midseason. The fall months are targeted as the peaking
period, followed by a month off to conclude the year. A blank fifty-twoweek macrocycle is contained in appendix B for your use.

Targeting Training on Your Preferred Subdiscipline

In chapter 1 you learned the importance of obeying the SAID Principle
(specific adaptation to imposed demands) in optimizing your training for
your favorite subdiscipline of climbing. Figure 1.7 depicts how the
demands of these subdisciplines vary over a continuum from bouldering to
alpine climbing. Maximizing the effectiveness of your training requires
targeting your workouts accordingly.
The vast majority of climbers reading this book participate in the three
subdisciplines of bouldering, sport climbing, and multipitch climbing, and
this text is obviously focused on helping these climbers improve their
performance. Still, big-wall and alpine climbers should be able to glean
plenty of useful information. For instance, in accordance with the SAID
Principle, a serious alpine climber would benefit much more from highvolume endurance Stair-Master training and trail running than from
bouldering on a home wall or hanging on a fingerboard. Of course, the most
specific and effective training for big-wall and alpine climbers is simply
doing lots of submaximum climbing.
Conversely, building a home wall or joining an indoor gym is the single
biggest advantage that boulder, sport, or multipitch climbers could give
themselves. Beyond this investment, the time these climbers spend training
or on the rock should mimic the performance demands of their preferred
focus. Boulderers should dedicate more of their mesocycle to maximumstrength and power training, while multipitch and big-wall climbers would
want to spend many more weeks of the mesocycle on training anaerobic
endurance and stamina. Sport climbers possessing a high degree of
technical skill, however, would do best to cycle their focus back and forth
between maximum strength/power and anaerobic endurance. As they
become more advanced, the 3-2-1 Training Cycle described earlier would
be ideal.
Clearly, the best training program for you will change over time as your
technical ability and your physical strengths and weaknesses change. For

this reason, active self-coaching, with regular self-assessments and course
correction, is critical in maintaining a successful training program. The time
invested in plotting your program intelligently and striving to stay on course
over the long term will pay huge dividends in how far and how fast you
progress in this sport. You might also consider hiring a personal climbing
coach (visit USAclimbing.org for a list of coaches by region) to help guide
your training—the objective analysis and expert guidance can be a real wild
card in obtaining the most rapid gains in ability possible.

IMPORTANCE OF A HOME WALL OR GYM
MEMBERSHIP
Regardless of your ability, nothing beats indoor climbing for sport-specific,
time-efficient training, any time of the day or year. Hopefully, there is a
good commercial facility within a reasonable distance of your home or
workplace. If so, join the gym and use it at least twice per week—this is the
number one thing you can do to improve climbing ability and fitness. Many
of us are less fortunate (the nearest climbing gym to my home is about an
hour away), however, so it’s vital to invest in a home wall in place of that
gym membership.
If your space is tight, simply build an 8-foot by 8-foot fifty-degree
overhanging wall with a small section of ceiling climbing atop it. While this
setup has obvious limitations (physical and mental), it will enable you to get
an excellent upper-body workout as well as help improve some aspects of
climbing movement and body position. If a larger space is available, it
would be wise to construct three additional sections of wall: a less overhung
wall (twenty to thirty degrees past vertical), a supersteep, sixtyfive-degree
overhanging wall, and a slightly overhanging (about five degrees past vert)
traverse wall. A garage with a high ceiling offers a good location for your
home wall, especially if there is a way to control the climate in the summer
and winter; however many homeowners feel it’s more practical to build
their home gym in the basement.
Another excellent strategy is organizing a community wall. Recruit five
or ten energetic climbers to pitch in a couple hundred dollars each. Rent a

garage or some similar structure that has room to build several hundred
square feet of climbing surface with a variety of angles, and then complete
your facility with a campus board, HIT System, and fingerboard.

Designing an Effective Personal Training Program
Obviously, there is a limit to how precisely I can prescribe an optimal
training program for you via the static format of a book. On the pages that
follow, however, I lay out the basic, fundamentally important guidelines
that you should follow in developing your training program. Do so, and you
will be far better off than the typical climber who trains in a haphazard,
trial-and-error manner.
Most important, you must adopt the appropriate training template for
your current ability level. Over time you can tweak this program according
to the results you experience and in line with the good training sense you’ve
developed from reading this book. As long as you act in ways consistent
with the principles and concepts described throughout this text, you will
remain on course toward your goals.
One of the most basic and powerful concepts in this book states that you
must train in the manner best suited to you and not do as others do.
Remember, to outperform the masses, you must do things they aren’t doing!
Toward this end, this section provides training guidelines for three basic
groups of climbers—beginner, accomplished, and elite. These categories are
defined in table 8.1.

Table 8.1 Climber Classifications for Training Programs

Beginner-Level Workout

PRIMARY MISSION
Learn climbing skills and technique, optimize body composition, and
improve general conditioning. Engage in mental training to improve
thought and emotional control before, during, and after a climb or workout.

WORKOUT GUIDELINES
Climb up to four days per week (ideally climbing outdoors two of the days)
and visit at least one new climbing area per month. Reduce body fat with
improved dietary surveillance and up to four days of aerobic training per
week. Train the antagonist muscles twice per week using the exercises
described in chapter 6. If you cannot climb during the workweek, you
should instead engage in some of the entry-level pull-muscle exercises in
chapter 7. Time spent training and climbing should break down according
to figure 8.5.

SAMPLE WORKOUTS

Table 8.2 outlines two beginner-level workouts, one for days when you visit
a climbing gym or the other for days when you want to train for climbing
but no gym is available. You may need to modify the volume and exercise
selection based on your current level of fitness. Furthermore, overweight
individuals should engage in additional aerobic training several days per
week—see chapter 6 for details on general training.

Figure 8.5 Workout Time—Beginner

Table 8.2 Beginner Workouts

SAMPLE MICROCYCLES
Two slightly different microcycles are shown in table 8.3—one for those
able to climb during the workweek (home or commercial gym, or outdoors)
and the other for those unable to climb except on weekends.

Table 8.3 Beginner Sample Microcycles

Summary of Training for a Beginning Climber
• Climb up to four days per week and at as many areas as
possible. Climb for volume over difficulty—maximum learning
of a wide range of skills and tactics is far more important than
the grade of routes ascended.
• Engage in conditioning exercises that focus on optimizing body
composition, improving flexibility, and toning the antagonist
muscles. Improved dietary surveillance is crucial for improving
body composition.
• Sport-specific strength training should be limited to the beginner
exercises, and actual climbing should be given preference over
doing these exercises.
• Strive for awareness of your thoughts and emotions throughout
the day and while climbing. Practice the mental exercises
described in chapter 3, and begin using them as part of your
preclimb preparations and while on the rock.

SAMPLE MESOCYCLE
I do not advise the use of a formal strength-training mesocycle (such as the
4-3-2-1 Cycle) for a true novice; nor do I suggest you attempt to climb at
maximum difficulty or push excessively hard on the rock. Instead, your
medium-term goals should be to increase your volume of climbing as well
as the diversity of techniques used. If you climb regularly, it’s prudent to
take a week off from climbing every few weeks to allow for systemic
consolidation of skills and strengthening of tendons (which take much
longer than muscles to strengthen). I propose roughly a 4-1 Cycle in which
the above microcycles are executed for four weeks, followed by a week off
from climbing and training (except for general conditioning and aerobic
activity).

SAMPLE MACROCYCLE
Executing a “perfect” macrocycle is less important for beginners than it is
for accomplished and elite climbers, though you can still benefit from some
long-term planning relating to possible road trips and when you might take
your annual month off. You might simply repeat the 4-1 Cycle throughout
the year, except for those times when you’re on an extended climbing trip
or taking a month off. Use the blank macrocycle in appendix B to plot your
training.

Accomplished Climber Workout

PRIMARY MISSION
Maximize economy of climbing movement with constant focus on refining
mental and technical skills. Expand motor skills and schema-rules by
gaining experience on many different rock types and by avoiding
specialization as long as possible. Reduce time spent on general
conditioning and increase the volume of sport-specific strength training that
targets improving maximum grip strength, lock-off ability, pulling power,
and anaerobic endurance.

Figure 8.6 Workout Time—Accomplished

WORKOUT GUIDELINES
Climbing three to four days per week (indoors and/or outdoors) is the
backbone of this program. For most people, this will require joining a
climbing gym or building a home training wall to help facilitate weekday
climbing. Strive to climb outside as often as possible—every weekend if
possible!—to enable learning of the diverse skills and techniques not
represented by human-made walls. Serious strength training should be
executed according to the 4-3-2-1 Cycle with a strong focus on the
intermediate-level exercises described in chapter 7. Any climbing should be
done before your strength training, and never climb or do climbing
exercises more than a total of four days per week. Train the antagonist and
core muscles twice per week, on either climbing or nonclimbing days.

Maintain close dietary surveillance during the latter portion of off-season
training and during on-season training/climbing. Err on the side of overresting—the harder you train, the more you need to rest in order to fully
recover and avoid overuse injuries! Your time spent training and climbing
should break down in the proportions shown in figure 8.6.

SAMPLE WORKOUTS
Every intermediate-level climber has a different “perfect” training program
depending on his or her unique physical, technical, and mental weaknesses,
as well as time available and climbing goals. Still, actual climbing is the
most essential part of this workout program for all accomplished climbers.
Targeted physical training is also important, both for the pull muscles and
for the antagonist push muscles. Use the three workouts in table 8.4 as
templates from which you can build the optimal workout for you. Modify
and vary the program over the mesocycle and macrocycle and also in
accordance with the principles of training detailed in chapter 5. In the
context of the 4-3-2-1 Training Cycle, use the stamina and skill template for
four weeks, the maximum-strength and power for three weeks, and the
anaerobic endurance workout for two weeks.

SAMPLE MICROCYCLES
Your discipline at planning and executing quality workouts over a sevenday microcycle is a primary factor in determining the results you obtain.
Integrating climbing days, hard training days, and sufficient rest days is the
crux of the matter. Train too little or rest too little, and you will shortchange
yourself. Table 8.5 provides four microcycles to help guide your
scheduling. Depending on your access to a climbing wall or rock, select
either the weekend-only climbing microcycle or the four-days-climbing
microcycle. Use the microcycle as a template for planning your weekly

schedule, but recognize that you may need to adjust or deviate from the
schedule depending on travel or the need for additional rest. If you’re using
the 4-3-2-1 mesocycle, you will similarly need to adjust the structure of the
microcycle to accommodate the correct number of weekly workouts
prescribed by the 4-3-2-1 program.

SAMPLE MESOCYCLE
Dedicated periods of serious strength training for gains are best scheduled
according to the 4-3-2-1 Cycle. Figure 8.2 shows a highly effective tenweek program that allows for adequate rest and thus produces maximum
strength gains without the risk of overtraining or injury. High-end
accomplished climbers may benefit more by using the 3-2-1 mesocycle as
shown in figure 8.3.
Peak climbing season (when you climb for performance and travel the
most) will make it difficult to follow a strict ten-week mesocycle. At these
times you may deviate from the schedule by taking two full rest days before
a weekend climbing trip and at least a full rest day after the weekend
climbing. Often the best in-season training strategy is to develop a sevenday microcycle that best accommodates your weekly climbing while still
allowing for at least one “maintenance” training day. When you find a
weekly schedule that works, stick with it for several weeks or until you can
commit to a more structured 4-3-2-1 regimen.

Table 8.4 Accomplished Climber Workouts

Table 8.5 Accomplished Climber Sample Microcycles

Summary of Training for an Accomplished
Climber

• Climb up to four days per week and gain exposure to as many
different types and styles of climbing as possible. Refine
mental and technical skills to maximize economy of movement
—the fastest way to becoming a better, stronger climber.
• Engage in regular, scheduled sport-specific strength training to
increase maximum grip strength, upper-body power, and
anaerobic endurance. Focus primarily on the intermediate
exercises listed in figures 7.1 and 7.5. During a particular
workout, always perform actual climbing before engaging in
strength-training exercises.
• Commit to training the antagonist muscles twice per week.
These are critical for maintaining muscle balance and
preventing injury.
• Work on becoming a more mental climber. Practice mentaltraining strategies throughout the week, and strive to leverage
all your mental tools when you step onto the rock.

SAMPLE MACROCYCLE
The average accomplished climber gets outdoors twenty or more weekends
per year and may go on as many as two to four extended road trips per year.
Therefore, careful macrocycle planning is vital to maximize conditioning
for these trips and to help produce peaking for an extreme project or
personal-best ascent. Use the blank macrocycle in appendix B to structure
an effective long-term training plan that accounts for your travel plans, the
best outdoor climbing season, and when you choose to take your month off
from climbing.

Elite Climber Workout

PRIMARY MISSION
Identify and correct any technical weak spots or energy leaks (no matter
how small) that compromise climbing performance. Constantly evaluate
and refine mental skills—you can always improve more in this area! Work
to eliminate subtle forms of self-sabotage by narrowing your focus onto the
process of climbing and letting go of any outcome-oriented thinking.
Fitness-training workouts must be highly specific to your preferred
climbing subdiscipline (bouldering, sport climbing, multipitch, or big
walls), and they must stretch the limits of what you are currently capable of
doing. Sound performance nutrition is critical for accelerating recovery
from severe workouts and to ensure maximum supercompensation.

Figure 8.7 Workout Time—Elite

WORKOUT GUIDELINES
Unlike the mass of climbers, the elite performer needs to spend a
disproportionate amount of training time on strength training (see figure
8.7). For boulderers and sport climbers, several weeks or even a month or
two at a time may be dedicated to strength/power training and hard
bouldering with little or no actual roped climbing. Multipitch and wall
climbers must invest a large amount of time into actual climbing—climbing
for volume, exercising to build muscular endurance, and stamina-training
activities are what it’s all about. Frequent training with the elite-level
exercises in chapter 7 is essential to achieving further physical gains.
Access to an indoor climbing wall, boulders, or crags is absolutely
necessary for elite-level training. Use of the 3-2-1 Cycle can be highly

effective for both on- and off-season training, although many elite climbers
will train intuitively. With many years of climbing and training under his or
her belt, a mature elite climber can often intuit the right amount of training
stimulus and rest. Still, the microcycles, mesocycles, and macrocycle
described herein offer useful guidance for such intuitive training. Finally,
brief but regular bouts of antagonist-muscle training, copious rest, and
proactive performance nutrition are vital to accelerate recovery and help
stave off injury and overtraining.

Table 8.6 Elite Climber Workout

Summary of Training an Elite Climber

• Plan and execute an optimal—not maximum—strength-training
program that targets your personal weakest link. The goal is to
maximize grip strength, upper-body power, and anaerobic
endurance.
• Constantly evaluate your technique and mental performance to
identify subtle flaws that are preventing further gains.
Economy of climbing movement is paramount, and it’s your
mental, technical, and tactical skills that determine your fuel
efficiency. Make the mental strategies described in chapter 3
into life skills that you employ 24/7.
• Err on the side of over-resting instead of overtraining. Use
performance nutrition and generous amounts of sleep and rest
to enhance recovery and maximize gains from training.
• Be a compulsive planner of training, travel, and rest. Try to
leave nothing to chance, and avoid trial-and-error training or
getting drawn into some else’s (flawed) training routine.
• Evaluate all you do in your daily life with this question: Is it
helping me reach my goals or holding me back in some way?

SAMPLE WORKOUTS
Table 8.6 provides two highly focused workout templates, one for training
maximum strength and power and the other for building anaerobic
endurance. You will need to modify the volume of training as well as
exercise selection based on your capabilities, time available to train, and
your climbing preference. Design and vary your workouts according to the
training principles outlined in chapter 5.

SAMPLE MICROCYCLES

The appropriate amount of training stimulus (workout length, frequency,
and intensity) will vary greatly among elite climbers based on climbing
preference, quality of nutrition, genetic factors, and age, among other
things. Some individuals may do best by training hard just twice per week,
while others do better by training and climbing a total of four days per
week. Given the tendency of elite climbers to push their limits, however, it
is often necessary to take forced rest days instead of training or projecting
while sore. As a guiding principle, elite climbers should “train hard when
training, and rest completely when resting.” While many elites will choose
to train intuitively, it would be best to roughly follow one of the
accomplished climber microcycles shown in table 8.5.

SAMPLE MESOCYCLE
As in planning weekly training and climbing, many elites will intuit their
multiweek mesocycle. Even so, it’s critical that you consider your outdoor
climbing and travel plans, then build a workout schedule around these
dates. One planning strategy is to schedule rest and workout days backward
from your climbing days—for example, allow for at least forty-eight hours
of rest before a weekend of climbing and then plan a workout day or two
prior to these rest days. On a calendar, mark in your climbing days and
trips, then mark the preceding rest days, then fill in your training days. Elite
climbers preferring a more structured schedule will do best by planning
their workouts according to the 3-2-1 mesocycle shown in figure 8.3.

SAMPLE MACROCYCLE
Elite climbers tend to be very goal-oriented and compulsive long-term
planners. It’s in the macrocycle that you need to book long road trips,
competitions, and an annual month off from climbing, so you can plan the

most effective training schedule to produce a physical peaking for key
events. You can plot your own macrocycle using the blank chart found in
appendix B.

Training Considerations for Female, Over-Fifty,
and Junior Climbers
This final section takes a look at special considerations for female climbers,
those over age fifty, and juniors. I’ve intentionally kept this section brief,
because I feel that these groups are particularly gifted for climbing; there
are only a few things they need to consider or do differently compared with
others.

Unique Issues for Female Climbers

Female climbers differ from males both physiologically and
psychologically. While the psychological differences are more difficult to
measure, there are clear physiological differences that may be an asset or
liability in terms of climbing performance. The average female is about 5
inches shorter, thirty-five pounds lighter in total body mass, and forty-five
pounds lighter in lean body mass (due to a higher percentage of body fat)
than the average male. This large difference in lean body mass (muscle) is
largely attributed to greater levels of the hormone testosterone in males
(Bloomfield 1994).
Consequently, the average female possesses approximately 40 percent of
the upper-body strength and 70 percent of the lower-body strength when
compared with men. In terms of strength-to-lean-body-mass, however, the
ratio is notably less—females possess about 55 percent of the upper-body
strength and about the same in lower-body strength as men (Wilmore 1974).
Thus, it’s clear that the greater level of adipose tissue in females has a
negative effective on physical performance, especially in sports requiring a
high strength-to-weight ratio. The female climber, therefore, will benefit
much more from regular aerobic training (to lower her percentage of body
fat) than her male counterpart—running for twenty to forty minutes several
days per week will effectively increase strength-to-weight ratio in many
females (due to changes in body composition).
Though females are naturally weaker than males (less testosterone and
lean mass), they do respond to strength training in the same ways as men.
Consequently, the serious female climber should not hesitate to engage in
the sport-specific strength-training exercises described in chapters 6 and 7.
In particular, the focus should be on increasing maximum strength in the
pull muscles and the general condition of the core and antagonist push
muscles.
The first few weeks or months of training will produce marked
improvement thanks to neural adaptations. Beyond that, strength gains will

come more slowly as hypertrophy (muscle growth) becomes a more
significant player in producing strength gains. For this reason it’s vital that
strength training for the female climber be just as focused as for the male.
The typical health club workout is no more appropriate for female climbers
than for males, and in the long run could have a negative effect on climbing
performance.
Technically and mentally, the beginning female climber is often a better
performer than her male counterpart, and this is something that every
female climber should recognize and leverage to the greatest possible
extent. More flexibility, a lower center of gravity, less body weight, shorter
fingers, and a more measured approach to climbing can all help a female
climber outperform her male counterpart despite possessing less strength.
So while sport-specific strength training is a must for any serious female
climber, she should not overlook her gifts of style, strategy, creativity, and
finesse.
As a final note, it’s a common misconception that physical performance
tends to be worse during menstruation. While the menstrual cycle’s effect
on performance varies widely among individuals and from sport to sport, at
least one study has shown that grip strength was greater during the actual
menstrual phase (Davis 1991). Ultimately, you need to develop an
awareness of just when is your best performance time of the month. You
can then plan your training and climbing to exploit this period, whether it’s
for a few high-intensity workouts or making a personal-best ascent!

Conditioning for Over-Fifty Climbers

As adult climbers age, numerous physiological changes combine to form an
increasing constraint on performance, especially beyond the age of fifty. A
few of the unfortunate changes include reduced VO2 max (aerobic
capacity), decreased muscle mass, a lower proportion of fast-twitch muscle
fibers, and reduced recovery. Despite these inevitable life changes, you can
still climb at a very high level given a renewed focus on the mental and
technical aspects of climbing and a steady dose of strength training. I know
of more than a few fifty- and sixty-somethings who climb 5.12, ascend big
walls, and trek in the mountains. You can, too, given a three-pronged
approach of injury avoidance, physical conditioning, and mastery of skills.

INJURY AVOIDANCE
Unlike teenagers with their resilient bodies, older climbers are susceptible
to injury during every single workout and climb. Common issues range
from muscle pulls to dislocated shoulders, torn tendons, and a variety of
other joint and spinal problems. Fortunately, you can significantly reduce
your risk by engaging in a comprehensive warm-up before every training
and climbing session. Younger climbers might rush through a warm-up in
just a few minutes, but older climbers would be wise to complete a full
thirty-minute warm-up of general aerobic activity, light exercise, stretching,
and easy climbing. Such a progressive warm-up will markedly decrease
injury risk by warming and lengthening the muscles and spreading synovial
fluid to lubricate the joints. While thirty minutes of nonclimbing exercise
might not be your idea of a good time, it will enhance the quality of your
climbing and reduce the risk of muscle or joint injury that might lay you up
for months or even knock you out of climbing completely.

Another way the mature, disciplined climber can avoid injuries is simply
by avoiding potentially injurious moves while climbing. The goal is to
foster a level of kinesthetic awareness at which you can assess—or often
intuit—the risk potential of a given move. Whether it is an awkward-feeling
drop-knee, a tweaky-feeling pocket, or an improbable-feeling lunge, your
discipline to heed the sensory feedback and rapidly evaluate the situation
before forging onward can save you. Ultimately, you will need to make a
quick decision as to whether you should retreat from the risky-feeling
move, test the move once to see how it feels, or just push onward in the
belief that you will succeed without incident. As a rule, the older you get,
the more you should view such a risky-feeling move as stop sign instead of
a caution sign.

PHYSICAL CONDITIONING
Physical conditioning for over-fifty climbers is not all that different from
the program I prescribe for the mass of climbers. You can safely employ
most of the exercises contained in this book. Most of your limitations relate
to dynamic, forceful training exercises, which become increasingly
dangerous with advancing age. Climbers over fifty years of age would be
wise to not engage in the most dynamic forms of campus training, One-Arm
Lock-Offs or One-Arm Pull-Ups, frequent lunging, and steep V-hard
bouldering. Of course, every climber possesses different generic encoding,
experience, and physical capabilities, so there are surely a few senior
climbers who prevail through the most stressful endeavors. But for the vast
majority of older climbers, dynamic training is dangerous training.
Otherwise, your fitness-training goals are similar to those of every other
climber: optimize body composition, improve aerobic capacity and stamina,
and increase muscular strength and endurance.
Preplanning workout and rest days is of great importance for the older
climber. Too many back-to-back workout (or climbing) days, too little rest,
and poor nutrition over just a few consecutive days will crack open the door
to possible injury or illness. Compound this over several weeks and it will
fling the door wide. Once an older climber is injured and sick, reduced

immune efficiency and changing hormone levels mean slower recovery and
a faster drop-off of physical conditioning than for a younger climber. The
bottom line for over-fifty climbers: Train, rest, and eat on a calculated
schedule that will reduce injury risk, and do nothing to tempt injury.

A climber for life, the master of rock John Gill still enjoys pulling down at
age seventy. ERIC J. HÖRST

TECHNICAL AND MENTAL MASTERY
The best older climbers are usually Zen masters who leverage the fact that
climbing performance is two-thirds technical and mental and only one-third
physical. By exploiting superior skill and wisdom, and bringing many years
of experience to the table, older climbers can become true masters of rock
by climbing very near their maximum capacity. Whether that top capability
is 5.8 or 5.13, you can spot these elder masters by their measured approach,
smooth sailing through scary terrain, and even the occasional calculated
lunge or grunt that shows they are still willing to pull out all the stops to
send.
Developing such mastery takes many years; in fact, in a complex sport
such as climbing you can still acquire and refine mental and technical skills
even after ten or twenty years’ experience. So while your physical
capacities may be steady or waning, you can often compensate by
improving mentally and technically. Consequently, you should strive to
strike a balance between fitness training—still an important part of the
equation—and going climbing at one of the myriad wonderful crags around
the world. And, after all, isn’t that the bottom line? Simply by moving over
stone, you tap into the life force that climbing provides, which transcends
ability, gender, and age. That’s the power of climbing!

Training for Junior Climbers

Kids can unquestionably learn complex sports skills more rapidly than
adults, and in recent years we’ve seen numerous “wonder kids” take the
sport-climbing world by storm. Clearly these young, generally prepubescent climbers possess the slight physique ideal for difficult climbing.
There are numerous other physiological traits that work in their favor to
enhance function and rate of recovery. Unfortunately these young climbers
often lack the maturity, self-awareness, and life experience to transfer their
sport-climbing prowess to a wide range of climbing pursuits. They are also
not prepared for the rigors of serious sport-specific training as outlined in
this text. Let’s take a look at the appropriate type of activity and training for
youth climbers of different ages.

TRAINING FOR YOUTH CLIMBERS (UNDER
AGE THIRTEEN)
Preteens are much better off simply climbing for fun over performance.
Climbing indoors or outdoors up to four days per week will allow their
natural ability and strength to surface. The coaching emphasis should be on
skill training and the fundamental aspects of the mental game. No strength
training is advised other than basic body weight exercises such as pull-ups,
push-ups, dips, abdominal crunches, and basic free-weight training with
very light dumbbells. Special attention should be given to performing
antagonist training (push-muscle exercises twice per week) to maintain
body balance, since the pulling muscles naturally grow stronger from
regular climbing.
Despite this conservative approach to training, most preteens will
progress rapidly in bouldering, indoor climbing, and sport climbing,

developing the foundation for becoming successful all-around climbers in
the future if they choose to do so. Some preteens—most likely those with
the best coaching or natural ability—will experience a meteoric rise in
ability and apparent strength, all without any training outside of climbing.

TRAINING FOR JUNIOR CLIMBERS (AGES
THIRTEEN TO SEVENTEEN)
The greatest gains in strength and power come during the period of the
adolescent growth spurt—around thirteen for girls and fourteen for boys
(Bloomfield 1994). Still, anthropometric changes may have a positive or
negative impact on performance. Teenagers lacking strength and power can
begin some climbing-specific training, including some of the finger and
pull-muscle exercises covered in chapter 7. They should not engage in the
most stressful forms of training (campus training, hypergravity, HIT),
however, until age sixteen or seventeen, at the earliest.
Still, the training emphasis should remain focused on developing good
technical and mental skills. Teenage climbers would benefit tremendously
from exposure to an expanding range of climbing activities such as
traditional and alpine climbing. Some individuals may naturally gravitate
toward competition climbing, though this should be the youth’s choice, not
that of an overbearing parent.
As teenage climbers transition into young adult-hood (age seventeen or
eighteen), they can begin a more serious and formal training program for
climbing. Many of these late-teen climbers will already be accomplished or
elite, and they can now engage in the elite training program as outlined
earlier in the chapter.
The most common setbacks for teenage climbers are overuse injuries in
the tendons, joints, and bones of the fingers, including stress fractures and
damage to the growth plates. Juniors experiencing chronic pain in the
fingers (or elsewhere) should cease climbing for a few weeks and consult a
doctor if the pain continues. As a hard-and-fast rule, climbing and training
must be limited to an aggregate of four days per week. The guidance of an

adult climber or coach is extremely beneficial both in helping structure
workouts and in monitoring rest and nutritional habits.

Youth climbers should focus on developing technique and skills while
doing only a modest amount of strength training. Here thirteen-year old
Alyssa Sullivan sails up 5.10 terrain at Mount Lemmon, Arizona.
ERIC J. HÖRST

Jasmine Caton jamming up the “enduro corner” on Astroman (5.11c),
Yosemite, California. RICH WHEATER

CHAPTER NINE
Performance Nutrition

Judge your success by what you had to give up in order to get it.
—The Dalai Lama

The foods and beverages you consume play a primary role in determining
your mental acuity, physical performance output, and ability to recover
from vigorous training or climbing. Therefore, a thoughtfully designed diet
will provide a noticeable edge in performance, whereas engaging in a “seefood diet”—you see food and you eat it!—will continue to hamper your
performance in a covert way that you may never recognize.
While it’s impossible to say exactly how big a part diet plays in climbing
performance, I estimate that most climbers can realize a 10 to 20 percent
improvement in their training, recovery, concentration, energy, and overall
climbing performance if they dedicate themselves to improved dietary
surveillance.
As a serious athlete and performance coach, I follow the changing trends
in nutrition with great interest. In the late 1980s high-carbohydrate, low-fat
diets were the rage; in the mid-1990s high-protein diets were in vogue; and
in the early 2000s the high-fat, low-carbohydrate diets are what sold the
most books and got the greatest hype. Interestingly, all these diets are
backed by scientific studies showing that they worked (in producing weight
loss) to some degree given that you execute them exactly and presuming
you are faced with one or more of the health issues common to obese
Americans. For a reasonably fit athlete, however, there is no need to engage
in one of the fad diet regimens—nor any benefit. Proper performance
nutrition is not that complex a subject; in the pages that follow, I will
provide you with basic guidelines that will make eating right easy.

I was fortunate to realize the causal connection between nutrition and
performance many years ago. Though I occasionally fall from the wagon, I
credit sound nutrition—about forty-eight weeks per year—for my ability to
train exceedingly hard, avoid injury, recover quickly, and still climb at a
high level in my forties and despite over thirty years of climbing abuse to
my joints, tendons, and muscles. I hope I can help you do the same, too!

Macronutrients
There is no single perfect diet for climbers, just as there is no single perfect
training program. To some extent, the amount and best type of foods for
you depend on your climbing preference. For instance, alpine climbers have
significantly different nutritional needs and energy requirements than those
of folks who partake in cragging or bouldering.
Our study of performance nutrition begins with a look at the three
macronutrients: protein, fat, and carbohydrate. As in the prior chapters, the
focus will remain on the best strategies for rock climbers, with only general
information for alpine climbers.

Protein

Protein has many functions in the body, including building and repairing of
tissue, acting as a major component of the immune system, and making up
enzymes, which facilitate every reaction that goes on in the body.
According to registered dietitian and nutritionist Barb Branda Turner,
growing individuals need more protein than adults do simply because they
are actually laying down large amounts of new tissue. Healthy adults have a
fairly extensive protein pool to draw on; that is, the proteins we consume
are recycled several times for different functions in the body. For this
reason daily protein requirements for adults are modest, even if they are
training to increase muscle mass. Successful training is much less a factor
of consuming a lot of protein than of using the appropriate training strategy
and eating enough carbohydrates to fuel your training.

DAILY REQUIREMENTS
Between 1.2 and 1.5 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight per day
is adequate for most climbers. For a seventy-two-kilogram (160-pound)
individual, this translates to 86 to 108 grams per day. This is higher than the
0.8 to 1.0 gram per kilogram recommended for sedentary individuals by the
FDA. Some studies have shown a slightly higher need in athletes, not just to
increase muscle mass but also to facilitate recovery from exercise and
compensate for the catabolic (tissue-consuming) effects of long, intense
exercise. Still, I (and most nutritionists) do not buy in to the massive
protein-intake guidelines (as much as 2.0 to 3.0 grams per kilogram per
day) prescribed in some fitness magazines.

BEST PROTEIN SOURCES
Low-fat dairy products such as skim milk and yogurt, plus grilled chicken
and fish, and lean red meats provide you with the best protein value for
your calorie. For example, a 3-ounce piece of lean red meat such as
tenderloin contains only 180 calories and 25 grams of high-quality,
complete protein. A glass of skim milk contains about 10 grams of
complete protein and almost zero fat. If you prefer not to eat much meat
(like me) or dairy products, whey protein powder mixed into skim milk,
100 percent pure fruit juice, or water is an excellent source of high-quality
protein. Incomplete proteins—these sources that do not contain all twenty
amino acids—are also useful when eaten in combination. This is of
particular importance to vegetarian athletes, who, by the way, are more
likely to be protein-deficient.

Table 9.1 Caloric Content of Macronutrients

Fat

It’s true that most Americans eat far too much fat, which contributes to our
high incidence of heart disease, cancer, hypertension, and obesity. Still,
getting too little fat has serious implications as well. Dietary fat is necessary
as a source of essential fatty acids, which are involved in critical
physiological processes such as the functions of the immune system and
hormone production. Furthermore, our cell membranes consist largely of
phospholipids (fatty acid derivatives), without which we would not be able
to make healthy new cells, including muscle cells. A dietary fat deficiency
in female athletes has been shown to cause amenorrhea (menstrual cycle
irregularities), which may affect the development and maintenance of bone
tissue.

DAILY REQUIREMENTS
On average the body’s minimum fat requirement is 15 to 25 grams per day.
Usually fat-intake recommendations are expressed in terms of percentage of
total calories consumed daily. For climbers, 15 to 30 percent of total
calories should come from fat, depending on your climbing preference.
For cragging and bouldering, where a low percentage of body fat is
desirable and the energy demands are largely anaerobic, fat intake should be
restricted to 15 to 20 percent of total calories consumed. Alpine climbers,
however, may be better off consuming up to 30 percent of daily calories
from fat. These endurance climbers place great demands on the larger
muscles of the body (especially the legs) and expend much more energy per
day than, say, sport climbers. Fat is more calorie-dense than carbohydrate
and protein (see table 9.1), and it’s a good fuel for long, slow aerobic

activities. Both these attributes make foods with a higher fat content more
advantageous for alpine climbers than for crag climbers.

FOUR TYPES OF FATS
In consuming your daily requirement of fat, it’s important to know which of
the four types of fat—saturated, monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, and
trans fatty acids—are “good” and “bad.” Although each contains the same
nine calories per gram consumed, they are not all created equal in terms of
their role in performance nutrition. Consequently, it’s important not only to
eat the optimal amount of fat but also to have the best ratio among the
different types of fatty acids.
• Saturated fats are most common in animal products such as milk
and dairy, meats, and poultry. They are also present in significant
amounts in some nuts, including Brazil and macadamia. Although
excessive saturated fat intake does increase serum cholesterol, in
particular the LDL or “bad” cholesterol, a certain amount is needed
by our bodies to be made into fatty-acid-containing compounds such
as hormones and phospholipids.
• Monounsaturated fatty acids are found in vegetables and oils
including canola, olive, peanut, and avocado. These “monos” are
thought to be the most beneficial in protecting against heart disease
because of their ability to lower LDL without reducing HDL (the
“good” cholesterol).
• Polyunsaturated fatty acids are common in fish, especially tuna,
mackerel, salmon, and trout, and in corn, sunflower, and soybean
oils. The omega-3 “polys” found mainly in fish and flaxseeds are
currently being investigated for their roles in fighting inflammatory
diseases such as arthritis and other illnesses, including migraine
headaches and heart disease.
• Trans fatty acids are found in trace amounts in almost all sources of
natural fats, but most of those in our diet come from hydrogenated
oils. During the process of hydrogenation, liquid vegetable oils are

converted into solids by bombardment with hydrogen atoms (as in
the making of margarine and shortening). Hydrogenation in effect
converts unsaturated fatty acids into saturated fatty acids largely
through the formation of trans bonds. Recent studies have raised
concerns about these bonds, because they produce effects similar to
those of saturated fats and may, in fact, be cancer causing.
While most well-trained athletes have a very healthy cholesterol profile
(unless they smoke or have a genetic predisposition to problems), it would
be wise to limit your intake of trans fatty acids. Unfortunately,
hydrogenated oils and partially hydrogenated oils are found in such a wide
range of foods that they are hard to avoid. For instance, many of the breads,
cookies, and snack foods you buy off the shelf at the grocery store contain
high amounts of these harmful oils. (Read the labels—you’ll be surprised
how many foods you eat daily contain them!) Most commercial fried foods
are cooked in oils that contain trans fatty acids. Surprisingly, even some
health foods and energy bars contain partially hydrogenated oils.
In terms of fat consumption, the best approach is to consume about equal
amounts of saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids and
minimize intake of trans fatty acids. Try to eliminate hydrogenated oils
from your diet, and in doing so you will reduce your consumption of these
unhealthy fats to acceptable levels. (Unfortunately, it’s very difficult to
escape them completely in this world of highly processed and prepackaged
foods.)
Examine the labels of the foods you eat most regularly and determine
which items are doing you the most nutritional damage. Chances are you
can make huge strides by eliminating just a handful of killer items like
french fries, fried meats, snack cakes and muffins, salty snacks (buy baked
chips and crackers instead), and any highly processed food designed for
maximum shelf life (no doubt, high in hydrogenated oils).

Carbohydrates

Although fat and protein can be used to provide energy, carbohydrate is the
most efficient and effective source of energy for the muscles and brain. A
high-carbohydrate diet is also important for athletes due to its proteinsparing effect. If you do not consume enough carbohydrates to meet your
energy needs, muscle protein will be broken down for energy—the last
thing any strength or power athlete would ever want! Consequently, the
popular low-carbohydrate diets (Atkins, Zone, Ketogenic, and so forth) are
inappropriate for most active climbers.
Carbohydrates come in two forms: sugars and starches. The sugar foods
include fruit, sugar, soda pop, jam, honey, and molasses, while common
starches are breads, rice, cereals, and pasta. Because these are the best
sources of energy for high-intensity training and climbing, I’m sure you are
already consuming plentiful amounts of these foods. Not all carbohydrates
are created equal, however: Different carbohydrates release sugar into the
bloodstream at different rates. The very best athletes know how to leverage
this information to maintain stable energy throughout the day and to
significantly increase the rate of recovery after a hard workout or day of
climbing. If you are serious about climbing better, this subject should be of
great interest to you. Enter the glycemic index.

GLYCEMIC INDEX
Historically, nutritionists classified carbohydrates only into the two basic
groups of simple carbohydrates (sugars) and complex carbohydrates
(starches). Simple sugars were said to produce a rapid rise in blood sugar
and quick energy, while complex carbohydrates were said to provide slow,
steady energy. Although this concept holds true in general, recent studies

have found that there is a large variability in the rise in blood sugar
following the ingestion of various foods from both the sugar and starch
groups.
To investigate and more accurately classify the metabolism of
carbohydrates, researchers developed the glycemic index (GI)—a powerful
nutritional tool I first introduced to climbers in my 1994 book Flash
Training. This index determines how the ingestion of a particular food
affects blood sugar levels in comparison with the ingestion of straight
glucose. Consumption of high-GI foods causes a rapid increase in blood
sugar and a large insulin response. Low-GI foods produce more subtle
changes. Climbers can use knowledge of the glycemic index to control
energy levels and to speed recovery after a workout. Here’s how.
Stable insulin levels are optimal for long-duration stop-and-go activities
such as all-day climbing and long training sessions. Experts also agree that
a steady insulin curve promotes muscle growth and discourages fat storage.
This makes low- to medium-GI foods preferable for climbers in most
situations. High-GI foods produce large swings in blood sugar and an
insulin spike. One minute you are jonesing to crank another hard route and
the next you’re yawning and feeling strangely weak.
Figuring the glycemic index of certain foods is more difficult than it
might seem at first. For instance, most foods classified as simple
carbohydrates (cereal, candy, some fruit juices) are high-GI foods.
However, so are potatoes, white rice, bread, and bagels—all considered
complex carbohydrates. Low-GI foods include vegetables, whole grains,
brown rice, and milk (see table 9.2).
As a general rule, the more processed and easily digestible a food, the
higher its glycemic index (for instance, liquids have a higher index than
similar food solids). High-fiber foods tend to elicit a slow insulin response
and have a relatively low GI. Finally, foods containing some protein and fat
along with carbohydrates come in lower on the scale.
This last piece of information is useful if you don’t have the gumption to
memorize and use this index. Consuming some protein and fat during each
of your carbohydrate feedings serves to moderate the overall glycemic
response of the meal. So for a long day at the crags, select a sports drink
that contains some protein and pack mainly balanced-type energy bars
(those containing nearly equal amounts of calories from protein,
carbohydrate, and fat).

The one good time to consume high-GI foods such as juice, soda pop,
and most sports drinks (like Gatorade) is at the end of your workout or day
of climbing. Intense exercise primes the muscles to immediately reload
energy reserves in the form of glycogen. High blood sugar and the insulin
spike help drive this repletion process. The optimal window for these highGI foods is the first two hours following exercise. After that, favor low- to
medium-index foods for slow, steady refueling. See chapter 10 for more
information on this and other recovery strategies.

DAILY REQUIREMENTS
Carbohydrates should account for nearly two-thirds of your daily caloric
intake. This means that roughly two-thirds of your plate should be covered
with pasta, rice, potatoes, and vegetables, with the other third comprising
lean, protein-rich foods. Be sure to apply the same rules when snacking. Try
to pair up carbos such as a bagel or fruit with some protein like skim milk,
yogurt, or a small amount of peanut butter. The protein helps slow down the
digestion of carbohydrates and results in longer-lasting energy.

Table 9.2 Glycemic Index of Common Foods
You can also calculate your approximate need for carbohydrates
according to your body weight. Training for two hours per day, you would
need roughly seven grams of carbohydrate per kilogram of body weight.
For example, if you weigh seventy-two kilograms (160 pounds), the
requirement would be for approximately 500 grams of carbohydrates; at
four calories per gram of carbohydrate, this would equal 2,000 calories.
Engaging in a full day of strenuous climbing, however—compared with two
hours of training—may demand as much as ten to fourteen grams per
kilogram of body weight.

Water

Water may be the most important nutrient to get right when you are
climbing, yet I sense that many climbers are chronically dehydrated. Dr.
Kristine Clark, director of sports nutrition at Penn State’s Center for Sports
Medicine, says that “even a 1 to 2 percent drop in water will cause
problems in performance.” The earliest symptoms of mild dehydration are a
loss of concentration and enhanced fatigue. Clark adds that “a 3 percent
drop in water level can create headaches, cramping, dizziness.”
Furthermore, a recent study has shown that dehydration leading to just a 1.5
percent drop in body weight resulted in a statistically significant drop in
maximum strength (Schoffstall 2001).
In a sport as stressful as climbing, dehydration also increases your chance
of a joint or tendon injury. Consider that proper hydration facilitates
transport of nutrients to the cells, helps protect tissues from injury, and
maintains joint lubrication. Therefore, for the purpose of injury prevention,
maintaining proper hydration as you train or climb is as important as a
proper warm-up.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREVENTING
DEHYDRATION
As a rule of thumb, it’s a good idea to prehydrate (“camel up,” as it’s called)
before you go to the gym or head out climbing by drinking two to four
glasses of water. Follow this with a minimum of an eight ounce serving
every hour throughout the day. This would total two quarts of water
consumed over an eight-hour period on the rocks. This is a bare minimum
amount—what you might drink, say, on a cold day when you perspire very
little. Climbing on a humid, eighty-degree day, however, would roughly

double this requirement. That means carrying four quarts of water with you
for an eight-hour day of climbing. Of course, I doubt you know of very
many, if any, climbers who carry three or four quarts of liquid to the crags
—thus, the mass of climbers are unknowingly detracting from their ability
and increasing injury risk due to mild dehydration.

Table 9.3 Estimated Nutrient and Calorie Needs

Diet and Nutritional Tips
1. Strive for a 65:15:20 caloric ratio of carbohydrate, protein, and
fat in your overall daily diet.
2. Consume 1.2 to 1.5 grams of protein per kilogram of body
weight per day to facilitate maximum recovery and muscular
regeneration.
3. Limit fat consumption to mono- and polyunsaturated fats from
vegetable and fish oils. Avoid saturated and trans fats, fried

foods, and prepackaged snack products.
4. Consume several small carbohydrate snacks throughout the day
to provide sustained energy, positive mood, and clear thinking.
Favor low- to mid-GI foods.
5. Drink an eight-ounce serving of water every hour throughout
the day—and twice this amount on hot days.

Optimal Macronutrient Ratio

As you may have gleaned from the previous sections, the optimal
macronutrient ratio for a climber depends on the type of climbing activity.
High-intensity, stop-and-go climbing like bouldering or cragging is best
fueled with a 65:15:20 ratio of carbohydrates, protein, and fat, respectively.
The long, slow distance training and climbing of an alpine climber would
demand a higher total calorie count per day than the typical rock climber,
and this need would be more easily met with a higher-fat diet (though
adequate carbohydrates are still necessary). Consequently, a macronutrient
ratio of 55:15:30 would be more suitable. See table 9.3 for sample calorie
counts for a typical male and female rock climber, though you personally
could have significantly different requirements.

Micronutrients and Sports Supplements
The subject of micronutrients and sports supplements is so broad that it’s
impossible to discuss in a comprehensive manner in an instructional text
like this. Still, the use of vitamin supplements and functional foods is so
common in sports that the subject is worthy of at least a primer.
Sales of vitamin and sports supplements is a multibillion-dollar industry
that bombards us with multilateral, never-ending advertising. Some of the
weight-loss and strength-gain claims are truly remarkable, but very few of
these claims are backed by reliable scientific studies. Many products are
promoted with strong anecdotal claims and well-paid pitchmen, but very
few actually do what the advertisers claim.
It’s my belief that up to 90 percent of the sports supplements on the
market are nothing other than modern-day snake oil, yet a serious athlete
looking to maximize performance must be careful not to throw the baby out
with the bathwater. On the pages that follow, we’ll sort out the handful of
products that could potentially enhance your training response and climbing
performance.

Micronutrients

Vitamins and minerals are the essential dietary micronutrients. Although the
body needs only very small amounts of these nutrients (compared with the
macronutrients), they do play a vital role in almost every bodily function—
from muscular growth and energy metabolism to neural conduction and
memory. Consequently, your health and athletic performance can suffer in a
number of ways if you are not consuming enough of these micronutrients.
Studies have shown that as much as two-thirds of self-selected diets
contain less than the recommended daily allowances (RDA) of certain vital
vitamins and minerals. Furthermore, despite being updated in recent years,
RDAs are still believed by many experts to represent low-end requirements
for a serious athlete.

VITAL VITAMINS
High-intensity and high-volume exercise (as in bouldering and alpine
climbing, respectively) both place great metabolic demands on the body and
generate elevated levels of free radicals, which may slow recovery and
increase your chance of illness. The antioxidants that combat these free
radicals, like vitamin C and vitamin E, are crucial micronutrients you would
be wise to consume in greater than the RDA-suggested amounts.
One study showed that supplementing with 1,200 IUs of vitamin E
modulated free-radical production and reduced the amount of muscle
damage following heavy weight training, in comparison with a placebo
group (McBride 1998). Vitamin C has also been shown to help reduce
muscle damage, in addition to being necessary for the formation of collagen
(the substance that forms connective tissue in the skin and muscles) and
supporting the immune system. Therefore, it would be wise to consume

extra vitamin C and vitamin E, above and beyond what you can acquire
through your diet or from a daily multivitamin. Consider taking one gram of
vitamin C and 400 IUs of vitamin E daily, split into two doses (morning and
evening).
Certainly there are a host of other vitamins that you might benefit from
consuming in amounts higher than the RDA guidelines. Still, eating a
decent well-rounded diet and taking a generic daily multivitamin
supplement should adequately meet your needs for these other vitamins.

PRECIOUS MINERALS
Magnesium and zinc are two minerals shown to be consumed in less than
recommended amounts by a majority of the population. For athletes, a
deficiency in these minerals could mean you’re getting short-changed on
training response. Several recent studies have shown a statistically
significant increase in muscular strength in a group of athletes taking
supplemental magnesium and zinc (in the form of a patented supplement
known as ZMA) versus a control group of athletes taking a placebo (Brilla
1998). Clearly, any climber engaging in serious strength training could
benefit from taking this ZMA supplement (available from several different
companies).
Another important mineral is selenium, known primarily for its function
as an antioxidant. If you are consuming extra vitamin C and vitamin E, you
might want to add 100 to 200 micrograms of selenium (taken in split doses
with meals) to your supplement regimen.
Calcium and iron are two other minerals that some climbers may be
lacking. Vegetarians often fall short on iron consumption, and some women
may not get enough iron and calcium in their diets. A multivitamin is the
best way to obtain extra iron, especially since its absorption is enhanced in
the presence of vitamin C (also in a multivitamin). Females wanting to get
extra calcium in their diets could take a calcium supplement (Tums are
cheap and taste good!) or simply drink a few glasses of skim milk each day.

Sports Supplements

The most effective way to increase climbing performance is through a longterm, dedicated effort to improve your technique, mental control, and upperbody strength. Unless you are working to dial in on each of these areas, the
few sports supplements that do work are probably a waste of money. If you
are actively honing your technical skills and training to increase your
physical and mental fitness, however, you may be able to further improve
your performance through use of a handful of ergogenic (performanceenhancing) supplements.

PROTEIN POWDERS
As discussed earlier, athletes have a greater daily protein requirement than
sedentary people, since strenuous exercise results in a higher protein
turnover. While mega amounts are not necessary (as some supplement
companies and fitness magazines suggest), a 160-pound climber does need
to consume between 86 and 108 grams of protein per day. This modest
amount can be met through a well-rounded diet; it may be tough to
consume adequate protein, however, if you do not eat meat such as chicken,
fish, and lean red meats. There is also the limiting factor relating to the
biological value of the protein source consumed. Not all protein sources are
equal when it comes to providing your body with the necessary building
blocks.
Consequently, scientists have developed a number of ways to measure
the quality of protein sources. The biological value (BV) is one of the most
commonly used; it’s based on how much of the protein consumed is
actually absorbed and utilized by the body. The higher the BV, the greater
the amount of protein that is actually available to be used by the body to

strengthen muscles and connective tissues, and to support enzyme
formation, among other things.
When the BV scale was originally developed, the egg was considered the
perfect protein source (remember Rocky?) and sat alone atop the chart with
a value of one hundred. Since then new technologies have enabled the
creation of superproteins that are equally valuable to the body but without
the fat found in many high-protein foods. Whey is the current superstar of
proteins, with a BV of one hundred (though for some reason a few
companies inflate this number). Therefore, whey protein could be viewed as
superior to the lower-BV foods such as fish, beef, chicken, or soy in helping
meet the protein needs of an athlete.
While whey protein costs approximately $0.40 to $0.70 per twenty-gram
serving, the investment is a good one considering its ease of use and high
BV. Many brands are available from health food stores, supplement
catalogs, and online merchants, so shop around for the best deal. Designer
Whey Protein by Next Proteins is one excellent brand with several good
flavors that mix easily in milk, juice, or water. Such liquid protein is ideal
first thing in the morning, and it can increase your rate of recovery when
consumed immediately following your workout or a day of climbing (more
on this in the next chapter).

Table 9.4 Biological Values of Protein Sources
One of the highest-quality and most affordable protein sources is skim
milk (see table 9.4). Since each glass contains ten grams of protein,
consuming a quart of milk per day would provide forty grams toward your
total protein requirement. As someone who only occasionally eats meat, I
have relied on skim milk as my primary source of protein for the last thirty
years (since I first read that John Gill slammed back milk protein after
climbing). At 2.5 gallons of milk per week for more than thirty years, I’ve
somehow consumed nearly 4,000 gallons of skim milk since I started
climbing. All I can say is, “Got milk?”
Even those who are lactose-intolerant can consume milk without any
nasty side effects by purchasing acidophilus milk. Regardless, be sure to
always select 1 percent or skim milk, since whole milk contains a
significant amount of saturated fat.

SPORTS DRINKS

Since the invention of Gatorade in the early 1970s, sports drinks have
grown into a massive industry. It’s now hard to find a serious athlete who
does not consume sports drinks to help replenish energy. Dozens of
different sports drinks are available in bottled form, including Gatorade and
Powerade, the two most popular drinks on the market right now. Many
others are sold in a bulk powdered form ideal for mixing up at home before
a workout or day at the crags.
As you might expect, not all sports drinks are the same. Some are merely
glorified sugar water, while others include electrolytes or any number of
vitamins, minerals, herbs, or other nutrients said to increase athletic
performance. Clearly, many of the claims are unsubstantiated—and at two
bucks a bottle, some are just a big rip-off.
The active ingredients in these products fall into two main categories:
electrolytes and fuel replacements. A simple understanding of both will
help you understand how these drinks might be of benefit to you.
Electrolytes such as potassium, magnesium, calcium, sodium, and
chloride are critical for concentration, energy production, nerve
transmission, and muscle contraction. Fortunately, electrolyte loss during
exercise is quite slow, so even a full day of climbing won’t cause significant
depletion. A reasonable diet and multivitamin provide you with all the
electrolytes you need for ordinary training or a day of climbing. Still, a
sports drink with electrolytes may be beneficial if your food supply will be
limited for a few days, as in big-wall or alpine climbing.

Snack and rehydrate every hour or two. You’ll climb better all day long
and top out on long routes with energy to spare! ERIC J. HÖRST

Fuel sources in the sports drinks are mainly carbohydrates, including
glucose, sucrose, fructose, maltodextrin, and lactates. Glucose and sucrose
(table sugar) are the fuel sources in the original sports drink Gatorade and
have since been adopted by many other companies. Ironically, some athletes
now shun drinks with large amounts of glucose and sucrose to avoid a
blood sugar spike. Unless you are engaged in an activity that continues
steadily for a couple of hours (such as long-distance biking, running, or
hiking), this quick increase in blood sugar may be followed by an energy
crash as insulin kicks in to reduce the elevated blood sugar level. In a stopand-go sport like climbing, this pullback on blood sugar can leave you
feeling more fatigued and tired than before you consumed the drink!
Consequently, you should avoid any drink whose first ingredient (after
water) is glucose or high-fructose corn syrup—both are signs that the drink
has a high glycemic index and will release sugar rapidly into the blood.
Instead, shop around for powdered sports drink mixes that list fructose (not
the same as high-fructose corn syrup) or a protein source such as whey as
the first or second ingredient. These have a lower glycemic index and hence
provide a slower, more sustained release of carbohydrate ideal for climbers.
Accelerade by Pacific Health Labs or PowerBar’s Performance Recovery
are two good choices.
Carbohydrate (glycogen) depletion in the muscles and liver is a primary
cause of fatigue when performing long-duration activities of more than
ninety minutes. The traditional use of sports drinks is for situations when
additional fuel is needed for prolonged activity lasting more than ninety
minutes. Therefore, consuming a fructose-based or protein-containing
sports drink during the course of a day at the crags will help maintain
energy levels throughout the day, though consuming some food would be
beneficial as well. Conversely, an hour or two of bouldering or a short gym
workout will not benefit from the added fuel of a sports drink.
While a slow-release, fructose-based or protein-containing sports drink is
ideal for when you are climbing, it might be better to consume a high-GI
drink upon completion of your workout or day of climbing. Numerous
studies have shown that elevating blood sugar as soon as possible after
exercise provides the substrate for synthesis of muscle glycogen (Robergs
1991). This is especially important if you plan to climb the very next day—
replenishing glycogen stores takes up to twenty-four hours, so you need to

get the process started immediately and at high speed (see chapter 10 for
more recovery tips).

ENERGY BARS
Energy bars have been a dietary mainstay of many climbers since PowerBar
hit the scene back in the late 1980s. Originally intended for endurance
athletes like bikers and runners, many of the energy bars are designed to
deliver a rapid release of sugar into the bloodstream. Therefore, many
energy bars possess a high glycemic index (greater than seventy); these are
easily identified by their first ingredient, high-fructose corn syrup. Climbers
in search of sustained energy are better off sticking to foods with a GI of
less than seventy, since they provide more sustained energy and less of an
insulin response.
The numerous balanced-style bars that have entered the market in recent
years typically possess a glycemic index in the forty-to-sixty range. The
higher amount of protein and fat contained in these bars helps slow the
release of sugar into the bloodstream. The balanced 40:30:30 macronutrient
ratio also helps conserve glycogen and may even help spare muscle protein
from being used for energy during a long day of climbing. Consequently,
consuming a couple of Balance Bars (Fig Newtons are also good) and
drinking lots of water may be the single best combination to maintain
energy, spare muscle protein, and prevent dehydration.

CREATINE
Dozens of sports supplements claim to help build muscle and increase
strength. While most are, in fact, worthless, creatine has been proven to
increase explosive strength (Toler 1997; Kreider 1998). But is creatine a
good supplement for climbers?

First, creatine is by far the most noticeably effective sports supplement
on the market. When it is consumed daily in doses of 10 to 25 grams, users
actually see their muscles get larger and harder—the results can be quite
amazing—as they gain lean muscle mass (that is, the users’ body weight
increases). Consequently, creatine-containing products have become the
biggest-selling sports supplements in the country, and they are widely used
by football and baseball players, weight lifters, bodybuilders, and millions
of fitness buffs. But are these effects beneficial for climbers? Let’s take a
look at how creatine works.
Creatine is a compound that’s natural to the body, and it’s used in the
muscles to help create ATP (the energy source for brief, explosive
movements). Creatine is also present in animal foods such as red meat, but
the amount consumed in a normal diet is quite small (a couple of grams per
day). Studies have shown that taking twenty grams per day of supplemental
creatine for five or six days will enhance performance in short-duration,
high-intensity exercise such as sprinting or weight lifting. This creatineloading protocol is the method used by most athletes—but it’s the wrong
protocol for climbers!
Two side effects of creatine loading are weight gain and what’s known as
cell volumizing. Both these effects occur because creatine associates with
water as it is stored in the muscles. Over the six-day loading phase, more
and more creatine is stored and an increasing amount of water is drawn into
the muscle cell. This gives muscles a fuller, “pumped” feel and look—just
what bodybuilders and fitness buffs want. This loading process, therefore,
results in a water weight gain of several pounds or more in most
individuals. This is a good thing for athletes in sports where increased
weight and speed (inertia) can be used to your advantage (tackling,
swinging a bat, or swinging your fist). In a sport that requires a high
strength-to-weight ratio, however, it can have a negative impact on
performance.
Some climbers have argued that stronger muscles (due to creatine
loading) can easily lift the extra weight gained in the growing process. The
problem, however, is that creatine loads in all muscles of the body, not just
the climbing muscles, and will load proportionately more in the largest
muscles of the body—the legs! Of course, increasing leg muscle size and
weight is a bad thing for climbers, since they are never the limiting factor.

There’s just no way around it: Creatine loading is not a good thing for
climbers.
If you are still not convinced, let’s consider the cell-volumizing effect of
creatine loading. Bodybuilders love the fact that their muscles pump up
more easily when they are loaded with creatine. I quickly noticed this same
effect when I experimented with creatine after it first appeared on the
market in 1993. It seemed strange at the time, but I pumped out faster when
I was on creatine—this despite the fact that I felt like I had a little more zip
in my muscles. What I quickly concluded was that the cell-volumizing
effect of creatine leads to more rapid occlusion of the capillaries that
innervate the muscle, thus slowing blood flow and causing the rapid pump.
In climbing, the goal is obviously to postpone full-on pump as long as
possible.
That said, I do believe that well-timed, small doses of creatine can help
climbers recover more quickly and without the nasty side effects of loading.
The protocol I’ve developed and used for many years now is to add just five
grams of creatine to a quart of sports drink that I sip throughout the day
when climbing. This provides a slow trickle of creatine into the blood and
muscles to aid recovery between routes. For training, I wait until the end of
the workout; then I initiate the recovery cycle by consuming five grams of
creatine mixed into a sports drink.

Vitamin and Sports Supplement Tips
1. Take a daily multivitamin each morning with breakfast.
2. On training or climbing days, take an additional 500 to
1,000mg of vitamin C, 400 to 800IU of vitamin E, and 100 to
200mcg of selenium, split into a morning and evening dose.
3. Consider consuming extra protein (especially if you eat little
meat or dairy products) by drinking a whey protein shake each
morning and evening.
4. When climbing, snack on fruits, balanced-style energy bars,
sports drinks (choose those possessing some fructose and/or
protein), and other low-GI foods. Consider adding five grams
of creatine (no more) to your bottle of sports drink to further
enhance recovery.

5. Avoid mass-marketed sports supplements, especially those with
the wildest claims—most are frauds.
The bottom line: Use creatine in small doses and it may enhance your
recovery with no noticeable weight gain or other negative side effects. If
you decide to supplement with creatine, follow the above guidelines closely
and never consume more than five grams per day.

SPORTS SUPPLEMENTS THAT DON’T WORK
The list of sports supplements that don’t work is too long to completely
cover in this text. I can, however, list a few of the most popular, most hyped
supplements that have little or no reliable research to back up the big
claims, or—worse yet—pose health dangers.
First and foremost is androstenedione (aka andro), along with other
testosterone boosters. The research on these substances is largely
contradictory and somewhat scary. One study showed that andro increased
testosterone in women, while another showed it increased estrogen in men!
Several other studies showed absolutely no effect to taking these
supplements. Stay away from this stuff.
Without getting long-winded, here’s a list of other supplements that will
only piss your money away (no proven ergogenic effect): NO2, vanadyl
sulfate, pyruvate, OKG, gamma oryzanol, inosine, chitosan (and other “fat
whackers”), algae (of all colors), GHB, MCTs, shark cartilage, and many
homeopathic supplements.

Persevering high up on the classic Arizona Flyways (5.11c), Mount
Lemmon, Arizona ERIC J. HÖRST

CHAPTER TEN
Accelerating Recovery

Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must
do.
—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

If you are serious about climbing performance, then you must be serious
about accelerating recovery. Knowing how to limit fatigue and speed
recovery is as important as knowing how to perform a drop-knee, lock a
finger jam, or float a deadpoint. The bottom line: If you are not playing a
proactive role in the recovery process, then you are definitely not training
optimally or climbing up to your capability.
We all know, firsthand, that physical fatigue is a primary limiting factor
whether pulling down at the crags or training in the gym. Therefore, it
stands to reason that being able to accelerate recovery means you will get
more back during a midclimb shakeout and while resting between climbs
and days of climbing. As a result, you will perform better on the rocks
today, tomorrow, and on all your future outings. Similarly, more rapid
recovery between training sessions can translate into more long-term
strength gains, since you can work out more often while still getting
adequate rest and without risk of overtraining.
While many of today’s enthusiastic climbers are keen on staying current
on the latest climbing and training techniques, surprisingly few individuals
are aware of the numerous strategies for accelerating recovery. Recovery
from exercise has been the subject of dozens of recent research studies, and

any serious climber would be wise to heed the findings of these sports
scientists. On the pages that follow, I will present the leading-edge recovery
strategies used in these studies, as well as provide instruction on specific
techniques that will help you slow fatigue and speed recovery while on the
rock.
Clearly, recovery ability is a function of several factors, including age,
sex, and level of conditioning. Regardless of these factors, however, I
guarantee that you can recover more quickly by playing a proactive role in
the recovery process—instead of just letting it happen, as many climbers
do. By placing the same importance on optimal recovery as you do on
training optimally, you will enhance your training response as well as your
overall climbing performance!

The Basics of Fatigue and Recovery
Proactively managing fatigue and taking the steps to accelerate recovery
require an understanding of the basic physiological processes involved in
energy production, fatigue, and recovery. We’ll begin our primer on this
subject with a look at what causes fatigue, and then look at three recovery
time frames.

Causes of Fatigue

Several factors contribute to the fatigue you experience while training or
climbing. These factors include the depletion of muscle fuels, the
accumulation of metabolic by-products, low blood glucose, muscular
cramps and microtraumas, and finally central fatigue.

DEPLETION OF ATP-CP
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and creatine phosphate (CP) are energy-rich
phosphate compounds stored within the muscle cells in small amounts.
Brief, maximum-intensity activities (such as a short, vicious boulder
problem, a one-arm pull-up, or a 100-meter sprint) are fueled by ATP and
CP; the supply of these fuels, however, limits this action to between five
and fifteen seconds.
This limitation on maximum energy output explains why it’s next to
impossible to perform Double Dyno campus training for more than fifteen
seconds, or why you have less than fifteen seconds to pull a maximal move
(for you) on a route before your muscles give out. Continued exercise
beyond this time threshold is only possible by lowering the intensity of the
activity, so that the lactic acid energy system can contribute to energy
production.
Fortunately, ATP is continually synthesized within the muscles (by little
ATP factories called mitochondria), and ATP stores become fully
replenished in just three to five minutes of complete rest (Bloomfield 1994).

ACCUMULATION OF METABOLIC BYPRODUCTS
Sustained moderately high-intensity activity lasting between fifteen seconds
and three minutes is fueled primary by anaerobic metabolism of glycogen
fuel (see figure 5.4). Unfortunately, metabolic by-products of this energy
production—chiefly, lactic acid—result in muscular discomfort and,
eventually, muscular failure. How long you can exercise during periods of
rising lactic acid concentration depends on your lactate threshold—that is,
how high in intensity can you exercise before blood lactate levels grow
greater than your body’s ability to metabolize it.
Anaerobic endurance training will increase your tolerance to lactic acid
as well as elevate your anaerobic threshold. Furthermore, anything you do
to enhance blood flow through the working muscles will help disperse lactic
acid to your liver and non-working muscles, where it’s converted back to
glucose. Continued high-intensity exercise (with no rest), however, will
cause lactic acid levels to skyrocket and muscular failure to occur in less
than three minutes. This explains why the “pump clock” runs out in less
than three minutes on long, near-maximum (for you) crux sequences. You
must get to a rest in less than three minutes or you’ll end up taking a lactic
acid bath!
During rest periods, the clearance time of lactic acid can be anywhere
from ten to thirty minutes, depending on the initial level of the lactic acid
accumulation and whether the rest is active or passive (more on this later).

DEPLETION OF GLYCOGEN
Steady, long-term exercise typically depletes glycogen stores in ninety
minutes to two hours. Running out of glycogen causes the infamous hittingthe-wall phenomenon in marathon running, and it is a contributing factor to
your inability to climb hard toward the end of a long day on the rock.

Fortunately, climbing is a stop-and-go activity, so a full two-hour supply
of glycogen can be stretched out to last nearly all day. You can also spare
your glycogen supplies through regular consumption of additional fuel
(sports drinks and foodstuffs) throughout the day. Research implies that
carbohydrate feeding during exercise can help extend your glycogen supply
by 25 to 50 percent (Coyle 1984).
Your starting level of glycogen is also a crucial factor in determining how
long and hard you will be able to climb. If you are climbing for a second or
third straight day, you will certainly have less than the full ninety-minute to
two-hour supply of glycogen. This is because complete replenishment of
glycogen stores takes twenty-four hours—a good dinner and a full night’s
sleep are not enough to restock the supply completely. When climbing on
successive days, it’s therefore vital to consume more calories throughout the
day (to spare glycogen)—and even so, you will likely hit the wall sooner on
day two than you did on day one.

LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE
Blood glucose (sugar) is but one of the possible fuel sources for working
muscles, but it’s the only fuel source available to the brain and nervous
system. As glycogen supplies dwindle during long-duration activity, the
working muscles become increasingly reliant on blood glucose for fuel. As
a result, blood glucose levels drop and increasing levels of exhaustion and
mental fatigue set in.

Figure 10.1 Recovery Curve
As mentioned above, ingestion of carbohydrates will help delay this
fatigue by helping to maintain an adequate level of blood glucose.

MUSCLE CRAMPS AND MICROTRAUMAS
Muscle cramps and microtraumas can contribute to the sense of muscular
fatigue, though in somewhat different time frames. Muscle cramps typically
occur near the end of an exhausting period of muscle action—for instance,
when some of the muscles in your back or arms lock up after a long,
strenuous section of jamming or upon reaching complete exhaustion in the
midst of a long sport climb. In such an instance, twenty to thirty minutes of
rest, gentle stretching, and massage, as well as consuming some fluids, will
help alleviate the cramping and restore normal muscular function.
Microtraumas are a primary cause of the all-too-common delayed-onset
muscle soreness (DOMS). This muscle soreness, which becomes evident
from twenty-four to forty-eight hours after strenuous exercise, is a result of
microscopic muscle tissue tears and the accompanying tightness and
swelling (edema). Strength will be diminished for as long as pain persists,
possibly as long as two to five days.

CENTRAL FATIGUE
In addition to muscular fatigue, strenuous exercise can have adverse effects
on the central nervous system (CNS). This so-called central fatigue can
impair coordination, concentration, and your ability to perform difficult
motor skills. Repeated high-intensity movements such as lunging and
campus training are the hardest on the CNS. However, excessive amounts
of any specific training stimulus—fingerboard, Hypergravity Isolation
Training, campus training, and such—or performing the same type of
bouldering movement over and over can also produce central fatigue.
Unfortunately, severe central fatigue can take longer to recover from than
that due to any of the other causes. Consider that recovery of a nerve cell
takes up to seven times longer than a muscle cell (Bompa 1983). Of course,
this level of fatigue may never be experienced by the typical recreational
climber; whereas elite climbers, who push the envelope both in the gym and
on the rock, are likely to experience central fatigue. If you still feel
physically “off” even after a few successive rest days, you may be
experiencing central fatigue. It may take another two to ten days away from
training and climbing to recuperate completely, but you will find yourself
performing better than ever after this break away from climbing (per the
Reminiscence Effect described in chapter 8).

Three Recovery Periods

Recovery is not linear, but instead exponential (see figure 10.1). For
example, recovery from an exhaustive crux sequence, climb, workout, or
day of climbing will initially be rapid, with about 70 percent of complete
recovery taking place in the first one-third of the recovery period (Bompa
1983). Recovery improves to 90 percent after two-thirds of the time needed
for complete recovery.
Knowing that recovery is an exponential process is powerful information
that can be applied to the three crucial recovery periods that I’ve defined as
recharge, refuel, and rebuild.

RECHARGE (SHORT-TERM RECOVERY)
This first recovery period takes place from ten seconds to thirty minutes
following the completion of muscular action. The recharge period includes
the ten-second shakeout you take in the midst of a crux sequence as well as
the midclimb rest you milk for five, ten, or even twenty minutes, if possible.
The two metabolic processes at work during this recovery period are
resynthesis of ATP and the removal of lactic acid from the working
muscles. As stated earlier, ATP resynthesis takes less than five minutes, and
complete lactic acid removal occurs in less than thirty minutes. As depicted
in figure 10.1, however, recovery to 90 percent of baseline levels occurs in
about two-thirds of the time needed for complete recovery. Therefore, you
can assume that the majority of ATP resynthesis has occurred in just over
three minutes and about 90 percent of the lactic acid has been removed in
about twenty minutes. Strategies to further hasten recovery during the
recharge period will be detailed later in this chapter.

It should be noted that nothing you consume during this initial recovery
period has any impact on exercise resumed immediately after this brief rest.
Water takes at least fifteen minutes to empty from the stomach, and sports
drinks or foodstuffs take even longer. If you have concluded your climbing
or training for the day, however, this initial thirty-minute period is vital for
enhancing long-term recovery (more on this in a bit).

REFUEL (MEDIUM-TERM RECOVERY)
The refuel recovery period occurs from thirty minutes to twenty-four hours
following cessation of exercise. Therefore, this phase of recovery takes
place during the two-hour break between climbs that you might take during
the hottest part of the day and, of course, during the overnight period
following a training or climbing day.
With ATP resynthesis and lactic acid removal completed in the first thirty
minutes, the refuel stage is defined by the replenishment of blood glucose
and glycogen stores (in muscles and the liver), and some minor repair of
tissue microtraumas. Since refueling is the hallmark of this period,
consuming a large amount of the right type of carbohydrates is necessary to
facilitate the process.
Numerous strategies for enhancing this replenishment process will be
described later in the chapter, but—as mentioned earlier—you can assume
that about 90 percent of this refueling has taken place in about sixteen hours
(two-thirds of the total recovery period). Thus, the typical twelve-hour
break between consecutive days of climbing will result only in
approximately 80 percent replenishment of glycogen stores (assuming you
begin refueling immediately upon finishing up the first day on the rocks).

REBUILD (LONG-TERM RECOVERY)

Muscle growth and neuromuscular adaptation typically take place from one
to four days following strenuous exercise. The degree of delayed-onset
muscle soreness experienced is proportionate to the amount of microscopic
damage inflicted on muscle fibers during exercise. Minor DOMS may
subside in forty-eight hours, while severe soreness signals a greater degree
of damage that may take four or more days to rebuild.
You can now see that a single rest day is enough to allow the muscles to
recharge and refuel, yet complete supercompensation—that is, rebuilding
the muscle to a stronger level than before the exercise stimulus—requires
additional rest for the neuromuscular system to recuperate. Therefore, while
you may be able to perform at a reasonably high level after just one day of
rest, truncating the rebuilding process negates the supercompensation
period (per chapter 5) and will inhibit gains in strength. In the long term,
chronic under-resting can result in decreased performance, injury, and even
risk of illness.
Whether you are training indoors or climbing a personal-best route
outside, the ability to accelerate recovery is tantamount to elevating your
absolute level of performance. In the gym faster recovery between exercises
or climbs translates to higher-intensity stimuli or faster learning,
respectively. On the rock hastened recovery at a marginal rest may make the
difference between a brilliant on-sight or hardest-ever flash and dangling on
the rope in frustration.
On the pages that follow, you will learn fourteen powerful techniques for
accelerating recovery and, thus, improving the quality of your training and
climbing. But knowing is not enough—you must apply these strategies with
the same dedication and resolve as when pursuing your endeavors in the
gym or at the crag.

Accelerating Short-Term or Intraclimb Recovery
Your capacity to perform difficult moves or exercises repeatedly, with only
short rest breaks, is directly proportionate to your recovery ability in the
short term. Described as the recharge period above, only certain recovery
mechanisms come into play during the first ten seconds to thirty minutes
following strenuous activity. The goal during this time is to help expedite
the recharge process. This is done by minimizing the magnitude of fatigue
(in the first place), enhancing forearm recovery with the G-Tox and active
rest, and engaging in pre-exercise hydration.

Limit Fatigue by Climbing More Efficiently

Let’s start off with the most simple, yet powerful method to enhance shortterm recovery—limit the magnitude of fatigue, as much as possible,
through economy of movement and optimal climbing technique. Obviously,
you will use less ATP and CP, as well as produce less lactic acid, if you can
lower the intensity of muscular contraction and the total time under load. In
this way you immediately reduce the magnitude of the fatigue you must
recover from, and you will return to baseline strength more quickly.
It’s in this area that the average climber can realize a windfall of
unknown capability. The fact is, most climbers move too slowly, possess
less-than-ideal technique, and stop to place gear or think when they should
be pushing on to the next rest. While lack of experience and technical
ability are the real limiting factors here, slow climbing and hesitation will
lead you to believe that a lack of strength is the primary problem.
If any of this sounds familiar, then some dedicated technique-training
practice will go a long way toward elevating your game (see chapter 4). By
learning to move swiftly and accurately through hard moves, and by
relaxing your grip and lowering tension in the antagonist muscles, you will
use less ATP and CP on difficult sequences and produce less lactic acid. In
this way you immediately reduce the magnitude of the fatigue you must
recover from at a midclimb rest position, and you will return to baseline
strength more quickly between attempts or sends.

Enhance Forearm Recovery with the G-Tox

The dangling-arm shakeout is the technique traditionally used to aid
recovery in the commonly fatigued forearm muscles. A few seconds or,
hopefully, a few minutes of shaking out provides some recovery, but often
not enough. The effects of a full-on pump can take frustratingly long to
subside, and when hanging out at a marginal rest, it’s possible to expend as
much energy hanging on with one arm as is being recouped in the other.
Such a zero-net gain in recovery does nothing to enhance performance—in
such a situation you would likely have fared better by blowing off the socalled rest and climbing onward.
Luckily there is the G-Tox, a shakeout technique that I developed, to
accelerate recovery of finger strength while hanging out at a midclimb rest.
For more than fifteen years, I have been promoting the benefits of
alternating the position of your resting arm between the normal dangling
position and an above-your-head raised-hand position. This simple practice
provides a noticeable increase in recovery rate. I named this recovery
technique the G-Tox, because it uses gravity (as an ally, for once) to help
detoxify the fatigued muscle and speed recovery.
The discomfort and pump that develop in your forearms while climbing
are largely the result of accumulating lactic acid (LA) and restricted blood
flow. As described in chapter 5, LA is a by-product of the anaerobic
metabolism of glycogen, an energy pathway that comes into use during
extended contractions of greater than about 50 percent of maximum
intensity. Worse yet, contractions of as little as 20 percent of maximum
intensity begin to hamper capillary blood flow, and at 50 percent of
maximum contraction blood flow may be completely occluded (closed off).
As a result, LA concentrations skyrocket until blood flow can resume
during periods of low-intensity contraction or complete rest.

Tips to Accelerate Short-Term Recovery

1. Strive to limit fatigue in the first place by climbing with
maximum economy, optimal technique, and brilliant strategy!
2. Accelerate recovery at midclimb shakeouts by using the G-Tox
recovery technique.
3. Engage in active recovery between climbs by walking around
and performing light stretching and massage. Research has
shown that this will lower blood lactate by up to 35 percent
compared with just sitting around between ascents or attempts.
4. Do not smoke! Smoking decreases circulation and slows
recovery. Worse yet, smoking inhibits the production of
collagen and thus slows healing of tendons and ligaments.
5. Camel up by drinking a quart of water in the two hours
preceding a workout or day of climbing.
6. Continue drinking water as you climb at a rate of eight ounces
per hour (more in hot weather).
What’s more, when dangling your arm in the traditional shakeout
technique, it’s common to experience an initial increase in the sensation of
being pumped. This is because, as the muscle relaxes, blood flow into it
resumes—but the venous return of the “old blood” out of the muscle is
more sluggish. This traffic jam perpetuates the pump and slows recovery,
yet many climbers continue to dangle their arms and complain about how
sickening of a pump they have.
The G-Tox technique puts gravity to work by aiding venous return of
blood toward the heart. By helping get blood out of the arm more quickly,
this practice enhances the removal of lactic acid and, therefore, returns you
to a baseline level of blood lactate more quickly. The effects of this
technique are unmistakable—you will literally see the pump drain from the
elevated arm due to the interesting fact that arterial flow into the arm is less
affected by gravity than is venous return flow.
So why not just use the raised-arm position for the full duration of the
rest instead of using the alternating technique as described above? Since the
raised-arm position requires some muscular contraction in the upper arm,
shoulder, and chest, these muscles would fatigue and possibly hamper
climbing performance if you held the raised-arm position for a long time.
Consequently, the best protocol for recovery is alternating between the two

arm positions every five to ten seconds. Do so, and you will definitely feel
the difference the G-Tox makes!

Engage in Active Rest

Along with the G-Tox, active rest is another underused yet highly effective
strategy for accelerating recovery. While the G-Tox shines in its
effectiveness to enhance recovery at a midclimb shakeout, use of active rest
between climbs is an equally effective strategy for increasing the rate of
lactic acid removal from the working muscles and bloodstream.
Several recent studies, including one excellent study on climbers (Watts
2000), have shown that active rest significantly reduces blood lactate
compared with the more common practice of passive rest. In the Watts
study fifteen expert climbers attempted to redpoint a 20-meter, 5.12b gym
route, with eight of them engaging in active rest (recumbent cycling) and
the others assigned to passive rest immediately following completion of the
route. Periodic measurements of blood lactate revealed that the active-rest
group returned to preclimb levels within twenty minutes, while the passive
group took thirty minutes to return to baseline levels. Therefore, lowintensity active rest accelerated the clearing of lactic acid from the blood by
almost 35 percent.
Applying this research finding at the crag is simple. Upon completing a
pumpy route or redpoint attempt, instead of sitting down and resting
passively (or worse yet, having a smoke), grab your water bottle and go for
a casual twenty-minute hike. This will help clear lactic acid more quickly as
well as provide a mental break from the action. Both these factors will
enhance your performance on the next route!
Another study compared recovery after maximum exercise in four
groups: passive rest, active rest, massage, and combined massage and active
rest (Monedero 2000). After fifteen minutes of rest, blood lactate removal
was greatest in the group performing combined active rest and massage.
Therefore, you may be able to further improve the Watts strategy of active
rest by performing some self-massage on your most fatigued muscles
(usually the forearms, upper arms, and shoulders).

A more recent study has shown that shorter periods of active recovery
provide similarly positive effects on lowering blood lactate concentrations
compared with equal periods of passive rest. The study tested ten climbers
engaging in five, two-minute climbing trials, followed by two minutes of
either active or passive recovery. The active-recovery group started the next
trial with lower arterial lactate concentration than the passive-recovery
group, and they recorded lower perceived exertion scores at the end of each
climb (Draper 2006). The bottom line on this study is that in bouldering, it’s
better to walk around between ascents or attempts and sustain a higher heart
rate to speed recovery.

Prehydrate Within Two Hours of Exercise

Muscles are more than 70 percent water, and it plays a vital role in cellular
function and the transport of nutrients and metabolic waste. If you are
dehydrated, it will hurt your performance and slow recovery. Therefore, it’s
prudent to prehydrate by consuming a quart of water in the two hours
preceding a workout or climbing. Continue sipping water throughout the
duration of activity at a minimum rate of eight ounces every hour (twice
this, if it’s hot).

Accelerating Medium-Term or Intraday Recovery
Intraday recovery is the medium-term recuperation that occurs throughout
the day and up to twenty-four hours following exercise. What you do (or
don’t do) during this recovery period plays a direct role in how much
energy you will have during the latter part of a long day of climbing; it’s
also the primary factor in how much recovery you acquire in a single night
of rest. Of course, this is of big-time importance if you are in the midst of a
long, all-day route or when you plan to climb two days in a row.
Earlier I referred to this medium-term recovery phase as the refuel
period, since restoring a normal blood glucose level and replenishing
glycogen is the basis for most recovery gained from thirty minutes to
twenty-four hours following exercise. Consequently, consuming the right
carbohydrates at the right time is the single most vital action to accelerate
recovery. Still, stretching, massage, and the use of relaxation exercises will
also increase your rate of recuperation. Let’s delve deeper into each of these
areas.

Refuel Early and Often

The single biggest error in recovery strategy by most climbers is delayed
consumption of calories during and after a day of climbing. The natural
tendency is to become so engaged in the activity of climbing that you forget
to eat and drink. This is compounded by the fact that strenuous exercise
naturally suppresses hunger.

REFUELING WHILE YOU CLIMB
Earlier it was explained that consuming calories throughout the day helps
maintain blood glucose and, thus, helps slow the use of your limited supply
of glycogen. Toward this end, you should take in your first dose of calories
between one to two hours after beginning your climb. If you are cragging,
this might mean consuming a piece of fruit, a Balance Bar, or eight ounces
of sports drink after completing the first strenuous climb of the day.
Continue eating a small serving of food every two hours throughout the day.
In the case of all-day climbing, this means a total of four snacks—for
example, two pieces of fruit and two energy bars.
This may seem like an awful lot of food, and it is if you are only
climbing for half a day or going bouldering (halve these amounts in these
situations). To keep climbing hard throughout the day and to speed recovery
for a second day of climbing, however, you should consume a minimum of
600 to 800 calories during the course of the day.
Selecting the right kinds of food at the right time is a matter of the
glycemic index (GI). As introduced in chapter 9, high-GI foods elicit a
rapid rise (then drop) in blood sugar, while medium- and low-GI foods
release fuel into the bloodstream more slowly. In a stop-and-go sport like
climbing, steady blood sugar is vital for maintaining steady concentration

and steady energy. Therefore, consume only low-and medium-GI foods
while you are still engaged in physical activity (see table 9.2). Upon
completing your day on the rocks or reaching the end of your workout,
however, it’s best to consume higher-GI foods and beverages. This latter
distinction is powerful—there is a growing body of research indicating that
what you eat in the first thirty minutes after exercise is the single largest
determining factor in how fast you recover.

KICK-STARTING GLYCOGEN
REPLENISHMENT AFTER CLIMBING OR
TRAINING
As incredible as it may seem, recent research has shown that waiting two
hours after exercise to consume carbohydrates will reduce your glycogen
replenishment by 50 percent compared with eating immediately upon
cessation of the activity (Burke 1999). Therefore, when planning to climb a
second day, you significantly handicap tomorrow’s performance by
delaying refueling. Similarly, delayed refueling after training slows the
recovery and rebuilding processes and, possibly, delays complete recovery
by as much as a full day.
Let’s take a closer look at the best refueling strategies in the hours
following climbing or a vigorous workout.
First thirty minutes after climbing: Ingestion of high-GI foods
immediately after exercise substantially increases the rate of muscle
glycogen replacement (Richter 1984). More recent studies have shown that
glycogen synthesis may take place another 40 percent faster if protein and
carbohydrate are consumed together, due to a greater insulin response
(Niles 1997). Consequently, the best protocol for accelerating glycogen
replenishment appears to be a 4:1 ratio of carbohydrate to protein
consumption (Burke 1999).
Since solid foods enter the bloodstream more slowly than liquids, it’s
best to drink this carbohydrate- protein blend post-exercise. For example, a

160-pound climber would want to consume approximately one hundred
grams of carbohydrate and twenty-five grams of protein. Drinking a quart
of Gatorade, juice, or another glucose- or high-fructose-corn-syrup-based
sports drink would provide nearly a hundred grams of high-GI
carbohydrate. Consuming a high-protein energy bar or a whey protein shake
would provide roughly twenty-five grams of protein. Another highly
practical option is to drink a 4:1 (carbohydrate-to-protein ratio) sports drink
such as Accelerade. Take these actions immediately after your workout or
climbing and you will jump-start recovery, big time!
Two hours after climbing: Assuming you consumed the initial feeding of
carbohydrates and protein within the thirty-minute time frame, you can wait
until about two hours post-activity to eat a complete meal. Ideally, the meal
should comprise foods providing a macronutrient ratio of about 65:15:20
(calories from carbohydrate:protein:fat), as explained in chapter 9. Such a
meal might include a large serving of pasta, a piece of lean meat, and a
salad or some vegetables. Whereas high-GI foods are best eaten
immediately after exercise, medium- and low-GI foods are more
advantageous in the two to twenty-four hours after exercise. They will
provide a slower, longer-lasting trickle of glucose into the bloodstream that
will support steady glycogen resynthesis.
Before going to sleep: A small meal of carbohydrate and protein within
thirty minutes of going to sleep will further support glycogen resynthesis
and tissue rebuilding overnight. Skim milk may be the perfect beforebedtime food—it possesses low-GI carbohydrate, high-quality protein, and
the amino acid tryptophan, a precursor to serotonin, which slows down
brain activity. Drink a tall glass of skim milk (consider mixing in some
whey protein powder) or have some milk on a small bowl of whole-grain
cereal before bedtime. It’ll do your body good!

Cross-fiber friction (with braced finger) self-massage is an excellent way
to increase blood flow and warm up the forearm muscles prior to training.

Stretch and Massage the Hardest-Working Muscles

Earlier, you learned about an impressive research study showing that
combining active rest and massage accelerated recovery by enhancing the
removal of lactic acid from the blood. Deep-fiber-spreading sports massage
is also an effective practice to enhance medium- and long-term recovery.
The guy who literally wrote the book on the subject is Jack Meagher. In
his text Sports Massage, he explains how the use of a specific form of
sports massage can provide up to a 20 percent increase in performance, in
addition to reducing the risk of injury and accelerating recovery.

HOW IT WORKS
Traditional massage has long been used to increase blood flow and oxygen
transport in the muscles. The benefits of this superficial “rubbing” are brief,
however, and have little residual effect on performance.
Sports massage utilizes a deep-fiber-spreading technique that produces
hyperemia (a dilation of the blood vessels) through the full depth of the
muscle. Furthermore, the state of hyperemia lasts long after the procedure
has ended, so the enhanced blood flow can accelerate recovery and aid
healing after strenuous exercise.

Tips to Accelerate Medium-Term Recovery
1. Refuel early and often. Consume a piece of fruit, a balancedstyle energy bar, or sixteen ounces of sports drink every two
hours throughout the day of climbing. Favor low- to mediumGI foods and drinks.

2. At the end of a workout or day of climbing, kick-start recovery
by consuming a high-GI sports drink or a 4:1 ratio
carbohydrate-to-protein sports drink within the first thirty
minutes of cessation of strenuous activity.
3. Within two hours of concluding your workout or climbing,
consume a meal comprising approximately a 65:15:20 percent
breakdown of carbohydrate, protein, and fat, respectively.
4. Avoid consumption of alcoholic beverages, since alcohol has
been shown to slow supercompensation and reduce beneficial
growth hormone response.
5. Stretch, massage, and use a heating pad or whirlpool to
increase blood flow to sore, tired muscles. Use cross-fiber
friction massage and direct pressure to trigger point spasms.
6. Engage in progressive relaxation (see chapter 3) to further relax
muscles and quiet the mind during midday breaks from
climbing and before going to sleep.
Sports massage also helps reduce the number of small and often unfelt
spasms that regularly occur in the muscle. These spasms may go
unchallenged by conventional stretching and warm-up exercises and, left
unchecked, can rob you of coordination and induce mechanical resistance
and premature fatigue.

HOW TO DO IT
There are several strokes you may want to learn, but the most effective is
called cross-fiber friction. This stroke is best executed with a braced finger
(see the photo). The motion is a simple push in followed by a short push
back and forth across the muscle fiber. Keep the stroke short and rhythmic;
only gradually increase the pressure to penetrate deeper into the muscle.
Although sports massage can be used on all muscles, focus your efforts
on the upper body and, in particular, the finger flexors and extensors, and
the pronator teres and brachioradialis (upper forearm muscles), the biceps

and triceps (muscles of the upper arm), and the large muscles of the
shoulders and back. Incorporate five to ten minutes of massage into your
regular warm-up routine. This, along with the warm-up activities and
stretches detailed in chapter 6, will better prepare you for an excellent
workout or day on the rocks.

SPORTS MASSAGE TO ACCELERATE
RECOVERY
Your body has inherent mechanical weaknesses where sport-specific
movements can trigger stress overload. In climbing, the muscle most
overloaded are the forearms, upper arms, and back. These muscles are the
first to tire, and they are typically the slowest to recover. Fortunately, you
can modulate fatigue and hasten recovery through application of sport
massage to the specific stress points—often called trigger points—inherent
to climbing movements.
To become familiar with these stress points, it’s best to have some
understanding of how a muscle works. First, voluntary muscles have two
ends, each of which is attached to a bone via a tendon. One end is a fixed
attachment called the origin, and the other is a movable attachment called
the insertion. For example, the origin of the bicep muscle is at the shoulder,
and the insertion is just below the elbow. The motor nerve enters the muscle
in the thick muscle belly between the origin and insertion. It is here that all
contractions begin, and they spread toward the ends of the muscle as more
forceful contractions are needed. Consequently, only a maximum effort will
recruit the high-threshold fibers situated near the ends of the muscle.
For this reason a proper (submaximum) warm-up does not work the
whole muscle. The end fibers (near the origin and insertion) largely miss
out on the warm-up process, and thus they are more likely to underperform
when called into action for high-intensity movements. Fortunately, sports
massage applied to these points before a workout or climb helps warm even
the least used fibers, and enables maximum efforts with minimal resistance
and risk of injury.

These trigger points are also more likely to harbor stress and become
cramped post-exercise. Use of sports massage and trigger point therapy will
help relieve these stress points and speed recovery. You can best address
these trigger points with what is called the direct-pressure stroke. Apply
firm, constant straight-in pressure with a braced finger, a wooden Bodo or
shepherd’s crook (available from www.bonnieprudden.com), or a friend’s
elbow, and hold for fifteen to thirty seconds. Direct pressure is especially
useful when applied to the trigger points near the base of the muscles. This
will help relieve any known or unknown spasms, increase local circulation,
and aid healing. (Be sure never to apply sports massage tactics to tendons,
joints, or injured tissues, however.) Conclude your massage with some mild
stretching.

Use Relaxation Techniques

Chapter 3 described an excellent relaxation technique called the Progressive
Relaxation Sequence. Though commonly used before going to sleep,
progressive relaxation is also highly effective for relaxing the muscles and
quieting the mind during a midday break from climbing. When resting
between climbs or taking a break before returning to work on a project, find
a quiet spot, lie down, and spend ten to twenty minutes performing
progressive relaxation. Upon completing this process, sit up for a few
minutes and enjoy the day before proceeding to the next climb.
Make a midday relaxation break a regular part of your climbing ritual
and you’ll find yourself climbing better, and with less fatigue, late into the
day.

Accelerating Long-Term or Interday Recovery
The interday recovery period involves the long-term recuperation from a
severe workout or a couple of hard days of climbing. Depending on the
intensity and volume of the activity, full recovery could take anywhere from
one to four days (or more).
When you wake up in the morning with sore muscles (delayed-onset
muscle soreness), it’s a sign that you incurred microtraumas and that a
recovery period of at least another twenty-four hours is needed. Of course,
you have two choices in this situation. The first is to go climbing (or work
out) for a second straight day, despite the soreness, realizing that your
performance will be less than ideal and your risk of injury is increased. Or
you could take a day or two off and allow your neuromuscular system to
recuperate to a level of capability higher than before the workout
(supercompensation).
Certainly, there are times when you will select the first option of
climbing a second day straight, but there should be an equal number of
instances when you decide that “less will be more.” Weekend climbing trips
are the classic situation in which you’d want to climb two days in a row,
regardless of sore muscles. Given proper nutrition, a good warm-up, and a
prudent approach to pushing yourself on the second day, you will usually
get away with climbing sore.
Choosing to take a day or two of rest, however, is clearly the intelligent
decision when climbing indoors or during an off-season training cycle.
Hopefully, you gleaned from chapter 5 that proper rest is as important as
training stimulus in becoming a stronger climber, and that under-resting is a
primary cause of injury. Enthusiastic indoor and sport climbers are most
commonly guilty of under-resting, but regardless of your preference, it’s
important that you distinguish yourself from the mass of climbers who
overtrain. If you find yourself drawn to overtraining with the crowd,

remember that in order to outperform the masses, you cannot do what they
are doing!

Eat Frequent, Small Meals

Instead of eating the typical three meals per day, you can accelerate
recovery by consuming six smaller meals or snacks spaced evenly
throughout the day. Avoid high-GI foods; they are less effective for
recovery after the first two hours post-exercise. Instead select low- and
medium-GI foods for all your meals and drink at least ten glasses of water
throughout the day.
At least three of your meals should contain a significant portion of
protein. For instance, breakfast could include a couple of eggs, skim milk,
or whey protein; lunch might include some low-fat yogurt, skim milk, or a
can of tuna; and for dinner it might be good to eat a piece of lean red meat,
chicken, or fish. Each of these meals should also include some
carbohydrate, and at all costs avoid fat-laden fried foods and any snack
foods containing hydrogenated oils. Strive for a macronutrient profile of
roughly 65:15:20 (carbohydrate:protein:fat) for each major meal.
While the other three feedings need be only a couple hundred calories,
they are vital for maintaining steady blood glucose and continuing the
recovery processes throughout the day. Low- and medium-GI foods are the
best choice, with a piece of fruit or a balanced-type energy bar being ideal
selections.

Take a Multivitamin and Antioxidants

In today’s world of highly processed foods, it’s often difficult to consume
enough of the vitamins and minerals that athletes need by simply eating a
well-rounded diet. Chapter 9 set forth a basic supplement program that I
feel all serious climbers should abide by. It’s most important to consume
extra vitamin C, vitamin E, and selenium; taking a daily multivitamin
would also be wise.

Stretch and Massage Sore Muscles

Gentle stretching and sports massage are widely accepted as effective
means to lengthen the muscles and enhance recovery following strenuous
exercise. Professional athletes have full-time trainers who help with postexercise stretching and rest-day massage (must be nice!). Though I won’t
pay for you to add a masseur to your climbing-support staff, I do suggest
that you stretch for ten to fifteen minutes per day and partake in some sports
massage of sore muscles. Follow the stretching procedures outlined in
chapter 6 and, of course, the primer on sports massage provided earlier in
this chapter.

Long-Term Recovery Tips
1. Eat small frequent meals—consume six smaller meals and
snacks comprising low-to mid-GI foods and protein sources.
2. Drink eight ounces of water every one to two hours to
rehydrate and flush toxins from your body.
3. Take a daily multivitamin and other antioxidants as detailed in
chapter 9.
4. Avoid excessive consumption of alcoholic beverages, since
these provide little quality nutrition, lead to dehydration, and
suppress growth hormone response following exercise.
5. Engage in daily stretching, massage, and active-recovery
activities such as hiking, biking, and easy running.
6. Apply a heating pad to sore muscles and tendons, twice daily
for ten to fifteen minutes, to increase blood flow and accelerate
recovery and healing. Note that you should never place a
heating pad on a swollen or acutely injured body part.
7. Get at least seven to eight hours of sleep per night; nine to ten
hours (or more) after mega-long day climbs or multiday big-

wall or alpine ascents.
8. Strive for a calm, relaxed, easygoing disposition—this will
help lower cortisol levels and foster more rapid recovery.

Get Plenty of Sleep

Here’s an important recovery technique that this full-time working, fourday-a-week-training, weekend-climbing, book-writing, thirty-year veteran
of the rocks wishes he could get more of! Although most neuromuscular
regeneration occurs during sleep, I always fall back on the fact that nothing
is produced or achieved during sleep.
Seriously, sleep is vital for any climber serious about training and
passionate about maximizing ability. The bare minimum amount of sleep
per night is seven to eight hours, though nine to ten hours is ideal following
an extremely strenuous workout or a long day of climbing. No doubt, it’s a
busy world—and sleep may seem like the only activity that’s expendable. If
you closely evaluate a typical day, however, you will likely be able to
identify some low-value activities like surfing the Net, watching TV, and
certain social events that can be reduced or eliminated to allow for more
sleep. It can take great discipline to give up some of these activities—
visualize your climbing goals!—but the long-term payoffs will dwarf the
hollow pleasure of these low-value pastimes.

Engage in Light Activities

Earlier you learned of a couple of great research studies that showed the
value of active rest in accelerating recovery from strenuous exercise (by
enhancing removal of lactic acid). In the context of long-term recovery,
active rest is also beneficial because it enhances circulation to the damaged
muscles and produces a general loosening effect on stiff muscles.
The best active-rest activities for climbers are hiking, jogging, light
mountain biking, and even some limited less-than-vertical or big-hold
climbing. Still, it’s crucial that each of these activities be performed at a low
enough intensity that you don’t get heavily winded or pumped and only
break a light sweat. Limit yourself to thirty to sixty minutes of activerecovery exercise, and remain disciplined in not letting the activity escalate
into anything more than active rest.

Possess a Positive, Calm Personality 24/7

This last recovery tip is subtle yet very powerful. Possessing a positive,
relaxed, and easygoing attitude not only puts you in a better performance
state, but has been proven to increase recovery and maybe even encourage
muscular growth.
Strenuous exercise and stressful situations cause a drugstore’s worth of
chemicals and hormones to be released into the bloodstream. Some of these
hormones have long-term positive effects, such as growth hormone, which
is anabolic. The fight-or-flight hormones like epinephrine and cortisol,
however, can have a long-term negative effect when released chronically. In
particular, cortisol has been shown to be catabolic, meaning that it results in
breakdown of muscle.
In light of the above factors, elite athletes have long been interested in
enhancing the release of growth hormone and preventing high levels of
cortisol. This is the very reason some athletes take anabolic steroids.
Fortunately, you can modulate levels of growth hormone and cortisol
with proper training, quality nutrition, and adequate rest, as well as through
adjustments in your lifestyle. For instance, individuals with Type A,
aggressive behavior naturally exhibit higher levels of cortisol (Williams
1982) and reduced levels of growth hormone. It’s also been shown,
however, that behavior modification and reduction of the stressors in life
can reverse this effect and provide more beneficial training (Dinan 1994).
Therefore, possessing a relaxed approach to climbing and a humorous
attitude about life in general will play an underlying but beneficial role by
enhancing the quality of your training adaptations, accelerating recovery,
and boosting climbing performance.
It’s important to recognize that training (climbing) and recovery are
opposite sides of the same coin. You must place equal importance on doing
both optimally and to the best of your ability. Clearly, it requires a shift in
perspective to actually plan and engage in the process of recovery in the

same way you plan and engage in the process of training. But in doing so,
you will distinguish yourself from the masses by producing uncommonly
good results, and by avoiding downtime due to injury and illness.

Daniel Woods crushing Armed Response (V13), South Africa. KEITH
LADZINSKI

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Injury Treatment and Prevention

Our greatest glory is not in never failing, but in rising up every time
we fail.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson

This last chapter might not be necessary if this were a book on training for
bowling or training for badminton. Despite what we tell our parents,
however, climbing is a sport with an unusually high incidence of injury.
Several studies report that up to three-quarters of all recreational and elite
climbers have suffered a climbing injury. Fortunately only a small number
of injuries are severe traumas produced by falls—the rest are overuse and
minor acute injuries that most commonly occur in the fingers, elbows, and
shoulders. These insidious “nuisance injuries,” while far from life
threatening, can become chronic and debilitating, and they are extremely
frustrating for an otherwise healthy individual passionate about climbing.
The goal of this chapter is to increase your awareness of the causes and
symptoms of the most common overuse injuries. Early identification is the
best way to mitigate an overuse injury, whereas ignoring the early pangs
and hoping that it will go away is almost always a recipe for a chronic
injury that could sideline you for months. Ultimately, learning to recognize
at-risk situations both when you’re training and when you’re climbing, and
embracing a prudent approach to these activities that errs on the side of
caution, is the best medicine for preventing injury.

Over the last decade numerous relevant studies have been presented by
British, French, German, and American researchers, and several excellent
articles were published in climbing magazines by physicians experienced in
treating injured climbers. Based on this growing body of knowledge, I will
present what seems to be the current treatment protocol for the most
prevalent injuries; still, I urge you to seek professional treatment from a
physician familiar with sports injuries (call around and ask this question
straight out). Countless climbers have fallen into the trap of self-treatment
and trying to climb through an injury—these approaches often make
matters worse and can lead to unnecessarily long-term downtime. The
bottom line: Read this chapter as an injury primer that encourages
proactive, professional treatment of all injuries, and not as an absolute guide
to the subject.

Overview of Climbing Injuries
A wide variety of injuries can result from climbing and sport-specific
training activities, and a survey of available literature yields a broad range
of pathologies from tendinitis to broken bones. While acute trauma
resulting from falls is a very real issue, this overview of climbing injuries
focuses on the chronic overuse injuries that typically result from the process
of climbing and training, instead of falling. For more comprehensive
coverage of both acute and overuse climbing injuries I strongly recommend
that you read the excellent book One Move Too Many (Hochholzer 2003).

Types of Injuries

Injury surveillance data from several recent studies confirms that the
majority of climbing injuries are not the result of falls. A well-designed
British study revealed that three-quarters of climbing injuries were of the
chronic overuse variety (Doran 1999). In this study 111 active climbers of
all ages and abilities were questioned with regard to injuries incurred over
the two previous years. One hundred forty overuse injuries from forty-nine
climbers were reported—obviously some climbers in this sample
experienced multiple or recurrent injuries during the twenty-four months of
the study.
A breakdown of these overuse injuries confirms what experienced
climbers have known anecdotally for years: The fingers, shoulders, and
elbows are the three most common sites of nonfall injuries (see figure 11.1).
Of all the injuries revealed in the British study, 40 percent occurred in the
fingers, 16 percent in the shoulders, and 12 percent in the elbows. Other
common sites for injury, though much less prevalent, were the knees (5
percent), back (5 percent), and wrists (4 percent). These findings agree
surprisingly well with a German study (Stelzle 2000) of 314 climbers of
both sexes and all degrees of climbing ability, which identified the most
common injuries as finger tendon (39 percent), elbow (11 percent), and
knee (about 5 percent).

Contributing Factors

An almost unanimous conclusion of the many injury studies is that
occurrence of overuse injuries is directly proportionate to climbing ability
and the perceived importance of climbing to the individual. Other cofactors
include use of indoor climbing walls and use of campus boards and
fingerboards in training for climbing.
The British study depicts a dramatic increase in injury rates among 5.11
climbers versus 5.10 climbers (see figure 11.2). At the 5.12 level, nearly 88
percent of climbers surveyed had experienced overuse injuries in the prior
two years. By comparison, only 20 percent of individuals climbing at levels
below 5.9 incurred overuse injuries, the lowest relative frequency of all
categories (Doran 1999).

Figure 11.1 Sites of Nonfall Injuries

Figure 11.2 Overuse Injuries
At least two studies show a statistically significant relationship between
perceived importance of climbing and incidence of injury. Doran (1999)
says, “The frequency of injury occurrence was significantly higher in those
who perceived climbing to be very important to those who rated it as not so
important.” An important corollary to this relationship is that enthusiastic
climbers are more likely to return to climbing before full rehabilitation has
occurred, thus leading to a pattern of recurrence.
Another British study of 295 climbers at a recent World Cup event found
that those most at risk for overuse injuries were climbers with “the most
ability and dedication to climbing.” The analysis showed a linear relation
between lead-climbing grade and overuse injuries (Wright 2001).
A number of other variables have been identified as cofactors in
contributing to overuse injuries, including climbing preference and training
practices.
Consensus among experts in the field is that incidence of overuse injuries
has increased since the advent of indoor walls and sport-climbing tactics.
An article in Sports Medicine proposes that the preponderance of
overhanging terrain at indoor climbing facilities is a contributing factor to
the increase in upper-body injuries (Rooks 1997). At the least, indoor walls
do enable year-round climbing and make it oh-so-easy to test your absolute
limit, thanks to toprope belays and well-bolted leads. Clearly, this is an
environment that can lend itself to overtraining and a general lack of rest

time away from the stresses and strains of climbing. I know of a few
individuals who climbed indoors five or six days per week—and all, sooner
or later, suffered significant finger, elbow, or shoulder injuries.
Training practices have also been implicated as a contributing factor in
overuse injuries of climbers at all ability levels. One study found that 37
percent of individuals engaging in sport-specific training used a fingerboard
or some other similar setup to perform one- and two-finger pull-ups. Of this
group of low-and high-end climbers, 72 percent reported at least one injury
of the hands or arms (Bannister 1986).
Doran (1996) reports that most of the climbers in his study performed
some form of supplementary training; in particular, fingerboards and
dynamic double-handed campus training were popular among the injured
climbers. The obvious implication is that these high-stress, ultraspecific
forms of training may be injurious or at least exacerbate low-grade
preexisting injuries. These conclusions all make good sense and, therefore,
underscore the importance of a prudent, mature approach to sport-specific
training that knows when to say enough and errs on the side of over-resting
rather than overtraining.
One puzzling part of the Doran (1996) study is the finding that climbers
who conducted a regular warm-up had an increased frequency of injury in
comparison with those who did not warm up. Not only is this idea
counterintuitive, but it is contradictory to a large body of literature claiming
that a proper warm-up is vital for preventing injury. Toward this end,
another British researcher had previously found that increased frequency of
injury was partially attributable to an absence of (or too brief) a warm-up
regimen (Bollen 1988).
It’s my sense that it would not be best to abandon your warm-up
activities based on a single study. There are several possible explanations
for the unlikely findings of the Doran study. First, one of the hallmark
findings of this study was that ability level was proportionate to frequency
of overuse injury. Therefore, high-end climbers were far more likely to
experience overuse injuries than low-end climbers. I wonder, however, if
high-end climbers are more likely to engage in warm-up activities (since
they take climbing and training so seriously), while low-end climbers are
more likely to “just go climbing” and skip the warm-up regimen. Could this
explain the unusual findings that warm-up activities increase the risk of
injury?

Another possible explanation of this finding could be that climbers who
regularly warm up before training and climbing do so too quickly, severely,
or excessively. For instance, it’s widely accepted that stretching cold can
injure connective tissues and muscles. Furthermore, excessive amounts of
stretching can lead to loose joints and aggravate existing injuries. In the
final analysis, I suspect we will find that a slow, incremental warm-up
(comprising general activity and mild stretching) does not increase injury
risk and is, in fact, a worthwhile and beneficial process prior to hard
training or climbing.

Figure 11.3 Finger Anatomy

Common Injuries and Treatment
Based on the research outlined above, we know that about 75 percent of all
climbers have had or will experience an overuse injury. Furthermore, it’s
well documented that the four most common sites of injury are the fingers,
elbows, shoulders, and knees. In this section we’ll take a closer look at each
of these problem spots. Hopefully, this information will empower you to
recognize symptoms early on and thus modify your activity or seek medical
attention before the injury becomes more severe or chronic. One caveat that
all climbers should recognize straight up is that you must seek medical
attention for any condition that gets worse after withdrawal from climbing
and training. This could indicate a tumor, infection, or other disease that
needs immediate medical attention.

Finger Injuries

Considering the incredible mechanical loading we place on our fingers
when climbing, it’s no surprise that they are the most common site of injury.
Unfortunately, these pesky finger injuries are often hard to diagnose
precisely and, worse yet, in the early stages tend to be ignored. Many
climbers rationalize that they can climb through one injured finger, since
they have nine healthy fingers and can still manage to crank at a nearmaximum level. Continued climbing on an injured finger may increase the
severity of the injury, however, and thus double or triple (or more) the
downtime needed to recover.
Understanding the most common injuries requires some knowledge of
hand anatomy (see figure 11.3). To begin with, there are no muscles in the
fingers. Flexion of the fingers and wrist is produced by the muscles of the
forearm that originate from the medial (inside) elbow and terminate via
long tendons that attach to the middle phalanx (MP) and distal phalanx
(DP) of each finger. The flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) muscle inserts
into the palm side of the MP and produces flexion of the proximal
interphalangeal (PIP) joint. The long tendon of the flexor digitorum
profundus (FDP) muscle passes through a split in the FDS and then inserts
on the palm side of the DP. The FDP controls flexion of the distal
interphalangeal joint (DIP).

Figure 11.4 Annular Pulley Injuries
Both flexor tendons (FDS and FDP) pass through a tunnel-like, synovialined tendon sheath that provides nourishment and lubrication. The flexor
tendon and sheath are held close to the bone by five annular pulleys (A1,
A2, and so forth) and three (sometimes four) cruciform pulleys that prevent
tendon “bowstringing” during flexion. Biomechanical studies have shown
that the A2 and A4 pulleys are the most important (Lin 1989). As a
conceptual model, visualize the whole system of the flexor tendon, sheath,
and annular pulley as functioning like a brake cable on a bike.

TENDON PULLEY INJURIES
The most common finger injuries experienced by climbers involve partial
tears or complete ruptures of one or more of the flexor tendon annular
pulleys. In many cases only a partial tear of a single pulley occurs; in more
serious incidences, however, one or more pulleys may rupture entirely,
resulting in palpable or visible bowstringing, respectively. The exact nature
and extent of the injury is difficult to diagnose without use of magnetic
resonance imaging (Gabl 1996), though a recent Austrian study has shown
Dynamic Ultrasonography to be highly effective at depicting finger pulley
injuries in rock climbers as well (Klauser 2002).

The A2 pulley is the most commonly injured of the five annular pulleys,
and you can blame the common crimp grip as the main culprit. In using the
crimp grip, near-ninety-degree flexion of the PIP joint produces tremendous
force load on the A2 pulley, in addition to forceful hyperextension of the
DIP joint. Injuries to the A2 pulley can range from microscopic to partial
tears and, in the worst case, a complete rupture (see figure 11.4). Small
partial tears are generally insidious, because they develop over the course of
a few climbs, a few days of climbing, or even gradually during the course
of a climbing season. Less frequent are acute ruptures that result during a
maximum move on a tiny crimp hold or one-finger pocket. Some climbers
report feeling or hearing a pop—a likely sign of a significant partial tear or
complete rupture—though other injuries could also produce this effect.
Depending on the severity of an A2 pulley injury, pain and swelling at
the base of the finger can range from slight to so debilitating that you can’t
perform everyday tasks like picking up a jug of milk. Swelling may limit
the range of motion during flexion, and bowstringing may be felt or seen
(Marco 1998) if one or two additional pulleys (usually A3 and A4) are
ruptured, respectively. Slight tears may be asymptomatic when the finger is
at rest, but become painful during isometric contraction (as in gripping a
hold) or when pressing on the base of the finger near the top of the palm.
Treatment of an A2 pulley injury must begin with completed cessation of
climbing and discontinuation of any other activity that requires forceful
flexion of the injured finger. Doing anything that causes pain will slow
healing of the injured tissue and may even make the injury worse.
Therefore, the intelligent climber will cease climbing at the very moment of
the injury so that the healing process may begin and the time frame for
healing is most brief. By contrast, the immature climber may try to climb
through the injury, which all but guarantees a worse tear and an even longer,
eventually forced, exit from climbing.
The goal during the first few days following injury is to control
inflammation (if present) with ice and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
(NSAID) medicines like ibuprofen or Naprosyn. Cease use of NSAIDs
within three to five days (or less), since long-term use has been shown to
impede the healing process and may even weaken tendons (see “Vitamin I”
later in this chapter). “Buddy taping” (to an adjacent finger) or splinting of
the injured finger can be beneficial during the first few days following
injury, especially if you find it hard to limit use of your injured finger.

Depending on the severity of the tear, pain typically subsides in two to
ten weeks. Becoming pain-free, however is not the go-ahead to resume
climbing! This is where many climbers go wrong—they return to climbing
too soon and reinjure the partially healed tissue. As a general rule, wait an
additional two weeks beyond becoming pain-free, then slowly return to
climbing. In the case of a modest A2 pulley injury, this may mean a total of
about forty-five days of climbing downtime.
A French study of twelve elite climbers with A2 pulley injuries found
that eight subjects were able to successfully return to climbing after fortyfive days of rest (Moutet 1993). More severe pulley tears, however, may
require as much as two or three months of rest before you can progressively
return to climbing. The bottom line on these frustrating pulley injuries is to
nip them in the bud by immediately initiating a rest and healing period
away from climbing. Each successive day you continue to climb on the
injured finger may effectively multiply the length of the healing process
(and your eventual time away from climbing).
In the case of a complete or multiple annular pulley rupture (Grade IV
injury), surgical reconstruction is necessary. Hand surgeons have long
performed reconstruction of annular pulleys in nonclimbing cases where a
deep laceration had damaged the flexor tendon and tendon pulleys. Free
tendon grafts are the most common method of pulley reconstruction (Seiler
2000). The grafts are most often harvested from the dorsal wrist extensor
retinaculum or the palmaris longus, and loops of the tendon are sewn in
place of the damaged pulley (Moutet 2003; Seiler 1995; Lister 1979). It has
been shown that reconstruction with three loops can withstand as much
force load to failure as a normal annular pulley (Lin 1989).
An Austrian study reveals that annular pulley reconstruction has
produced good functional and subjective results in climbers after eighteen
to forty-three months of recovery time (Gabl 1998). Still, American
physician Joel Rohrbough has examined numerous climbers who exhibit
chronic bowstringing and continue to climb hard without disability. Based
on this, he recommends against surgery, though he does encourage
individuals to make an educated choice after discussion with a qualified
surgeon (Rohrbough 2000).
So how can you protect injured fingers from further damage?
Reinforcing flexor tendon pulleys with cloth athletic tape is a popular
method—but is this practice really effective? Several physicians are on

record as stating that firm circumferential taping is beneficial. Rohrbough
(2000) notes that “tape is a tremendous help, giving support to a weak or
healing pulley, helping to hold the tendon against the bone.” Robinson
(1988) says, “Use of tape around the fingers between joints is helpful,”
because it acts to reinforce the flexor tendon pulleys, protect the joint from
extreme positions by limiting range of motion, and helps protect the skin.
Jebson (1997) advises using protective taping for two to three months upon
returning to climbing after an A2 pulley injury.
Despite these endorsements of prophylactic taping, I’ve seen one
magazine article stating that taping “doesn’t make the tendon any stronger
—in fact, it may restrict blood flow to the repairing tendon and weaken it”
(Crouch 1998). Furthermore, a study done in Texas found “no statistically
significant difference in load to A2 pulley failure between taped and
untaped fingers” and concluded that “we do not support taping the base of
fingers as a prophylactic measure” (Warme 2000). Let’s sort things out.
Based on an objective analysis of all available studies, it seems that the
above statements about the ineffectiveness or even harmful effects of taping
are flawed. First, the statement about taping “restricting blood and
weakening the tendon” might be true if tape was worn all day and night. It’s
hard to imagine that taping for a few hours while training or climbing could
have such a negative effect; after all, athletes in a wide range of sports tape
everything from feet and ankles to wrists and fingers while in training or
competing. Why would climbers’ intermittent use of supportive taping be
uniquely dangerous?
What about the recent study that found no difference in A2 pulley
strength between taped and untaped fingers? Well, that study was done
using frozen cadaveric hands that were rigidly mounted in a specialized jig
to maintain a crimp-grip position. One has to wonder if the warm hands of a
living climber might exhibit different properties with regard to tendon
strength and might even use a subtly different grip than our “climbing
cadaver.”

Treating A2 Pulley Injury
1. Immediately cease climbing and any other activity that requires
forceful flexion of the injured finger. Consult a doctor if there

is noticeable bowstringing on the flexor tendon.
2. Use ice and consume NSAID medications only if the injury
produces palpable or visible swelling. Cease use of ice and
NSAIDs as soon as swelling diminishes—further use will slow
healing!
3. In especially painful cases, consider buddy taping or splinting
the injured finger to limit use for a few days following injury.
4. As pain decreases—and only when all swelling is gone—begin
light daily finger activity such as finger flexions, squeezing a
rubber doughnut, mild stretching, and massage. This light
exercise is important to ensure proper healing.
5. Use a heating pad for ten to fifteen minutes, three times a day,
to increase blood flow and accelerate healing. Smokers should
consider breaking the habit, since smoking has been shown to
slow healing of tendons and ligaments.
6. Use the therapy described in steps 4 and 5 for at least two to
four weeks before beginning a gradual return to climbing. Use
prophylactic taping every time you climb, and spend the first
week or two climbing relatively easy routes with big holds and
good footholds.
7. Return to maximal climbing if easy climbing yields no pain.
Continue taping and avoid tweaky holds for several months,
since complete tendon healing can take a hundred days or
more. Climb smart!
Interestingly, a Swiss researcher has apparently answered this question
for us (Schweizer 2000). He built a device to measure tendon and tendon
pulley forces in vivo—that is, live climbers’ hands—and determined the
force of bowstringing as well as the force applied to the pulley tape. Two
slightly different taping methods were used—over the A2 pulley at the base
of the finger, and over the distal end of proximal phalanx near the PIP joint
—as he tested sixteen fingers in the typical crimp-grip position. This study
revealed that taping over the A2 pulley decreased bowstringing by 2.8
percent and absorbed 11 percent of the force, while taping just below the
PIP joint (just beyond the A2 pulley) decreased bowstringing by 22 percent
and absorbed 12 percent of total force. The obvious conclusion is that

circumferential taping does provide a small reduction in total force on the
tendon pulley system, though the author does not feel it would be enough to
prevent a pulley rupture.

Prophylactic Taping Methods

The A2 ring is the more common method of prophylactic finger
taping. Using the widest piece of tape possible without interfering
with PIP flexion (anywhere from 0.5 to 1.0 inch, depending on the
length of your fingers), wrap three firm turns of tape around the
base of the finger, directly supporting the A2 pulley. Apply the tape
as tightly as possible without restricting blood flow. This may take a
bit of experimentation, but remember that loose taping serves no
function other than protecting the skin. Retape your fingers every
few hours to maintain the necessary tightness throughout a full day
of climbing.

The Swiss method (as used in the Swiss study mentioned below)
involves firm circumferential taping at the distal end of the proximal
phalanx—that is, just above the A2 pulley and immediately below the
PIP joint. Use a narrower strip of tape, approximately 0.33 inch
wide, and wrap as tightly and as close to the PIP joint as possible
without restricting blood flow or flexion.

The X method may provide additional tendon support to the A3, A4,
and cruciform pulleys, and it’s very effective at preventing skin wear
(and pain) when you’re climbing on sharp pockets or rough indoor
holds. Tear a long strip of tape, approximately 16 inches in length by
0.75 inch wide. With a slight bend in the finger, begin with two turns
of tape over the proximal phalanx (on top of the A2 pulley), and then
cross under the PIP joint and take two turns around the middle
phalanx. Cross back under the PIP joint and conclude with another
turn or two around the base of the finger.
Therefore, it seems that taping should have a small positive effect in
reinforcing the A2 pulley, and you should consider this practice for
providing some protection of a previously injured tendon. Three different
taping techniques are shown in the “Prophylactic Taping Methods” box
above.

FLEXOR TENDINOSIS, AND TENDON
RUPTURE AND AVULSION
Several other injuries can produce pain and diminished function in ways
similar to an injured annular pulley. (As stated earlier, diagnosis can be
difficult—see a physician to be completely sure what you are dealing with.)
Tendinosis can develop in the FDS or FDP tendon as a result of repetitive
stress. In this case pain may be limited to the palm side of the finger or
extend into the palm or forearm (Jebson 1997). Extended rest is the primary
treatment, followed by a gradual return to climbing a few weeks after
cessation of pain (as described for tendon pulley injuries).
In rare cases a flexor tendon may rupture or avulse (pull out at the point
of insertion). Jebson (1997) states that an FDS tendon rupture may occur
with the crimp grip, while an FDP tendon rupture is more likely with a
pocket grip. Either rupture or avulsion would occur acutely with immediate
onset of pain. Jebson states that symptoms include pain at the FDS or FDP
tendon insertion, finger swelling, and an absence of active flexion of the

PIP joint (FDS rupture) or DIP joint (FDP rupture). Surgical reattachment
may be required.
You may be surprised to learn that flexor tendon ruptures, avulsions, and
to a lesser extent annular pulley injuries occur occasionally among football
players. These acute injuries, commonly called “jersey finger,” occur when
a tackler with an outstretched arm catches a finger on the jersey of the ball
carrier sprinting past him. It is interesting to observe that many linemen and
linebackers use prophylactic taping to support the flexor tendon and the A2
and A4 pulleys—it would seem that professional football players have also
concluded that prophylactic taping works!

COLLATERAL LIGAMENT INJURIES
Ligaments connect bone to bone across a joint, providing stability (see
figure 11.3). Collateral ligament sprains and avulsions at the PIP joint are
known to occur in climbers, particularly as a result of a powerful lunge or
awkward torque off a “fixed” finger (as in a jam or tight pocket). A sprain
manifests with mild to moderate pain and swelling around the PIP joint, but
with no loss of stability (Jebson 1997). A rupture or avulsion will produce
significant pain and swelling as well as loss of stability, medially or
laterally.
Treatment of incomplete collateral ligament injuries typically involves
splinting of the PIP joint for ten to fourteen days, after which buddy taping
can be used and range-of-motion exercises started (Bach 1999). Climbing
can gradually be reintroduced despite persistent low-grade pain and
swelling, which may take months to resolve (Jebson 1997).
Complete collateral ligament injuries at the PIP joint are usually treated
operatively. If the collateral ligament is completely avulsed from the bone,
non-operative treatment may result in chronic swelling and long-term
instability (Bach 1999). Surgical repair can improve this, and full function
is often restored in approximately three months.

Other Finger and Hand Injuries

A wide variety of other finger and hand injuries are possible in a sport that
requires fingers to crimp, pinch, and jam under high passive and dynamic
force loads. No doubt, you will experience your share of household injuries
like torn tips, palm flappers, or back-of-hand gobies. There are a few more
subtle injuries that can affect climbers, however, including carpal tunnel
syndrome, swollen or arthritic PIP and DIP joints, and growth plate injury
among youth climbers.

CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a condition in which a nerve passing
through the wrist, with the flexor tendons, is exposed chronically to too
much pressure. This syndrome affects a small number of climbers, but its
occurrence does not appear to be disproportionately common in climbers
(Robinson 1993). Therefore, it’s difficult to conclude whether a climber
with this syndrome incurred it from the repetitive gripping of rock holds or
from some other source. Regardless, the symptoms include numbness,
burning, and tingling of the fingers; these symptoms may become worse at
night or during activity or elevation (Lewis 1993). Treatment involves
cessation or lowering intensity of climbing, anti-inflammatory medicines,
and splinting of the wrist in a neutral position at night for three to six
weeks. Surgical decompression of the carpal tunnel may be required if this
conservative treatment fails and symptoms are severe enough to be
disabling.

ARTHRITIS
For years I have heard speculation that active “rock climbers will someday
become severe arthritis sufferers.” Fortunately, anecdotal evidence of many
twenty- and thirty-year veterans, as well as recent studies of longtime
climbers, indicates that these predictions are not quite panning out. In this
study, radiographs of the hands of veteran elite climbers were compared
with an age-matched control group. An increased rate of osteoarthritis for
several joints was found in the climber group, though no significant
difference in the overall prevalence of osteoarthritis was found between the
two groups (Rohrbough 1998). A more recent study compared recreational
climbers to nonclimbers by measuring bone strength and dimensions and
occurrence of osteoarthritis. The study concluded that climbers are not at an
increased risk for developing osteoarthritis; it also discovered that climbers’
finger and hand bones are wider (indicating that additional bone is
deposited subperiosteally) and stronger (Sylvester 2006). These studies are
really good news for those of us entering middle age with many years of
climbing under our belts!
Still, it’s possible that individuals who predominantly use the crimp grip
may experience some mild swelling and arthritis in the PIP and DIP joints.
As shown in figure 11.4, use of the crimp grip produces hyperextension of
the DIP joint under large passive force, while the PIP joint is sharply flexed
under great force. Therefore, both the DIP and PIP joints are possible sites
of mild swelling and arthritis (Robinson 1993).
If you are an aging climber who experiences some swelling, pain, or
stiffness of the DIP and PIP joints, you will find some relief through use of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications. A growing body of research
also points to a supplement called glucosamine sulfate as an effective
treatment for mild osteoarthritis. Daily supplementation of 1,500 milligrams
of glucosamine sulfate has been shown to reduce pain and stiffness, and—
more important—to slow the degradation of affected joints (Reginster
2001). Acquiring these benefits requires a long-term commitment to taking
glucosamine sulfate, because the effects are cumulative, not immediate as in
taking anti-inflammatory medicines. But the promise of slowing or halting
joint degradation is a huge benefit for individuals—climbers and
nonclimbers—over forty years of age who take glucosamine sulfate daily.

Many supplement manufacturers are now adding two other compounds,
chondroitin and MSM, to their glucosamine sulfate supplements.
Chondroitin is believed to produce benefits similar to glucosamine sulfate,
and one study showed positive results in patients with joint problems from
four to eight weeks of taking both supplements together (McAlindon 2000).
However, a more recent meta-analysis of the best-designed studies showed
no positive effects in taking chondroitin alone (Juni 2007). MSM shows
more promise based on a recent pilot study. Participants who received 3
grams of MSM, twice per day, for twelve weeks experienced a significant
reduction in pain and improved physical function compared with a placebo
group (Kim 2006). In summary, all relevant studies showed these
compounds to be safe, and with almost no side effects; however, only
glucosamine sulfate and MSM, taken in long-term daily doses of 1.5 to 3.0
grams each, produced statistically significant beneficial results.

GROWTH PLATE INJURY IN JUNIOR
CLIMBERS
Junior climbers make up one of the fastest-growing demographics, with
hundreds—perhaps thousands—of young climbers now entering
competitions and beginning structured training programs. Correlating to the
rising popularity of junior competitions and the intensive training used by
many participants is an increase in nontraumatic growth plate fractures,
known as epiphyseal fractures. The common symptoms are slow onset of
pain and swelling of the middle finger joint, and in some cases the inability
to crimp grip on holds. The condition is easily diagnosed via X-ray.

“Vitamin I” Use: The Good, the Bad, and the
Alternatives
Pain is a common companion of climbers. For some it’s the benign
pain of muscular soreness after a hard day of climbing or a severe
workout. Many others, however, unfortunately experience the pain of

acute or overuse injury. Given the ubiquity of injured and sore
climbers, use of NSAID medications to treat inflammation and mask
pain is widespread. In fact, some climbers joking refer to ibuprofen as
“vitamin I,” since they take it as if it were a daily vitamin.
Daily use of NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen (Advil and Motrin),
naproxen (Aleve and Naprosyn), and aspirin, does have its drawbacks,
including risk of ulceration of the stomach, impaired kidney function,
and anti-blood-clotting effects. Furthermore, regular NSAID use may
actually slow muscle cell regeneration and hamper healing of muscles,
ligaments, tendons, and cartilage (Almekinders 1999, 2003). Even
more alarming is a study that found a marked decrease in the breaking
strength of tendons after four and six weeks in ibuprofen-treated
animals (Kulick 1986). In aggregate, these risks and side effects make
a compelling case against regular NSAID use—and, the latter study
may perhaps help explain why so many ibuprofen-using climbers
experience tendon injuries.
So what are the alternatives for treating the pain and inflammation
of an acute injury, delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS) after
climbing or training, and the persistent pangs of an overuse injury?
Let’s first examine the immediate response to acute injury, which is
best treated with the RICE method (rest, ice, compression, and
elevation). Icing the injured area for twenty minutes, three to six times
a day, is highly effective for controlling swelling and reducing pain in
the hours following acute injury. Continued use of RICE beyond the
first few days following injury, however, will inhibit the healing
process. (Get professional medical care if you have any sense that your
injury might be serious or if it does not begin to improve given several
days of rest.)
What about the most common cause of pain among climbers—
delayed onset muscular soreness? Some climbers use topical rubs
containing methyl salicylate, menthol, camphor, or various herbs such
as arnica for spot treatment. While the stimulation of massage and the
warming or numbing effect of some preparations may reduce the
sensation of pain, there is little evidence that these concoctions
promote healing beyond the effect of massage itself. It seems that any
measure or activity that increases circulation will promote healing;

thus engaging in low-intensity general exercise or use of a whirlpool or
heating pad are effective treatments for DOMS.
Finally, there are those frustrating, slow-to-heal overuse injuries
such as annular pulley strain, elbow tendinosis, shoulder impingement,
and such. As outlined in this chapter, rest and rehabilitative exercise
are the primary methods of treatment. NSAID use should be avoided,
since these anti-inflammatory agents will slow healing and may even
reduce tendon strength (as does smoking). Conversely, regular
massage, heat therapy, and gentle stretching will encourage blood flow
to the injured tissues and, thus, seem to be the best method to
encourage healing once acute pain and inflammation have subsided.
Perhaps the best anti-NSAID alternatives, for vitamin I addicts, are
the omega-3 essential fatty acids found in fish. You may be familiar
with omega- 3 EFA for its well-promoted preventive effects on
coronary artery disease. Interestingly, daily consumption of fish, or
fish oil supplements, also has been shown effective for treating
musculoskeletal injuries and discogenic diseases (Maroon 2006). The
effective dose to be heart-healthy is just 1 gram of omega-3 EFA per
day; however, an everyday dose of 2 to 4 grams (more than you could
likely consume from eating fish) is needed to provide the natural antiinflammatory effects that would benefit climbers.
In conclusion, you should just say no to regular use of vitamin I and
all other NSAIDs, since in most cases it will do you more harm than
good. Limit use of NSAIDs and the RICE method to the few days
following a painful and swollen acute injury. When inflammation and
pain subside, begin use of massage and a heating pad for ten to twenty
minutes, three times a day, to enhance rate of healing. Finally, consider
daily, year-round supplementation with omega-3 EFAs for their natural
anti-inflammatory and heart-healthy effects—at less than fifty cents
per day, it’s a wise investment and a prudent adjunct to NSAID use.
A recent German study (Hochholzer 2005) evaluated twenty-four junior
climbers with nontraumatic epiphyseal fractures. Interestingly, only one of
the injured climbers was a girl—so boys seem to be at greater risk—and all
were between the ages of thirteen and sixteen. Injury to growth plates can
cause permanent damage, so a temporary withdrawal from climbing is
essential for adolescents experiencing finger joint pain. Parents and coaches

must enforce a rest period of at least a few months or more away from
climbing until the youth climber is asymptomatic. In terms of prevention,
parents and coaches should limit climbing activity to three days per week
during the adolescent growth spurt, and disallow use of advanced training
exercises such as campus training, hypergravity training, and intensive
fingerboard training until at least age sixteen or the end of puberty
(achievement of maximum adult height).

Elbow Tendinopathy

Pain near the bony medial (inside) or lateral (outside) epicondyles of the
elbow is an exceedingly common ailment among serious climbers. In most
cases the onset of pain is very gradual: A schedule of frequent climbing
produces microscopic injury that fails to repair before the tendon is
subjected to additional strain. A tendinosis cycle develops and amplifies as
breakdown exceeds repair and the microtraumas accumulate over many
weeks and months. In the early stage of tendinosis, pain is dull and may be
felt only after a day of climbing; however, pain experienced in the course of
everyday activities such as opening a door or washing your hair is a sign of
advanced tendinosis. The hallmark of tendinosis is its gradual onset and
lack of inflammation and visible swelling.
A similar yet less common and often misdiagnosed injury is tendinitis.
The suffix itis means “inflammation,” and the term tendinitis should be
reserved for acute tendon injury accompanied by inflammation and palpable
swelling. In climbing, tendinitis occurs most often near the medial
epicondyle as the tendon is injured during a maximal one-arm pull on a
small hold or in performing advance training exercises without adequate
warm-up or training experience.
A third, more subtle class of tendon injury is paratenonitis (formerly
termed tenosynovitis and tenovaginitis), an inflammation and degeneration
of the outer layers of the tendon and the synovia-lined tendon sheath.
Paratenonitis can develop in the tendons of the arms and fingers and in
concert with either tendinosis or tendinitis.
Regardless of which tendon ailment you possess, the one commonality is
the extremely slow rate of healing. While muscles possess abundant blood
flow and a relatively rapid rate of healing, blood flow to the ropelike
collagenous tendons is poor, and laying down new collagen make take a
hundred days or more (Khan 1999). Exacerbating these slow-healing
injuries is the tendency of enthusiastic climbers to rush back into training
and climbing prematurely. Worse yet, researchers have discovered that an

enduring tendinosis cycle often leads to collagen repair with an abnormal
structure and composition, thus making the repaired tendon less able to
withstand tensile stress and more vulnerable to further injury. Following
acute injury, the strength of a repaired tendon can remain as much as 30
percent lower than normal for months or even years (Leadbetter 1992; Liu
1995).
In severe, chronic cases of elbow tendinitis or tendinosis, surgery may
offer the only lasting remedy. The most popular procedure is to simply
excise the diseased tissue from the tendon, then reattach healthy tendon to
the bone. Eighty-five to 90 percent of patients recuperate in three months,
10 to 12 percent have improvement but some pain during exercise, and only
2 to 3 percent have no improvement (Auerback 2000).
Following is a closer look at the two most common elbow injuries and
their treatments.

MEDIAL TENDINOSIS AND TENDINITIS
Pain near the medial epicondyle is commonly called golfer’s elbow or
climber’s elbow. Pain develops in the tendons connecting the pronator teres
muscle and/or the many forearm flexor muscles (responsible for finger
flexion) to the knobby, medial epicondyle of the inside elbow.
In many cases medial tendinosis is caused by muscular imbalances of the
forearm and an accumulation of microtraumas to the tendons that result
from climbing too often, too hard, and, most important, with too little rest.
Consider that all the muscles that produce finger flexion are anchored to the
medial epicondyle. Furthermore, the muscles that produce hand pronation
(that turn the palm outward to face the rock) originate from the medial
epicondyle. This subtle fact plays a key role in causing this injury: Biceps
contraction produces supination (turning of the palm upward), but in
gripping the rock you generally need to maintain a pronated, palms-out
position. This battle, between the supinating action of the biceps pulling and
the necessity to maintain a pronated hand position (to maintain grip with the
rock), strains the typically undertrained teres pronator muscle and its
attachment at the medial epicondyle.

Given the above factors, it’s easy to see why the tendons attaching to the
medial epicondyle are subjected to sustained stress and, inevitably, develop
microtraumas. Just as muscular microtraumas are repaired to new level of
capability, the tendons increase in strength and can withstand higher stress
loads given adequate rest. Unfortunately, the repair and strengthening
process occurs more slowly in tendons than in muscles. Eventually the
muscles are able to create more force than the tendons can adapt to—the
result is injury.
Tendinosis will reveal itself gradually through increasing incidence of
painful twinges or soreness during or after climbing. Tendinitis, however, is
evidenced by acute onset of pain in the midst of a single hard move, and is
usually followed by inflammation and palpable swelling. Even in these
cases cumulative microtrauma may be involved in making the tissue
vulnerable to acute trauma.
As in treating other injuries, you can more easily manage tendinopathy
(any tendon injury) and speed your return to climbing by early recognition
of the symptoms and proactive treatment. The mature and prudent approach
of attending to the injury early on versus trying to “climbing through it”
could mean the difference between six weeks and six months (or more) of
climbing downtime.
Treatment of tendinosis and tendinitis has two phases: Phase I involves
steps to relieve pain and reduce of inflammation (in the case of tendinitis);
Phase II is engaging in rehabilitative and stretching exercises to promote
correct alignment of collagen tissue and prevent recurrence.
Phase I demands withdrawal from climbing (and all sport-specific
training) and commencement of pain-reducing and anti-inflammatory
measures. Icing the elbow for twenty minutes, three to six times a day, and
use of NSAIDs will help reduce inflammation and pain following injury;
cease use within a few days to a week. A cortisone injection may be helpful
in chronic or severe cases, though this practice is somewhat controversial
among physicians and, in fact, may be detrimental to the healing process
(Nirschl 1996). Depending on the severity of the injury, successful
completion of Phase I could require anywhere from two weeks to two
months.
The goal of Phase II is to retrain and rehabilitate the injured tissues
through use of mild stretching and strength-training exercises. Since
forearm-muscle imbalance plays a primary role in many elbow injuries, it’s

vital to perform exercises that strengthen the weaker aspects of the forearm
—hand pronation for medial tendinosis and hand/wrist extension for lateral
tendinosis (more on this in a bit).
Always perform some general warm-up activity and consider warming
the elbow directly with a heating pad before beginning the stretching and
strengthening exercises. Stretch twice daily the forearm flexor, extensor,
and pronator muscles as described in chapter 6. Once the stretching
exercises have successfully restored normal range of motion with no pain,
you can introduce strength training with the Forearm Pronator exercise
shown on page 121. It’s important to progress slowly with training
exercises and to cut back at the first sign of pain. Begin with just a couple
of pounds of resistance and gradually increase the weight over the course of
a few weeks. Use the stretching exercises daily, but do the weight-training
exercises only three days per week.
After three to four weeks of pain-free training, begin a gradual return to
climbing. Start with low-angle and easy vertical routes, and take a month or
two to return to your original level of climbing. Continue with the
stretching and strength-training exercises indefinitely—as long as you are a
climber, you must engage in these preventive measures. Failed
rehabilitation and relapse into chronic pain may eventually lead to a need
for surgical intervention.
Finally, let’s take a look at the use of counterforce bracing, or
circumferential taping of the upper forearm, as a curative (or preventive)
measure for elbow tendinosis. A counterforce brace designed specifically
for elbow tendinosis can provide some comfort by dispersing forces away
from the underlying tissues (Nirschl 1996). These braces are not a substitute
for proper rehabilitation, however; they instead act only to help prevent
recurrence after full rehabilitation. There is little evidence that supportive
taping of the forearm provides the same benefit as use of a counterforce
brace.

Treating Elbow Tendinosis and Tendinitis
1. Cease climbing and sport-specific training.
2. Apply ice to the injured area and take NSAID medications only
if the injury produces visible or palpable swelling (most elbow

tendinopathy does not). Cease use of ice and NSAIDs as soon
as swelling diminishes—further use will slow healing.
3. Never use NSAIDs to mask pain in order to continue climbing
while injured. Regular use of NSAIDS (and smoking) may
actually weaken tendons!
4. If no swelling is present, begin mild stretching, light massage,
and use of a heating pad (ten to fifteen minutes) three times per
day. Most important is twice-daily use of the forearm stretches
shown in chapter 6.
5. If no swelling is present and if pain is minor, engage in
rehabilitative exercises on an every-other-day basis. Perform
some warm-up activities such as arm circles, finger flexions,
massage, or use of a heating pad. Use Reverse Wrist Curls for
lateral tendinosis and Forearm Pronators for medial tendinosis.
6. Cautiously return to climbing when your elbow is pain-free and
no sooner then after two to four weeks of strength-training
exercise. Begin with easy, foot-oriented climbing for the first
few weeks and limit use of the crimp grip. Cease climbing if
you experience pain while climbing and immediately return to
step 2.

LATERAL TENDINOSIS
Lateral tendinosis, commonly called tennis elbow or lateral epicondylitis, is
an irritation of the tendons that attach the forearm extensor muscles to the
lateral epicondyle on the outside of the elbow. The forearm extensor
muscles are antagonists to the forearm flexor muscles used so prominently
in gripping the rock and, therefore, the extensors are often
disproportionately weak compared with the flexors. Furthermore, grip
strength is greatest when your hand is in the extended position—this
explains why your arm “chicken wings” out from the rock when you
struggle to grip small crimp holds. It’s the extensor muscles that facilitate

this chicken wing position and, thus, constant straining to stick crimp holds
can lead to tendon injury where the extensor muscles attach to the lateral
epicondyle. (Note reducing your use of the crimp grip will lower your risk
of tendinosis.)
Onset of pain is typically gradual, and will first appear after a hard day of
climbing. Without rest and treatment, the condition will progressively
worsen to the point that climbing becomes prohibitively painful and even
everyday tasks are hampered. Since such a severe case often requires a sixmonth (or longer) rehabilitation period away from climbing, it’s paramount
that you take the necessary steps to mitigate this injury early on.
The treatment protocol for lateral tendinosis is similar to that described
above for medial tendinopathy. Time away from climbing is mandatory—
very few people successfully climb through elbow tendinosis of either kind.
Frequent icing and limited use of anti-inflammatory medication is helpful
during the initial period of pain, but these treatments should never be used
to allow continuation of climbing. As pain and swelling subside, daily use
of the stretching exercises is absolutely necessary as the first step in the
rehabilitation process. Gradually introduce Reverse Wrist Curls (page 120)
to strengthen the forearm extensor muscles; add weight incrementally over
the course of a few weeks. Use a heating pad for a few minutes before
stretching—daily use of a heating pad may also speed rate of healing. In
mild cases of tendinosis, you may be able to complete the rehabilitation
process and begin a slow return to climbing in six to eight weeks. A
counterforce brace worn just below the elbow may be beneficial upon
beginning a slow return to climbing.
Remember, recurrence or severe episodes may take six months or longer
to overcome—let this knowledge compel you to cease climbing and engage
in the rehab protocol described below at the first signs of pain.

Shoulder Injuries

The shoulder joint takes lot of punishment from climbing, especially in
those obsessed with V-hard bouldering, steep terrain, and sport-specific
training. A variety of injuries can occur, ranging from impingement or
tendinitis to a partial dislocation or tear of the rotator cuff. Given the
complexity of the shoulder joint, however, a diagnosis can be difficult;
expert consultation or an MRI will likely be required to detect small tears of
the rotator cuff and other subtle injuries.

IMPINGEMENT SYNDROME, BURSITIS, AND
TENDINITIS
These conditions are closely related, and they are a common source of
shoulder pain among athletes in sports that demand consistent, forceful
overhead arm movements. Pain and inflammation often develop under the
acromion, the bony top portion of the shoulder where the shoulder blade
and collar-bone meet, as a result of tendinitis and swelling of the bursa (a
fluid-filled sac that provides cushion between the bone and surrounding
tissues). Onset of pain is gradual over weeks and months, and may
eventually lead to pain in the upper arm and difficulty sleeping on the arm
or shoulder.
Diagnosis begins with a physical examination, including movement and
strength testing to evaluate pain and weakness throughout the range of
motion. X-rays and an MRI may be performed to rule out other causes of
shoulder pain, such as arthritis, bone disease, and tears in the rotator cuff.
Impingement syndrome may be confirmed if injection of a small amount of
anaesthetic under the acromion relieves pain.

Treatment of these conditions begins with steps to reduce pain and
inflammation: icing for twenty minutes, three to six times per day; limited
use of NSAIDS (such as ibuprofen and Naprosyn); and cessation of
climbing and overhead hand movements. As pain subsides, gentle
stretching and strengthening exercises can be introduced gradually—these
rehabilitative exercises are essential to lower risk of injury relapse upon
returning to climbing (see the “Shoulder Rehab Exercises” box). In minor
cases followed up by dedicated rehabilitation, a return to climbing may be
possible in one to two months. More serious cases may require six months
or more away from climbing, and perhaps even steroid injections or
surgery.

SHOULDER INSTABILITY
Shoulder instability is a condition that’s become increasingly common
among high-end climbers with a taste for overhanging routes as well as
individuals who engage in excessive fingerboard training. The condition
develops gradually from long-term, repeated exposure to straight-arm
hangs, Gaston moves, and severe lock-offs, as well as from overzealous
stretching or climbing on overhanging routes day after day or hard boulder
problems without adequate rest and training of the stabilizing antagonist
muscles. No matter the mechanism, constant stretching of the ligaments and
a growing imbalance of the muscles that surround and stabilize the shoulder
joint can lead to instability and risk of injury.
Dr. Joel Rohrbough has worked with many climbers and believes that a
partial dislocation known as subluxation is the most common shoulder
injury among climbers. This injury produces instability of the shoulder joint
and manifests with pain from deep within or in back of the shoulder
(Rohrbough 2001). In most cases the ball portion of the shoulder joint is
levered forward during extreme movements with the elbow located behind
the plane of the body. Furthermore, the force of the levering motion on the
shoulder joint increases when the arm is extended with the elbow pointing
outward (and extending behind the plane of the body), as in grabbing a high
Gaston hold or making a long reach on overhanging rock.

Fresh shoulder injuries should be treated with the two-phase process of
resting until pain diminishes and then use of rehabilitative exercises to
strengthen the rotator cuff muscle group. Climbing activity must be
markedly reduced or eliminated while you engage in the rehabilitative
process, and you should also avoid any overhead motion or other activity
that causes pain in the shoulder. Anti-inflammatory medicine and ice
applied twice daily are useful in reducing initial pain and swelling.
The common course of therapy begins with gentle stretching and
strengthening of the shoulder, but with no exercises above the level of the
shoulder. Perform the four exercises from the “Shoulder Rehab Exercises”
box every other day, and gradually increase the weight from one pound to
five pounds over about a five-week period. Gradually, you can introduce
some basic push-muscle exercises (see chapter 6) that strengthen the
antagonist muscles. Decrease resistance on or eliminate completely any
exercise that is too painful. Of course, rehabilitation is best guided by a
professional physical therapist, and you may need anywhere from two to six
months before you can reintroduce climbing activities.
Unfortunately, a significant number of people with shoulder injuries
ultimately require a surgical solution. The procedure may include removal
of damaged tissue, repair of minor rotator cuff tears, or surgical tightening
of affected ligaments and tendons. Surgery will be followed with long-term
physical therapy; given a successful outcome, climbing activity may resume
in six to twelve months.

Shoulder Rehab Exercises
Reduce or cease climbing upon onset of shoulder pain. Apply ice
(several times a day) and take NSAID medications to reduce pain and
swelling for up to one week. See a doctor if you experience severe
pain or if your condition does not improve with rest.
As pain declines, begin using the following rehabilitation exercises
three or four days per week. Be sure to perform each exercise on both
sides of the body (with both arms). The weight used should be light:
Begin with a dumbbell that seems too light, and gradually increase in
one-pound increments over the course of a few weeks. There is no
need to use heavy weights; in fact, performing these exercises with
more than five to fifteen pounds will unfavorably stress the smaller

muscles of the rotator cuff. Supplement your rehab with the antagonist
push-muscle exercises detailed in chapter 6 when you become painfree.
Dumbbell Internal Rotation

1. Dumbbell Internal Rotation
Lie on your side with your bottom arm in front of your waist; place a
rolled-up towel under your head to support your neck. Rest your other

arm along your hip and upper thigh. Hold a two- to five-pound
dumbbell in the hand of your bottom arm, positioning this forearm
perpendicular to your body. Lift the weight up to your body and hold
for a moment before lowering it back to the floor. The upper portion of
your arm should remain in contact with the floor throughout the range
of motion—think of your upper arm and shoulder as a door hinge that
allows your forearm to swing “open and closed.” Continue in a slow
but steady motion for a total of fifteen repetitions. Do two sets on each
side, with a three-minute rest between sets. Increase weight in one- or
two-pound increments, but do not exceed ten pounds. Using heavy
weight is not necessary and may even result in injury.
2. Dumbbell External Rotation
Lie on your side with your bottom arm in front of your waist and a
rolled-up towel under your head to support your neck. Alternatively,
you can bend your bottom arm and use it as a headrest. Hold a two- to
five-pound dumbbell in the hand of your top arm. Rest the upper arm
and elbow on the top side of your body, and then bend at the elbow so
that the forearm hangs down over your belly and the weight rests on
the floor. Now raise the weight upward toward the ceiling until your
forearm passes a parallel position with the floor. Pause at this top
position for a moment, and then lower the weight to the floor. Your
upper arm should remain in contact with the side of your torso and act
only as a hinge that allows your forearm to swing up and down.
Continue in a slow but steady motion for a total of fifteen repetitions.
Do two sets on each side, with a three-minute rest between each set.
Increase weight in one or two-pound increments, but do not exceed ten
pounds. Use of heavy resistance is not necessary or desirable.
Dumbbell External Rotation

Bent-Over Arm Raise

3. Bent-Over Arm Raise
Standing with one leg slightly ahead of the other, assume a bent-over
position with your free arm braced on your knee or hip. Holding a
five-pound dumbbell in the opposite hand, lift your arm up to your side
until it’s parallel to the floor. Hold for a moment and lower slowly to
the starting position. Keep your elbow straight throughout the range of
motion. Do three sets of ten to fifteen repetitions. Increase the weight
as strength gains allow, but do not exceed fifteen pounds.
Bent-Over Arm Kickback

4. Bent-Over Arm Kickback
Assume the same bent-over position as in the previous exercise, but
this time lift the five-pound dumbbell behind you until it’s parallel to
the floor and in a position next to your hip. Hold here for a moment,
then return to the starting position. Maintain a straight arm throughout
the range of motion. Do three sets of ten to fifteen repetitions. Increase
the weight as strength gains allow, but do not exceed fifteen pounds.

Knee Injuries

Injury to the knee is a relatively new phenomenon in climbing that
correlates directly to the proliferation of indoor and sport climbing. New
climbing techniques like the drop-knee weren’t popularized until the 1990s,
but this is now a staple move of the steep indoor and outdoor climbs that are
so prominent today. Repeated use of the drop-knee, especially under high
force load, can tear the specialized cartilage in the knee called the meniscus
(Stelzle 2000), as can high-stepping in a full-hip-turnout position. A
meniscus tear—or, worse, a tear of a knee ligament—can also occur during
a forceful, uneven landing when jumping off a boulder problem.

MENISCUS TEAR
Meniscus is a tough, fibrous type of cartilage that sits between the ends of
the femur and tibia (see figure 11.5). The menisci serve primarily as shock
absorbers between the ends of the bones to protect the articulating surfaces
(McFarland 2000). There are two separate C-shaped meniscal cartilages in
the knee, one on the inner half of the knee (the medial meniscus) and the
other on the outer half (the lateral meniscus). A partial or total tear of a
meniscus can occur during forced rotation of the knee while the foot
remains in a fixed position. In climbing, these tears most often occur in
severe drop-knee positions, which produce inside rotation of the knee under
pressure.
A small meniscus tear can develop gradually from repeated use of these
climbing moves, or a tear may occur suddenly. Some tears involve only a
small portion of the meniscus, while others produce a bucket handle, or
complete separation of a piece of cartilage. Symptoms can range from mild
pain and no visible swelling to severe pain and swelling and reduced

mobility (McFarland 2000). Many meniscal tears cause popping, clicking,
and locking of the knee in certain positions.
Not all meniscus tears cause big problems. A minor tear in the thick outer
portion of the meniscus may be able to repair itself given fairly good blood
supply. Also, use of the supplement glucosamine sulfate is believed to
support the formation of new cartilage and may enhance the healing
process. In minor cases, symptoms will disappear on their own; persistent
pain that affects daily activities or produces significant pain in certain
climbing positions may require surgery, however.

Figure 11.5 Meniscus Tear

Arthroscopic surgery is very successful in relieving pain and restoring
full function to the injured knee. The goal of arthroscopic surgery is to
preserve as much of the meniscus as possible so as to decrease the chance
of future arthritis (McFarland 2000). Tears on the outer margin of the
meniscus are more amenable to repair, since they have greater blood flow
compared with the thin, inner margin of the meniscus. Tears in the thin
portion of the meniscus are typically excised; entirely detached pieces of
cartilage are removed.
Recovery from arthroscopic surgery is rapid. The procedure is generally
performed as outpatient surgery, followed by three to seven days of rest, ice
packs, and elevating the limb. Crutches are often used during the first
postoperative week, though weight can be placed on the injured leg as can
be tolerated. Most patients return to work in less than a week, and other
normal activities can be added during the second and third week after
surgery.
Physical therapy may be beneficial but is not required for fit individuals
who can begin a gradual return to physical activity after two or three weeks.
A full return to training activities and climbing typically takes two to three
months.

Preventing Injuries
This chapter began by quoting studies that place your odds—as an avid
rock climber—of getting injured as at least three to one. Therefore, it seems
appropriate that we conclude this tome with an attempt at lowering those
odds!
First, abstinence is the only preventive measure that is absolute.
Climbing is a stressful sport, and injury may be unavoidable. Still, I
estimate that you can lower the risk by at least 50 percent if you follow all
the preventive measures outlined below. Undoubtedly, some of these
guidelines fly in opposition to the modus operandi of many climbers. By
now, however, you are familiar with the thread weaving throughout this
book: “To outperform the masses, you must do things that they do not do.”

Ten Rules for Preventing Overuse Injuries

Detailed below are ten strategies for lowering your exposure to overuse
injuries. Clearly, there will be situations that demand breaking one or more
of these rules. By climbing and training in accordance with these guidelines
most of the time, however, you will likely decrease your risk of injury and
never, or only rarely, join the injured mass of climbers.

1. FOCUS ON TECHNIQUE TRAINING OVER
STRENGTH TRAINING.
Many overuse injuries result from too much of a focus on strength training
too early in an individual’s climbing career. As advised throughout this
book, it’s fundamental to develop a high level of technical competence
before jumping full-bore into sport-specific training. Not only does good
technique help you reduce stress on your fingers and shoulders, but it also
helps maximize economy of movement and, thus, increases apparent
strength on the rock.
Remember that two to four days per week of climbing will naturally
produce rapid gains in sport-specific strength in beginners. Because tendons
strengthen at a slower rate than muscles, novice climbers are not exempt
from injury risk. With little experience, these new climbers have not yet
developed the keen sense needed to distinguish “good pain” from “bad
pain.” The number of climbers who become injured during their first year
or two in the sport—as they quickly progress from, say, 5.5 to 5.10 (or
higher)—is alarming. Therefore, awareness, maturity, and a prudent
approach to training are vital traits that must be fostered in all enthusiastic
climbers.

Finally, it’s important to avoid the added stress of using highly specific
training tools, like a fingerboard or campus board, during the first year or
two of climbing. After that, these activities can be added gradually as part
of an intelligent, well-planned training-for-climbing program.

2. REGULARLY VARY THE TYPE OF
CLIMBING.
Varying the type and magnitude of climbing stressors on the body is a
highly effective way of lowering your exposure to injury. For instance,
alternating consecutive weekends of climbing between sport and traditional
routes naturally varies the type of specific strains placed on the body.
Likewise, regularly changing the focus of weekday climbing and training
activities—for example, alternating among bouldering, roped gym
climbing, and general training—prevents any single system from being
overly stressed. This practice of constantly mixing things up is the essence
of cross-training applied to climbing.

3. USE PROPHYLACTIC FINGER TAPING IN
THE MOST STRESSFUL SITUATIONS AND
AFTER INJURY.
This subject was covered in length earlier in the chapter, but it’s worth
underscoring here—supportive taping of the finger tendon pulleys helps
lower the force load placed on the tendons and may help prevent injury.
Still, prophylactic taping is not something you should use every day and on
every climb. Subjecting the finger tendons and annular pulleys to gradually
increasing levels of stress is what will make them stronger and able to
function under higher and higher loads in the future. The use of taping all

the time could have a negative impact on the long-term strength of this
system.
Reserve use of prophylactic taping techniques for workouts or climbs
that you expect will push the envelope of what your tendons have
previously experienced. For instance, taping would be a wise measure for
attempting a hardest-ever route, any climb known to possess injurious hold
types (one-finger pockets, extreme crimps, and the like), or high-intensity
training techniques such as campus or hypergravity training. Of course,
individuals recovering from recent finger injuries should tape their fingers
during the early stages of returning to climbing.

4. PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY THROUGH
DANGEROUS MOVES.
An important sense to develop is that of knowing and managing movement
through inherently dangerous moves or sequences. In recognizing that you
are entering a dangerous sequence (say, a one-finger lock with poor feet)
and in sensing that you are near injury on a move, you are empowered to
either disengage from the move or cautiously navigate the sequence as
expeditiously as possible. Clearly you need experience in such situations in
order to develop this sense, but you can foster this important skill by
knowing your body and the sensations you feel on various types of
movements.
As a final note, a climber will often escape injury on the first attempt or
pass through some heinous move, then get injured by attempting or
rehearsing the painful move repeatedly. This is obviously a very
unintelligent approach—no single route is worth getting injured and,
possibly, laid up for months over. The bottom line: If you find yourself
climbing into a move that feels overly painful or injury-scary, simply lower
off and find a better route to enjoy.

5. DON’T CLIMB TO EXHAUSTION.

There is nothing I enjoy more than occasionally maximizing a day of
climbing fun by pulling down right into the evening twilight. As a regular
practice, however, this is a prescription for injury. This chapter covered a
range of overuse injuries that are largely caused by accumulated stress
beyond what the body is capable of handling—that’s why they call them
overuse injuries!
Knowing when to say when is one of the subtle climbing skills that you
can’t learn from a book or video, but only through experience. Obviously,
the best strategy is to err on the side of ending climbing early in the day
versus right after you feel that finger tweak. The chapter on strength
training hammered home the idea that quality training stimulus is far more
important that the quantity of training. In strength training, less is often
more.
When climbing, the right decision on when to call it a day is much less
clear, since you want to maximize climbing fun and achievement without
getting injured. In this situation only you can decide what’s right for you.
Don’t be swayed into another burn on a strenuous route if you are
approaching exhaustion and think your climbing technique will not be up to
snuff. Keep in mind that many injuries occur late in the day, when you are
tired and climbing sloppily.
One rule of thumb you might adopt is to call it quits early when planning
to climb again the very next day or if you are already on your second day of
climbing. In this way, you will limit undue accumulation of stress.
Conversely, when sandwiching a single day of climbing between two rest
days, you can feel better about packing in as many climbs as possible
before dark.

6. DON’T CLIMB OR TRAIN MORE THAN
FOUR DAYS PER WEEK.
In most cases it’s counterproductive to climb and train for climbing more
than a total of four days per week. Consequently, if you are climbing four
days a week on the rock, in the gym, or both combined, you should do no

other sport-specific training during the three remaining days of the week.
Even with three days’ rest out of seven, your body will struggle to repair the
microtraumas incurred to the tendons and muscles during your four
climbing days. For this reason, it is wise to incorporate a training cycle that
provides a complete week off every month or two. This is valuable catch-up
time for your biological climbing machine!
In a pure strength- and power-training program (such as in focused offseason training), you may only be able to train two or three days per week
while resting four or five. Earlier in this chapter I presented several studies
that indict overtraining (or under-resting) as one of the most common
causes of overuse injury. Don’t set yourself up for failure by succeeding at
overtraining. Listen to your body and, when in doubt, favor over-resting.

7. ALWAYS WARM UP AND COOL DOWN.
Anyone with experience in traditional sports knows firsthand the
importance of a proper warm-up and cool-down. Unfortunately, I have
observed more than a few climbers who just tie in and start climbing
without any preparatory warm-up activity, stretching, or submaximum
climbing.
All that’s needed for a good warm-up is to break a light sweat by jogging,
hiking, or riding a bike for five to fifteen minutes. Follow this with some
light stretching exercises, as described in chapter 6. Start your climbing for
the day by doing a series of easy boulder problems or a route or two that is
much easier than you might want to get on. This minor inconvenience is a
worthy investment in avoiding injury and maximizing your performance
later in the day.
A brief cool-down is also beneficial, since it will loosen up tight muscle
groups and enhance the recovery process. In particular, stretching and a few
minutes of light aerobic activity help maintain increased blood flow and
speed dispersion of lactic acid accumulated in the most fatigued muscles.

8. MAINTAIN MUSCLE BALANCE BY
TRAINING ANTAGONIST-MUSCLE GROUPS.
Training the antagonist muscles is one of the most overlooked—and most
vital—parts of training for climbing. Muscle imbalances in the forearms,
shoulders, and torso are primary factors in many of the overuse injuries
covered in this chapter. If you are serious about climbing your best and
preventing injury, then you must commit to training the antagonist muscles
twice per week.
The time and equipment involved is minimal. All of the antagonistmuscle exercises described in chapter 6 can be performed at home with
nothing more than a couple of dumbbells. As for the time commitment, it’s
less than twenty minutes, twice per week. I advise doing these exercises at
the end of your weekday climbing or sport-specific workout. Keep the
weights light, and do every single exercise outlined for the antagonist
muscles of the upper body and forearms, as well as the handful of exercises
for the core muscles of the torso.

9. USE PERIODIZATION TO VARY YOUR
TRAINING SCHEDULE.
Many sports scientists consider periodization to be the gold standard for
interweek planning of an effective and optimal strength-training program.
As described in chapter 5, periodization involves a premeditated variation
in workout focus, intensity, and volume, which in the long term produces a
maximum training response. Periodization may also reduce the risk of
overuse injury, since the training focus and intensity change every few days
or weeks.
In a highly stressful sport like climbing, the most valuable aspect of
periodization may be the intermittent rest phases or breaks away from all
sport-specific activity. Chapter 8 advised use of the 4-3-2-1 and 3- 2-1
cycles for most intermediate and elite climbers. Use of this training cycle

provides one full week of rest out at the end of the training cycle, for
systemic recovery and to blunt long-term accumulation of overuse stress. In
the yearlong macrocycle it is advised to take one full month off from
climbing-related stresses. These breaks away from climbing go a long way
toward allowing the slow-to-adapt tendons and ligaments to catch up to the
gains in muscular strength. It’s also a healthy break for your mental muscle!

10. MAKE GETTING PROPER REST AND
NUTRITION TOP PRIORITIES.
Getting proper rest and nutrition seems like an obvious rule for a serious
athlete, but I’m often surprised by the bad dietary and sleep habits
possessed by some very serious climbers. Fortunately, I have noticed
improvement and increased awareness about rest and nutrition issues in
recent years. No doubt the better-informed and more disciplined climbers
are performing closer to their ultimate potential and with fewer injuries.
Chapter 9 on “Performance Nutrition” and chapter 10 on “Accelerating
Recovery” provide many useful strategies to employ as you increase the
priority placed on these subjects. If you use most of these strategies, most of
the time, I am confident that you will outperform the masses and reduce
your risk of overuse injuries.
Certainly an occasional late night out or free day of eating whatever you
like won’t hurt (in fact, it’s a great reward after sending a major project!).
Still, consistent lack of sleep and poor nutrition slow recovery between
workouts and days of climbing, and undoubtedly make you more vulnerable
to injury. Most important is good nutrition and a solid eight to nine hours of
sleep in the day or two following an especially hard workout or day(s) of
climbing. Remember that training and recovery are opposite sides of the
same coin—if you put the effort into training optimally, then it would be a
waste not to do everything in your power to recover optimally as well.

Jeff Batzer showing no handicap as he tops out on Upper Refuse,
Cathedral Ledge, New Hampshire. ERIC J. HÖRST

AFTERWORD
The power of climbing is awesome. The simple act of moving over stone
can change your day, and it can change your life. Climbing takes you to
places you have never been before—breathtaking vistas that few humans
ever see and deep into the very core of your being. In this way climbing
helps us discover who we are and gives us the gift of insight into our true
potential and what really is possible in our lives. Many “flatlanders” never
gain this insight, and, worse yet, far too many people around the world will
never have the opportunity to experience the wonder of climbing (or any
other pleasure-seeking activity) because they spend each day of their lives
just trying to get by. From this perspective, I trust you will agree that in
simply being able to go climbing and pursue self-actualization, we are
better off than the majority of people on this planet. Regardless of your
current disposition, vow to live each day with an attitude of gratitude. Look
for ways to brighten the day of everyone you meet, and consider
contributing some time or money to aid those who are less fortunate. I
invite you to check out some of my favorite charities listed below. Share
some of your climbing power with the world!
• MakeAWish.org
• RedCross.org
• WorldVision.org
• WoundedWarriors.org

APPENDIX A
Muscular Anatomy

APPENDIX B
Training Charts
Use the two blank training charts on the following pages to track your
training progress. The “Training and Climbing Macrocycle” will enable you
to set annual training objectives and seasonal climbing goals as well as
record your actual progress. You can use the chart to plan your training for
the four seasons, target specific types of training, track the number of days
you train, and record your achievements throughout the year.
Use the “Energy-Emotion Levels” chart to track your physical energy
and emotional mind-set hour by hour throughout the day. You can use this
chart to observe patterns, identify negative triggers, modify your emotional
state, and better manage your energy and emotions for optimal
performance.

Training and Climbing Macrocycle

Energy-Emotion Levels

APPENDIX C
Self-Assessment Test Comments and Training
Tips
The Self-Assessment Test in chapter 2 covers physical strength, mental
focus, and techniques and tactics. Taking the test should help you to gauge
your overall strengths and weaknesses and pinpoint some specific areas for
improvement. If you gave yourself a score of 3 or lower on any of the
questions, you’ve identified weak spots that should be targeted for training.
Here is a brief comment on each of these common problems as well as
some specific tips for improving your climbing performance. For more indepth information on any of these topics, see the chapters referenced below.
1. If your footwork deteriorates during the hardest part of the climb,
you might be focusing on the lack of good handholds instead of
zeroing in on crucial footholds (often the key to unlocking hard
sequences).
TIP: When the going gets tough, focus on your feet! (See chapter
3.)
2. If your forearms balloon and your grip begins to fail, you are
probably overgripping the holds and/or climbing too slowly.
TIP: On near-vertical walls, relax your grip and place maximum
weight over your feet. When the wall angle is overhanging, the
number one rule is to climb fast from one rest to the next. (See
chapter 4.)
3. If you have difficulty stepping onto critical footholds during hard
sequences, lack of flexibility or weak hip flexor muscles is the likely
problem.
TIP: Begin daily stretching for a minimum of ten minutes and
practice high steps in a gym setting. (See chapter 6.)
4. If you find you get anxious and tight as you head into crux
sequences, normalized breathing is the key to reducing tension and
anxiety.

TIP: Before starting up a climb, close your eyes and take five slow,
deep breaths (each breath should take at least ten seconds). Try to
maintain steady breathing as you climb. Take three more slow, deep
breaths at each rest position and before you begin the crux sequence.
(See chapter 3.)
5. If your biceps pump out before your forearms, it usually means
you’re hanging out with bent arms. Straight-arm positions are
fundamental to good climbing technique.
TIP: Whenever possible, hang “by the bone” and not with flexed
arm muscle. Straight-arm positions are especially important when
placing gear, shaking out, or pausing to decipher the next sequence
(see chapter 4).
6. Do you have difficulty hanging on to small, necessary holds?
Although poor body positioning can make small holds even harder
to use, it’s likely that your contact strength (grip) needs work.
TIP: Spend more time training on steep walls and gym cave areas,
and go bouldering more often. Some limited fingerboard and
hypergravity training is also recommended for intermediate and
advanced climbers. (See chapter 7.)
7. If you fail on sequences you know by heart, you might be making
the common mistake of trying or inventing new sequences during a
redpoint attempt.
TIP: When you find a sequence that works, it’s usually best to stick
with it. Counter any midclimb thoughts of trying a new sequence
with the definitive belief that you already know (and can do) the
best sequence.
8. If you stall at the start of crux sequences, you might be suffering
from paralysis by analysis.
TIP: When faced with a crux sequence, visualize two possible
sequences, and then immediately try the one that looks more
promising. Once you commit to a sequence, go for it! Only one
thing should be on your mind—getting to the next good hold (or
rest) as fast as possible.
9. Do you climb three or four days in a row? Unless you are one of
those genetically gifted extreme outliers, climbing or training on
three or four consecutive days is a practice that will lead to
overtraining, injury, and a drop in performance.

TIP: In this case, less is more. Switch to a two-day-on, one-day-off
(or one-day-on, one-day-off) schedule and you will be training
smarter and climbing harder!
10. Sewing-machine leg is common in the tight, anxious climber.
TIP: Lengthen your warm-up and begin working some of the
relaxation exercises described in this text. (See chapter 3.)
11. If you pump out on overhanging climbs, you should be aware that
the pump clock starts running when you leave the ground. You
might not be too weak to climb the route—just too slow!
TIP: Practice climbing more quickly on known (wired) routes and
when redpointing. Foster a watchful eye that’s on the lookout for
creative rests that might stop the clock for a few moments. (See
chapters 3 and 4.)
12. Do you get out of breath when you climb? Rapid breathing while
climbing results from excess tension, irregular breathing, or poor
aerobic fitness.
TIP: Concentrate on maintaining relaxed, normal breathing while
you climb. Also, consider engaging in some aerobic training
(preferably running) three to four days per week. Build up to a
maximum of four, twenty-minute runs per week. (See chapter 6.)
13. If you begin thinking about how you might fail on a route before
you even start, you should know that belief gives birth to reality. If
the thought of failing crosses your mind, you likely will.
TIP: Before you start up a climb, always visualize yourself
successfully climbing the route from bottom to top. (See chapter 3.)
14. Do you miss hidden holds on routes? Tunnel vision is a common
cause of failure, especially during on-sight climbing.
TIP: Scope the route from a few different vantage points before
leaving the ground. As you climb, keep an open mind for hidden
holds—the key hold always seems to take a little extra effort to
locate. If a route feels really hard for its grade, chances are there’s a
good handhold or foothold escaping your view. (See chapters 3 and
4.)
15. If you have difficulty hanging on to small holds or pockets, keep in
mind that open-hand grip strength is crucial. Expert climbers favor
it, while beginner climbers avoid it.

TIP: While training and bouldering, force yourself to use the openhand grip at least 50 percent of the time. Most intermediate and
advanced climbers can significantly improve open-hand grip
strength through use of HIT workouts. (See chapter 7.)
16. It’s common to grab onto gear rather than risk a fall trying a hard
move. Assuming the potential fall is safe, always go for the move
instead of grabbing gear or hanging on the rope. The bad habit of
grabbing gear is easy to develop and very hard to break. Plus, you’ll
never learn where your true limit is if you give up in this way.
TIP: Counter any thought of grabbing gear with the belief that there
is absolutely a good hold just a few moves above you (there
probably is!).
17. If much of your body weight is hanging on your arms, you might
not be placing your weight (center of gravity) over your feet.
TIP: Invest more time practicing technique and body positioning.
Focus on keeping your crotch and hips in near the wall (except on
slabs) and experiment with moves where you turn one hip or the
other to the wall. Some flexibility training may be beneficial, too
(see chapter 4).
18. Intense soreness after only one day of cragging means that your
training volume and intensity are not congruent with your outdoor
climbing goals.
TIP: Step up your indoor training and always try for two solid
training days during the workweek.
19. Do you have difficulty visualizing yourself successfully climbing
the route? All peak performers acknowledge the importance of
visualization.
TIP: Get into the habit of climbing each route in your mind’s eye at
least twice before giving it a real go. (See chapter 3.)
20. If you think you cannot reach key holds on difficult routes, you
should be aware that this is the oldest excuse in this sport. Funny
thing is, some great short climbers never use this excuse! The reason
—there is almost always a technical solution or intermediate hold to
be discovered that will solve apparent reach problems.
TIP: Try a move five, ten, or even twenty different ways and you’ll
almost always find one that works!

21. If your feet cut loose and swing out on overhanging routes and
roofs, it’s possible that poor footwork and body positioning are
responsible. More often, however, it results from weak core muscles
(torso).
TIP: Perform the core-muscle exercises, described in chapter 6, at
least twice weekly. Also, spend more time in a bouldering cave
working on your steep-wall footwork and body position.
22. If you get distracted by activity on the ground, remember that
while climbing your focus must be locked onto the moves at hand,
not directed downward. If less than 95 percent of your
focus/attention is targeted on the climb, you don’t have much of a
chance of success.
TIP: Clear your mind of what’s happening on the ground. If you
need confirmation that your belayer is paying attention, a simple
“watch me” will do; then refocus on the move at hand. (See chapter
3.)
23. It’s common for beginning climbers to have difficulty reading
sequences. Reading sequences comes from experience—each time
you go climbing is money in the bank!
TIP: Climb up to four days a week to increase your rate of deposit.
Always try to figure sequences from the ground and minimize use of
beta (a real handicap to learning), except when climbing for
performance.
24. Do you experience a deep flash pump on the first climb of the day?
A flash pump results when you push your muscles too hard, too
soon.
TIP: Lengthen your warm-up period, add more stretching and some
sports massage, and always do a few increasingly difficult routes
before attempting your project.
25. If you have more difficulty climbing when people are watching,
remember that the pressure of needing to perform is entirely selfimposed. Therefore, it can be turned off as easily as you turn it on.
TIP: Commit to climb for yourself—for the challenge, adventure,
and fun of it (all the reasons you got into climbing in the first place).
Forget about the rest of the world, engage the process of climbing,
and let the outcome take care of itself. (See chapter 3.)

26. If your feet unexpectedly pop off footholds, take heart that this is a
common problem, even among some advanced climbers.
TIP: Refocus your attention on your feet for a few weeks. Evaluate
whether you carefully place your feet on the best part of a hold or
simply drop them onto the biggest-looking part. Also, do you hold
your foot position stationary as you stand up or does your shoe
move on the hold? These are things you need to practice in a
nonperformance setting. (See chapter 4.)
27. Do you experience frequent elbow pain? There are two types of
elbow tendinosis common to climbers. If you climb enough years,
chances are you’ll experience at least one of them.
TIP: Reverse Wrist Curls and forearm rotation exercises as well as
regular forearm stretching will help prevent these problems. Perform
three sets of Reverse Wrist Curls (twenty-five reps with a five- to
fifteen-pound dumbbell) and two sets of Forearm Pronators, three
days per week, year-round. Stretch both sides of your forearms each
day. (See chapter 6.)
28. If you have trouble pushing yourself to the limit on a safe lead
climb, your problem is more likely mental than physical. Keep in
mind that mental fortitude is as important as brawn.
TIP: On safe routes consciously push yourself into the mental
discomfort zone. At first this will feel like bitter medicine, but in
time it will redefine your mental limits. (See chapter 3.)
29. If you have difficulty finding midroute rest positions, you are
missing one of the keys to sending routes near your limit.
TIP: Creative practice (in a nonperformance setting) at finding
funky rest positions, modeling the rest positions of other climbers,
and climbing experience at a wide range of crags will, in time, make
finding “thank God” rests instinctual!
30. If your first attempt on a hard route is usually better than second or
third attempts that day, lack of muscular endurance and stamina are
likely a contributing factor.
TIP: Climbing laps on training routes or boulder problems is a great
way to improve endurance. Use the interval-climbing strategies
detailed in chapter 7.

APPENDIX D
Fitness Evaluation
This ten-part evaluation is strenuous. Perform a complete warm-up before
proceeding, and rest extensively between tests. Take this fitness test
annually to gauge your changes in conditioning for climbing. Submit your
results at TrainingForClimbing.com.
Test 1: One set maximum number of pull-ups. Do this test on a standard
pull-up bar (or bucket hold on a fingerboard) with your palms away and
hands shoulder width apart. Do not bounce, and be sure to go up and down
the whole way.
Evaluation: Total number of pull-ups in a single set to failure.
Results: _________________________
Test 2: One repetition maximum pull-up. Do a single pull-up with a tenpound weight clipped to your harness. Rest three minutes, then add ten
more pounds and repeat. (If you are very strong, begin with a twenty-pound
weight and increase at ten- to twenty-pound increments.) Continue in this
fashion until you have added more weight than you can pull up.
Evaluation: The maximum amount of added weight successfully lifted for a
single pull-up divided by your body weight.
Results: ________________________
Test 3: One-arm lock-off. Start with a standard chin-up (palms facing) then
lock off at the top on one arm and let go with the other.
Evaluation: Length of time in the lock-off before your chin drops below the
bar.

Results:
Right
arm
________________________
________________________

Left

arm

Test 4: One set maximum number of Frenchies. Perform the exercise as
described on page 166. Remember, each cycle consists of three pull-ups
separated by the three different lock-off positions, which are held for five
seconds. Have a partner time your lock-offs.
Evaluation: The number of cycles (or part of) completed in a single set.
Results: ________________________
Test 5: One set maximum number of fingertip pull-ups on a 0.75-inch (19
millimeter) edge. Perform this exercise as in test 1 except on a fingerboard
edge or doorjamb of approximately the stated size.
Evaluation: The number of fingertip pull-ups done in a single go.
Results: ________________________
Test 6: Lock off in the top position of a fingertip pull-up (0.75-inch or 19millimeter edge) for as long as possible.
Evaluation: Length of time in the lock-off until your chin drops below the
edge.
Results: ________________________
Test 7: Straight-arm hang from a standard pull-up bar. Place your hands
shoulder width apart with palms facing away.
Evaluation: Length of time you can hang on the bar before muscle failure.
Results: ________________________

Test 8: One set maximum number of abdominal crunches. Perform these on
a pad or carpeted floor with your knees bent at approximately ninety
degrees, your feet flat on the floor with nothing anchoring them. Cross your
arms over your upper chest and perform each crunch until your shoulder
blades rise off the floor.
Evaluation: Number of crunches you can perform without stopping. Do
them in a controlled manner—no bouncing off the floor.
Results: ________________________
Test 9: Wall split as described on page 108. Be sure that your rear end is no
more than 6 inches from the wall.
Evaluation: Position your legs so they are equidistant from the floor and
measure the distance from your heels to the floor.
Results: ________________________
Test 10: High-step stretch. Stand facing a wall with one foot flat on the
floor with toes touching the wall. Lift the other leg up to the side as high as
possible without any aid from your hands.
Evaluation: Measure the height of your step off the floor and divide it by
your height.
Results: ________________________

GLOSSARY
The following is a compilation of some of the technical terms and climbing
jargon used throughout this book.
active recovery—The restoration of homeostasis following vigorous
exercise that involves continued light-intensity movement; facilitates faster
recovery by enhancing lactate removal from the blood.
acute—Having rapid onset and severe symptoms.
adaptive response—Physiological changes in structure or function
particularly related to response to a training overload.
adipose tissue—Body fat.
aerobic(s)—Any physical activity deriving energy from the breakdown of
glycogen in the presence of oxygen, thus producing little or no lactic acid,
enabling an athlete to continue exercise much longer.
agonist—A muscle directly engaged in a muscular contraction.
anaerobic—Energy production in the muscles involving the breakdown of
glycogen in the absence of oxygen; a by-product called lactic acid is
formed, resulting in rapid fatigue and cessation of physical activity.
anaerobic endurance—The ability to continue moderate- to high-intensity
activity over a period of time; commonly called power endurance or power
stamina by climbers, though these terms are scientifically incorrect.
anaerobic threshold—The workload or level of oxygen consumption
where lactate production by the working muscles exceeds the rate of lactate
removal by the liver; typically at 50 percent to 80 percent of maximum
intensity of exercise, and in proportion to one’s level of anaerobic
endurance conditioning.
antagonist—A muscle providing an opposing force to the primary muscles
of action (agonist).
antioxidants—Substances (vitamins and minerals) proven to oppose
oxidation and inhibit or neutralize free radicals.
ape-index—Fingertip-to-fingertip distance (across your chest with arms out
to each side) minus your height; a positive ape-index is associated with
above-average reach for a given height.

artery—A vessel that carries oxygenated blood away from the heart to the
tissues of the body.
arthritis—A disease that causes inflammation, swelling, and pain in the
joints.
arousal—An internal state of alertness or excitement.
ATP—Adenosine triphosphate; a high-energy molecule that is stored in the
muscles in very small amounts. The body’s ultimate fuel source.
atrophy—Gradual shrinking and deconditioning of muscle tissue from
disuse.
backstepping—Outside edging on a foothold that is behind you while
climbing a move with your side to the wall.
barndoor—Sideways swinging or uncontrolled turning of the body
resulting from poor balance or body positioning.
basal metabolic rate—The minimum level of energy required to sustain
the body’s vital functions.
beta—Any prior information about a route, including sequence, rests, gear,
clips, and so on.
biological value (BV)—A method for evaluating protein sources; a high
BV protein source has a high percentage of nutrients actually absorbed from
the human intestine as opposed to excreted.
blocked practice—A practice routine in which a specific task is practiced
repeatedly, as in working a crux move or sequence.
bouldering—Variable practice of climbing skills performed without a belay
rope at the base of a cliff or on small boulders.
campus (or campusing)—Climbing an overhanging section of rock or
artificial wall with no feet, usually in a dynamic left-hand, right-hand, lefthand (and so forth) sequence.
campus training—A sport-specific form of plyometric exercise, developed
by Wolfgang Güllich at the Campus Center, a weight-lifting facility at the
University of Nürnberg, Germany.
capillary—The tiny blood vessels that receive blood flow from the arteries,
interchange substances between the blood and the tissues, and return the
blood to the veins.
capillary density—The number of capillaries per unit area of muscle
tissue. Capillary density increases, mainly in slow-twitch fibers, in response
to aerobic training.

catabolic—A breaking-down process in the body, as in muscle breakdown
during intense exercise.
center of gravity—The theoretical point on which the total effect of gravity
acts on the body.
chronic—Continuing over time.
concentric contraction—Any movement involving a shortening of
muscles fibers while developing tension, as in the biceps muscle during a
pull-up.
contact strength—Initial grip strength upon touching a handhold; directly
related to the speed at which the muscular motor units are called into play.
cortisol—A hormone, released in response to emotional or exercise stress,
that promotes fat utilization, inhibits inflammatory response, and facilitates
breakdown of muscle proteins for energy.
cortisone—A synthetic form of cortisol used (injected) as an antiinflammatory.
creatine phosphate (CP)—A high-energy phosphate compound stored in
skeletal muscle and used to supply energy for brief, high-intensity muscle
action.
crimp grip—The most natural (and stressful) way to grip a rock hold,
characterized by hyperextension of the first joint in the fingers and nearly
full flexion of the second joint.
crux—The hardest move, or sequence of moves, on a route.
deadpoint—The high position in a dynamic movement where, for a
moment, all motion stops.
detox—To shake out, rest, and recover from pumped forearm muscles.
detraining—Reversal of positive adaptations to chronic exercise upon
cessation of an exercise program.
drop-knee—An exaggerated backstep, commonly used on overhanging
rock, where the inside knee is dropped toward the ground, resulting in a
stable chimneylike position.
dynamic move—An explosive leap for a hold otherwise out of reach.
dyno—Short for “dynamic.”
eccentric contraction—A muscle action in which the muscle resists as it is
forced to lengthen, as in the biceps during the lowering phase of a pull-up.
electrolyte—A substance that, in solution, is capable of conducting
electricity. Certain electrolytes are essential to the electrochemical
functioning of the body.

endurance—The ability to perform physical work for an extended period
of time. Cardiovascular endurance is directly related to VO2 max, whereas
muscular endurance is influenced by circulation and available oxygen.
enzyme—A protein molecule that aids chemical reactions.
epicondylitis—Inflammation of the tendon origins of the forearm flexors
(medial) or extensors (lateral) near the elbow.
ergogenic—Performance enhancing.
estrogen—The sex hormone that predominates in females, but also has
some functions in males.
extension—A movement that moves the two ends of a jointed body part
away from each other, as in straightening the arm.
fast-twitch fibers—The muscle fiber type that contracts quickly and is
used mostly during intense, powerful movements.
flagging—A climbing technique in which one foot is crossed behind the
other to avoid barndooring and to improve balance.
flash—To climb a route first try without ever having touched it, but with
the aid of beta.
flash pump—A rapid, often vicious, muscular pump resulting from
strenuous training or climbing without first performing a proper, gradual
warm-up.
flexion—A movement that brings the ends of a body part closer together, as
in bending the arm.
G-Tox—A technique that uses gravity to help speed recovery from a
forearm pump. It involves alternating, every five to ten seconds, the
position of the resting arm between the normal hanging-at-your-side
position and a raised-hand position above your shoulder.
glycogen—Compound chains of glucose stored in the muscle and liver for
use during aerobic or anaerobic exercise.
glycemic index (GI)—A scale that classifies how the ingestion of various
foods affects blood sugar levels in comparison with the ingestion of straight
glucose.
Golgi tendon organ—Sensory receptors located between the muscle and
its tendon that are sensitive to the stretch of the muscle tendon produced
during muscular contraction.
gripped—Extremely scared.
hangdogging—Climbing a route, usually bolt-to-bolt, with the aid of a rope
to hang and rest while practicing the sequence.

heel hook—Use of the heel on a hold, usually near chest level, to aid in
pulling and balance.
homeostasis—The body’s tendency to maintain a steady state despite
external changes.
honed—In extremely good shape; with low body fat.
hormone—A chemical secreted into the bloodstream to regulate the
function of a certain organ.
hyperemia—Increased blood flow in the working muscles during exercise
or as a result of deep sports massage.
Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT)—A highly refined and specific
method of training maximum finger strength and upper-body power by
climbing on identical finger holds (isolation) with greater than body weight
(hypergravity). Also known as Hörst Isolation Training.
hypertrophy—Enlargement in size (for example, muscular hypertrophy).
insertion—The point of attachment of a muscle to a distal or relatively
more movable bone.
insulin—A hormone that decreases blood glucose level by driving glucose
from the blood into muscle and fat cells.
interval training—A method of anaerobic endurance training that involves
brief periods of intense training interspaced with periods of rest or lowintensity training.
isometric—A muscular contraction resulting in no shortening movement of
the muscle.
kinesiology—The scientific study of human movement.
kinesthetic—The sense derived from muscular contractions and limb
movements.
killer—Extraordinarily good, as in a killer route.
lactic acid—An acid by-product of the anaerobic metabolism of glucose
during intense muscular exercise.
lactic acid system—The energy pathway used in high-intensity activity
over a short duration.
lean body weight—The weight of the body, less the weight of its fat.
ligament—Fibrous tissue that connects bone to bone, or bone to cartilage,
to hold together and support the joints.
lunge—An out-of-control dynamic move; an explosive jump for a far-off
hold.

macronutrients—Basic nutrients needed for energy, cell growth, and organ
function (carbohydrates, fat, and protein).
manky—Of poor quality, as in a manky finger jam or a manky protection
placement.
maximum strength—The peak force of a muscular contraction,
irrespective of the time element.
micronutrients—Noncaloric nutrients needed in very small amounts, as in
vitamins and minerals.
modeling—A learning technique where an individual watches, then
attempts, a skill as performed properly by another person.
motor learning—A set of internal processes associated with practice or
experience leading to a relatively permanent gain in performance capability.
motor skill—A skill where the primary determinant of success is the
movement component itself.
motor unit—A motor neuron, together with a group of muscle cells,
stimulated in an all-or-nothing response.
muscular endurance—The length of time a given level of power can be
maintained.
NSAID—Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, usually available over the
counter, that reduce pain, fever, and inflammation.
on-sight—When a route is climbed first try and with absolutely no prior
information of any kind.
open-hand grip—The less-stressful finger grip involving only slight
flexion of the finger joints.
osteoarthritis—A joint disease of older persons in which cartilage in the
joints wears down and there is bone growth at the edges of the joint.
overload—Subjecting a part of the body to greater efforts (intensity or
volume) than it is accustomed to in order to elicit a training response.
overtraining—Constant severe training that does not provide adequate
time for recovery; symptoms include increased frequency of injury,
decreased performance, irritability, and apathy.
overuse—Excessive repeated exertion or shock that results in injuries such
as inflammation of the muscles and tendons.
plyometric—An exercise that suddenly preloads and forces the stretching
of a muscle an instant prior to its concentric contraction, as in dynamic upand-down campus training. Also known as reactive or shock training.

power—A measure of both force and speed (speed = distance x time) of a
muscular contraction through a given range of motion. Power is the
explosive aspect of strength. (Technically the term finger power is
meaningless, since the fingers normally don’t move when gripping the
rock.)
pronation—The inward turning of a body part, as in turning the forearm
inward and the palm facedown.
proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF)—A stretching
technique that couples contraction and relaxations to enhance stretching
gains. Most commonly, a five- to ten-second muscle contraction (against
resistance from a partner) is followed by a relaxation period during which
the partner slowly applies pressure to increase the range of the stretch.
proprioceptors—Sensory receptors found in muscles, tendons, joints, and
the inner ear, that detect the motion or position of the limbs and body, thus
providing kinesthetic awareness.
psyched—Raring to go or very happy.
pumped—When the muscles become engorged with blood due to extended
physical exertion.
random practice—A practice sequence in which tasks from several classes
are experienced in random order over consecutive trails.
reactive training—A power-building exercise that couples, in rapid
succession, a forceful eccentric contraction with an explosive concentric
contraction.
recommended dietary allowances (RDA)—Quantities of specific
vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients needed daily that have been judged
adequate for maintenance of good nutrition. Developed by the Food and
Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Science.
recruitment—The systematic increase in the number of active motor units
called upon during muscular contraction.
redpoint—Lead climbing a route bottom-to-top in one push.
Reminiscence Effect—The phenomenon of enhanced motor skill and
performance after an extended time-off period from climbing and training.
schema—A set of rules, usually developed and applied unconsciously by
the motor system in the brain and spinal cord, relating how to move and
adjust muscle forces, body positions, and so forth, given the parameters at
hand, such as steepness of the rock, friction qualities, holds being used, and
type of terrain.

sharp end—The lead climber’s end of the rope.
skill—The capability to bring about an end result with maximum certainty,
minimum energy, and minimum time.
slow-twitch fibers—The muscle fiber type that contracts slowly and is
used most in moderate-intensity endurance activities such as easy to
moderate climbing or running.
sport climbing—Usually refers to any indoor or outdoor climbing on boltprotected routes.
spotter—A person designated to slow the fall of a boulderer, with the main
goal of keeping the boulderer’s head from hitting the ground.
stabilizer muscle—A muscle that is stimulated to help anchor or stabilize
the position of a bone.
strength—The amount of muscle force that can be exerted; speed and
distance are not factors of strength.
strength endurance—See anaerobic endurance.
supination—Rotation of the forearm outward and palm-upward.
synovial fluid—A viscid fluid secreted by the membrane lining joints,
tendon sheaths, and bursae to lubricate and cushion them during movement.
Tabata—A grueling interval-training protocol involving twenty seconds of
maximum-intensity exercise followed by ten seconds of rest; usually
repeated up to eight times. Named after its developer, Izumi Tabata.
tendinitis—An acute disorder involving the inflammation of a tendon and
synovial membrane at a joint.
tendinopathy—A general term that just refers to tendon injury, without
specifying a particular type of injury such as tendinitis (inflammation) or
tendinosis (failed healing).
tendinosis—Chronic tendon pain due to an accumulation of microscopic
injuries that don’t heal properly; the main problem, then, is failed healing,
not inflammation.
tendon—A white fibrous cord of dense connective tissue that attaches
muscle to bone.
trad—Short for a traditional climb (or climber) that requires natural
protection placements.
training effect—A basic principle of exercise science that states that
adaptation occurs from an exercise only in those parts or systems of the
body that are stressed by the exercise.

transfer of learning—The gain or loss in proficiency on one task as a
result of practice or experience on another task.
trigger point—A long-lasting muscle spasm or contracture often associated
with local muscular fatigue or injury.
tweak—To injure, as in a tweaked finger tendon.
variable practice—Practice in which many variations on a class of actions
are performed; opposite of blocked practice.
vein—A vessel that returns blood from the various parts of the body to the
heart.
visualization—Controlled and directed imagery that can be used for
awareness building, monitoring and self-regulation, healing, and, most
important, as mental programming for good performances.
VO2max—Maximal oxygen uptake, as in the measurement of maximum
aerobic power.
wired—Known well, as in a wired route.
working—Practicing the moves on a difficult route via toprope or
hangdogging.

SUGGESTED READING
Ament, Pat. Master of Rock. Mechanicsburg, Pa.: Stackpole Books, 1977,
1998.
Armstrong, Lawrence E. Performing in Extreme Environments. Champaign,
Ill.: Human Kinetics, 2000.
Benardot, Dan. Advanced Sports Nutrition. Champaign, Ill.: Human
Kinetics, 2006.
Brand-Miller, Jennie, et al. The Glucose Revolution: The Authoritative
Guide to the Glycemic Index. New York: Marlowe and Company, 1999.
Brukner, Peter, and Karim Khan. Clinical Sports Medicine. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Burke, Edmund R. Optimal Muscle Recovery. Garden City Park, N.Y.:
Avery Publishing Group, 1999.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience.
New York: Harper Perennial, 1990.
Garfield, Charles A. Peak Performance: Mental Training Techniques of the
World’s Greatest Athletes. New York: Warner Books, 1984.
Goddard, Dale, and Udo, Neumann. Performance Rock Climbing.
Mechanicsburg, Pa.: Stackpole Books, 1993.
Guten, Gary. Injuries in Outdoor Recreation. Guilford, Conn.: Globe
Pequot Press/Falcon Publishing, 2005.
Hochholzer, Thomas, et al. One Move Too Many. Ebenhausen, Germany:
Lochner-Verlag, 2003.

Hörst, Eric J. How to Climb 5.12. Guilford, Conn.: Globe Pequot
Press/FalconGuides, 2003.
———. Mental Wings: A Seven-Step, Life-Elevating Program for
Uncommon Success. www.MentalWings.com, 2003.
———. Learning to Climb Indoors. Guilford, Conn.: Globe Pequot
Press/FalconGuides, 2006.
———. Conditioning for Climbers. Guilford, Conn.: Globe Pequot
Press/FalconGuides, 2007.
Long, John. How to Rock Climb! Guilford, Conn.: Globe Pequot
Press/Falcon Publishing, 1993.
Meagher, Jack. Sports Massage. New York: Station Hill, 1990.
Prudden, Bonnie. Pain Eraser: Discover the Wonders of Trigger Point
Therapy. New York: Evans and Company, 1980.
Schmidt, R. A., and C. A. Wrisberg. Motor Learning and Performance: A
Problem-Based Learning Approach. Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics,
2004.
Stricker, Lauri. Pilates for the Outdoor Athlete. Conifer, Colo.: Fulcrum,
2007.

REFERENCES

Chapter 1
Ament, Pat. (1977, 1992) Master of Rock. Lincoln, Neb.: Adventure’s
Meaning Press.
Barss, Stephanie J. (1997) “Physiological attributes of recreational rock
climbers.” A master’s thesis presented to the faculty of Western Washington
University.
Bloomfield, J., Ackland, T. R., Elliot, B. C. (1994) Applied Anatomy and
Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific
Publications.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., Tech-Rsmer, C. (1993) “The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance.” Psych Rev
100(3): 363- 406.
Fox, P. W., Hershberger, S. L., Bouchard, T. J. (1996) “Genetic and
environmental contributions to the acquisition of a motor skill.” Nature
384: 356-358.
Goddard, Dale, Neumann, Udo. (1993) Performance Rock Climbing.
Mechanicsburg, Pa.: Stackpole Books.
Güllich, W., Kubin, A. (1986) Sportklettern Heute: Technik, Taktik,
Training. München, Germany: Bruckmann.
Hörst, Eric J. (1994) Flash Training. Evergreen, Colo.: Chockstone Press.
———. (1997) How to Climb 5.12. Helena, Mont.: Falcon Press/Globe
Pequot.

Mermier, C. M., Janot, J. M., Parker, D. L., Swan, J. G. (2000)
“Physiological and anthropometric determinants of sport climbing
performance.” Brit J Sports Med 34(5) (Oct): 359-365.
Seiler, S. (2000) “Limits to performance.” Sportscience 4(2).
Watts, P. B., Martin, D. T., Durtschi, S. (1993) “Anthropometric profiles of
elite male and female competitive sport rock climbers.” J Sport Sci 11(2)
(Apr): 113-117.

Chapter 3
Covey, Stephen. (1989) The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Feltz, D., Landers, D. (1983) “The effects of mental practice on motor skill
learning and performance.” Sport Psych 5.
Garfield, C. (1984) Peak Performance. New York: Warner Books.
Knudson, D. V., Morrison, C. S. (1997) Qualitative Analysis of Human
Movement. Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics.
Kubistant, T. (1986) Performing Your Best. Champaign, Ill.: Leisure Press.
Levinson, W. (1994) The Way of Strategy. Milwaukee: ASQC Quality Press.

Chapter 4
Schmidt, R. A. (1991) Motor Learning and Performance: From Principles
to Practice. Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics.
Schmidt, R. A., Wrisberg, C. A. (2004) Motor Learning and Performance:
A Problem-Based Learning Approach. Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics.

Chapter 5
Adams, K., O’Shea, J., O’Shea, K., Climstein, M. (1992) “The effect of six
weeks of squat, plyometric, and squat-plyometric training on power
production.” Appl Sport Sci Res 6.
Bloomfield, J., Ackland, T. R., Elliot, B. C. (1994) Applied Anatomy and
Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific
Publications.
Bloomfield, J., Fricker, P., Fitch, K. (1992) Textbook of Science and
Medicine in Sport. Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific
Publications.
Chu, Donald A. (1996) Explosive Power and Strength. Champaign, Ill.:
Human Kinetics.
Kaneko, M., Fuchimoto, T., Toji, H., Suei, K. (1983) “Training effect of
differing loads on the force- velocity relationship and mechanical power
output in human muscle.” Scand J Sport Sci 5.
O’Shea, K., O’Shea, J. (1989) “Functional isometric weight training: Its
effect on dynamic and static strength.” J Appl Sport Sci Res 3.
Tabata, I., Nishimura, K., Kouzaki, M., Hirai, Y., Ogita, F., Miyachi, M.,
Yamamoto, K. (1997) “Effects of moderate-intensity endurance and highintensity intermittent training on anaerobic capacity and VO2 max.” Med
Sci Sports Exercise 28: 1327-1330.
Tidow, G. (1990) “Aspects of strength training in athletes.” New Studies in
Athletics 1.

Watts, P., Newbury, V., Sulentic, J. (1996) “Acute changes in handgrip
strength, endurance, and blood lactate with sustained sport rock climbing.”
J Sports Med Physical Fitness (Dec).

Chapter 6
Bell, G., Peterson, S., Quinney, A., Wenger, H. (1989) “The effect of
velocity-specific strength training on peak torque and anaerobic rowing
power.” J Sports Sci 7.
King, J., et al. (2001) “A comparison of high intensity vs. low intensity
exercise on body composition in overweight women.” American College of
Sports Medicine Annual Meeting.
Shrier, I. (1999) “Stretching before exercise does not reduce the risk of
local muscle injury: A critical review of the clinical and basic science
literature.” Clinical J Sport Med 9: 221-227.
———(2000) “Stretching before exercise: An evidence based approach.”
Brit J Sports Med 34(10): 324-325.
Watts, P. B., Martin, D. T., Durtschi, S. (1993) “Anthropometric profiles of
elite male and female competitive sport rock climbers.” J Sport Sci 11(2)
(Apr): 113-117.
Wilmore, J. (1983) “Body composition in sport and exercise: Directions for
future research.” Med Sci Sports Exercise 15.

Chapter 7
Tabata, I., Nishimura, K., Kouzaki, M., Hirai, Y., Ogita, F., Miyachi, M.,
Yamamoto, K. (1997) “Effects of moderate-intensity endurance and highintensity intermittent training on anaerobic capacity and VO2 max.” Med
Sci Sports Exercise 28: 1327-1330.

Chapter 8
Bloomfield, J., Ackland, T. R., Elliot, B. C. (1994) Applied Anatomy and
Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific
Publications.
Davis, B., Elford, J., Jamieson, K. (1991) “Variation in performance in
simple muscle tests at different phases of the menstrual cycle.” J Sports
Med Physical Fitness 31.
Wilmore, J. (1974) “Alterations in strength, body composition and
anthropometric measurements consequent to a ten-week weight training
program.” Med Sci Sports 5.

Chapter 9
Brilla, L. R., Conte, V. (1999) “A novel zinc and magnesium formulation
(ZMA) increases anabolic hormones and strength in athletes.” Sports Med
Training Rehab J (Nov).
Duchaine, Daniel. (1996) Bodyopus. Carson City, Nev.: Xipe Press.
Graham, T. E., et al. (1998) “Metabolic and exercise endurance effects of
coffee and caffeine ingestion.” J Appl Physiol 85: 883-889.
Horswill, C. A. (1995) “Effects of bicarbonate, citrate, and phosphate
loading on performance.” Int J Sport Nutrition 5: S111-119.
Kelly, G. S. (1997) “Sports nutrition: A review of selected nutritional
supplements for endurance athletes.” Alt Med Rev.
Linderman, J. K., Gosselink, K. L. (1994) “The effects of sodium
bicarbonate ingestion on exercise performance.” Sports Med 18: 75-80.
McBride, J. B., et al. (1998) “Effect of resistance exercise on free radical
production.” Med Sci Sports Exercise 30(1).
Nissen, S., Panton, L., et al. (1996) “Effect of HMB supplementation on
strength and body composition of trained and untrained males undergoing
intense strength training.” FASEB J 10A: A287.
Nissen, S., Sharp, R., et al. (1996) “Effect of leucine metabolite HMB on
muscle metabolism during resistive exercise training.” J Appl Physiol 81:
2095-2104.

Pasman, W. J., et al. (1995) “The effect of different dosages of caffeine on
endurance performance time.” Int J Sports Med 16: 225-230.
Robergs, R. A. (1991) “Nutrition and exercise determinants of post-exercise
glycogen synthesis.” Int J Sport Nutrition.
Schoffstall, J., et al. (2001) “Effects of dehydration and rehydration on the
one-rep maximum bench press of weight-trained males.” J Strength Cond
Res 15.
Spriet, L. (1995) “Caffeine and performance.” Int J Sport Nutrition 5: S8499.
Toubro, et al. (1993) “Safety and efficacy of long-term treatment with
ephedrine, caffeine and an ephedrine/caffeine mixture.” Int J Obes 17 (1):
S69-72.
Vukovich, M., et al. (1997) “Effect of HBM on VO2 peak and maximal
lactate in endurance-trained cyclists.” Med Sci Sports Exercise.
Williams, Melvin H. (1989) Beyond Training. Champaign, Ill.: Leisure
Press/Human Kinetics Publishing.

Chapter 10
Bloomfield, J., T. R. Ackland, B. C. Elliot (1994) Applied Anatomy and
Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific
Publications.
Bompa, Tudor O. (1983) Theory and Methodology of Training. Dubuque,
Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co.
Burke, Edmund R. (1999) Optimal Muscle Recovery. Garden City Park,
N.Y.: Avery Publishing Group.
Coyle, E. F., Coggan, A. R. (1984) “Effectiveness of carbohydrate feeding
in delaying fatigue during prolonged exercise.” Sports Med 5.
Dinan, T. G., et al. (1994) “Lowering cortisol enhances growth hormone
response in healthy individuals.” Acta Physiol Scand 151(3) (Jul).
Draper, Nick, et al. (2006) “Effects of active recovery on lactate
concentration, heart rate and RPE in climbing.” J Sports Sci Med 5: 97-105.
Meagher, Jack. (1990) Sports Massage. New York: Station Hill Press.
Monedero, J., Donne, B. (2000) “Effect of recovery interventions on lactate
removal and subsequent performance.” Int J Sports Med (Nov).
Niles, T. S., et al. (1997) “The effects of carbohydrate-protein drink on
muscle glycogen resynthesis after endurance exercise.” Med Sci Sports
Exercise 29 Suppl 5.
Richter, E. A., et al. (1984) “Enhanced muscle glycogen metabolism after
exercise.” Amer J Physiol 246.

Watts, P. B., M. Daggett, P. Gallagher, B. Wilkens. (2000) “Metabolic
response during sport rock climbing and the effects of active versus passive
recovery.” Int J Sports Med (Apr).
Williams, R. B., et al. (1982) “Type A behavior and elevated physiological
and neuroendocrine responses to cognitive tasks.” Science 29 (Oct): 218.

Chapter 11
Almekinders, L. (1999) “Anti-inflammatory treatment of muscular injuries
in sport.” Sports Med 28: 383-388.
———(2003) “An in vitro investigation into the effects of repetitive motion
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication on human tendon
fibroblasts.” Am J Sports Med 23:119-123.
Auerback, David, M. (2000) Tennis Elbow/Lateral Epicondylitis. Southern
California Orthopedic Institute. www.scoi.com.
Bach, Allan W. (1999) “Finger joint injuries in active patients.” Physician
Sportsmedicine 27(3).
Bannister, P., Foster, P. (1986) “Upper limb injuries associated with rock
climbing.” Brit J Sports Med 20.
Bollen, S. R. (1988) “Soft tissue injuries in extreme rock climbers.” Brit J
Sports Med 22.
Crouch, D. M. (1998) “Finger tips: The key to treating finger injuries is
knowing what ails you.” Rock and Ice 84.
Doran, D. A., Reay, M. (2000) “Injuries and associated training and
performance characteristics in recreational rock climbers.” In The Science
of Rock Climbing and Mountaineering. Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics
Publishing.
Gabl, M., Lener, M., Pechlaner, S., Lutz, M., Rudisch, A. (1996) “Rupture
or stress injury of the flexor tendon pulleys? Early diagnosis with MRI.”
Handchir Mikrochir Plast Chir 28 (Nov).

Gabl, M., Rangger, C., Lutz, M., Fink, C., Rudisch, A., Pechlaner, S. (1998)
“Disruption of the finger flexor pulley system in elite rock climbers.” Am J
Sports Med 26(5) (Sep-Oct).
Hochholzer T., Schoffl VR., Lightner S. (2003) One Move Too Many.
Ebenhausen, Germany: Lochner-Verlag.
Hochholzer T., Schoffl VR. (2005) “Epiphyseal fractures of the finger
middle joints in young sport climbers.” Wilderness Environ Med 16(3)
(fall): 139-142.
Jebson, Peter, Steyers, J. L., Curtis, M. (1997) “Hand injuries in rock
climbing: Reaching the right treatment.” Physician Sportsmedicine 25(5).
Jüni, P. (2007) “Meta-analysis: Chondroitin for osteoarthritis of the knee or
hip.” Ann Intern Med. 146 (8): 580-90.
Khan, K. M. (1999) “Histopathology of common tendinopathies. Update
and implications for clinical management.” Sports Med 27(6) (June): 393408.
Kim, L.S. (2006) “Efficacy of methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) in
osteoarthritis pain of the knee: A pilot clinical trial.” Osteoarthritis
Cartilage 14(3): 286-294.
Klauser A., et al. (2002) “Finger pulley injuries in extreme rock climbers:
Depiction with Dynamic Ultrasonography.” Radiology 222(3): 755-61.
Kulick, M. (1986) “Oral ibuprofen: Evaluation of its effect on peritendinous
adhesions and the breaking strength of a tenorrhaphy.” J Hand Surg 11A:
100-119.
Leadbetter, W. B. (1992) “Cell matrix response in tendon injury.” Clin
Sports Med 2(3): 533-577.

Lewis, R. A., Shea, O. F., Shea, K. G. (1993) “Acute carpal tunnel
syndrome: Wrist stress during a major climb.” Physician Sportsmedicine
21(7).
Lin, G. T., et al. (1989) “Functional anatomy of the human digital flexor
pulley system.” J Hand Surg Am 14.
Lin, G. T., et al. (1998) “Biomechanical analysis of flexor pulley
reconstruction.” J Hand Surg Brit 14.
Lister, G. D. (1979) “Reconstruction of pulleys employing extensor
retinaculum.” J Hand Surg Am.
Liu, S. H. (1995) “Collagen in tendon, ligament, and bone healing.” Clin
Orth Related Res Num 318: 265-278.
Marco, R. A., Sharkey, N. A., Smith, T. S., Zissimos, A. G. (1998)
“Pathomechanics of closed rupture of the flexor tendon pulleys in rock
climbers.” J Bone Joint Surg Am 80(7) (Jul).
Maroon, J.C. (2006) “Omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil) as an antiinflammatory: An alternative to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for
discogenic pain.” Surg Neurol 65(4) (Apr): 325.
McAlindon, T., et al. (2000) “Glucosamine and chondroitin for treatment of
osteoarthritis.” JAMA 283: 1469-1475.
McFarland, Edward G., et al. (2000) Patient Guide to Knee Arthroscopy.
Johns
Hopkins
Department
of
Orthopaedic
Surgery.
www.hopkinsmedicine.org.
Moutet, F., Guinard, D., Gerard, P., Mugnier, C. (1993) “Subcutaneous
rupture of long finger flexor pulleys in rock climbers.” Ann Chir Main
Memb Super 12(3).
Moutet, F. (2003) Flexor tendon pulley system: Anatomy, pathology,
treatment. Chirurgie de la Main 22(1).

Nirschl, Robert P., Kraushaar, Barry S. (1996) “Assessment and treatment
guidelines for elbow injuries.” Physician Sportsmedicine 25(4).
Reginster, J. Y., et al. (2001) “Long-term effects of glucosamine sulfate on
osteoarthritis progression: A randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial.”
Lancet 357(9252) (Jan 27).
Robinson, Mark. (1988) “Fingers: Get a grip on injury prevention and
treatment.” Climbing (Aug).
———. (1993) “Snap, crackle, pop: Climbing injuries to fingers and
forearms.” Climbing (Jun- Jul).
———. (1993) “The elbow: Understanding a common sore subject.”
Climbing (Apr).
Rohrbough, Joel. (2000) “‘Pop’ goes your climbing season.” Climbing
(Nov).
Rooks, M. D. (1997) “Rock climbing injuries.” Sports Med 23.
Schweizer, A. (2000) “Biomechanical effectiveness of taping the A2 pulley
in rock climbers.” J. Hand Surg. 25: 102-107.
Seiler, J. G., Leversedge, F. J. (2000) “Digital flexor sheath: Repair and
reconstruction of the annular pulleys and membranous sheath.” J S Orth
Assn 9(2).
Seiler, J. G., et al. (1995) “The flexor digitorum longus: An anatomic and
microscopic study for use as a tendon graft.” J Hand Surg Am 20.
Stelzle, F. D., Gaulrapp, H., Pforringer, W. (2000) “Injuries and overuse
syndromes due to rock climbing on artificial walls.” Sportverletz
Sportschaden 14(4) (Dec).

Sylvester, A. D., Christensen, A. M., Kramer, P. A. (2006) “Factors
influencing osteological changes in the hands and fingers of rock climbers.”
J Anatomy 209(5).
Warme, W. J., Brooks, D. (2000) “The effect of circumferential taping on
flexor tendon pulley failure in rock climbers.” Am J Sports Med 28 (SepOct).
Wright, D. M., Royle, T. J., Marshall, T. (2001) “Indoor rock climbing:
Who gets injured?” Brit J Sports Med 35(3) (Jun).

INDEX
Italicized page numbers indicate photographs.
Figures and tables are indicated with “f” and “t” respectively, following
the page number.

A

abdominals
exercises
stretches
Accelerade
accomplished (intermediate) climbers
classification requirements
complex training
finger and forearm training exercises
pull-muscle exercises
reactive training
training focus and weakness targets
workout schedules for
achievement curves
Action Directe
active rest
adductor stretches
adenosine triphosphate. See ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
advanced climbers. See elite (advanced) climbers
aerobic capacity
aerobic energy production
aerobic training
for body composition
female climbers and
high-volume, for stamina
running intervals
stamina and
A-E training. See anaerobic endurance (A-E) training
agonist muscles

Aided Pull-Ups
alcoholic consumption
alpine climbing
nutritional needs
SAID Principle and
sleep requirements
training for
Ament, Pat
anabolic steroids
anaerobic endurance (A-E) training. See also endurance training; stamina
training
climbing intervals for
lactic acid tolerance
overview
rest, importance of
sample workouts for accomplished (intermediate) climbers
sample workouts for elite (advanced) climbers
anaerobic threshold
androstenedione (andro)
ANSWER Sequence
antagonist muscles
anti-inflammatory medications
antioxidants
anxiety
Aquaman
arm positions and movements
mantling
reverse side pull (Gaston)
side pulls
underclings
arms. See also arm positions and movements; forearms
climbing techniques
flexibility training/stretches for
arnica

arthritis
associated visualization
ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
creatine and
as energy production component
fatigue and
high-repetition training and
recovery periods involving
attitude
fear management and
positive vs. negative
recovery acceleration and
self-confidence
tension and anxiety management techniques
A2 pulley injuries
A2 ring finger taping method
autonomous learning stage

B

Bachar, John
Bachar Ladder
backstep
back stretches
Baker, E. A.
Balance Bars
Bates, Barry
Batzer, Jeff
beginner (novice) climbers
classification requirements
finger and forearm training exercises
injury prevention for
pull-muscle exercises
training focus and weakness targets
workout schedules for
bench press
Benson, Claude E.
Bent-Over Arm Kickback
Bent-Over Arm Raise
big-wall climbing
biking
biological value (BV)
blocked practice
blood glucose levels
body composition
body fat percentage
female vs. male climbers
optimizing strategies for

Bosley, Matt
bouldering
feet-off (campusing)
for finger/forearm strength training
forearm endurance exercises
hypergravity, for grip strength training
as power training
for pull-muscle training
stamina training for
as strength training
training activity
training drill
as training program subdiscipline target
bowstringing
bracing, counterforce
brain hemispheres
breathing
Bridwell, Jim
British Mountaineering (Benson)
buddy taping
bursitis
buttocks and lower-back stretches
BV (biological value)

C

calcium
calf stretches
calories
“camel up,”
campus board training
exercises for
injury prevention
overview
for pull-up muscles
Campus Double Dynos
campusing (feet-off bouldering)
Campus Laddering
Campus Lock-Offs (Campus Touches)
campus training
carbohydrates
lactic acid system and
as macronutrient, overview
for recovery
recovery strategies
sport drinks for refueling
carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)
Caton, Jasmine
cell volumizing
centering
center of gravity
central fatigue
cholesterol
chondroitin

chunking down the route
cigarette smoking
circuit training
Clark, Kristine
climber categories
classifications/levels, defined(see also accomplished (intermediate)
climbers; beginner (novice) climbers; elite (advanced) climbers)
female
injury and climbing ability correlations
junior/youth
over-fifty
youth
climber’s elbow
climbing intervals
coaches
cognitive learning stage
comfort zones
community walls
competition
peaking effects
practice drills for
visualization skills for
workout schedule planning for
complex training
concentration
concentric contractions and strength
conditioning, general
antagonist muscle training
body composition, optimizing
core muscle training
flexibility training
for over-fifty climbers
overview
stamina training

confidence
contact strength
core-muscle training
cortisol
cortisone
CP (creatine phosphate)
crack climbing
cragging
cramps, muscle
crash diets
creatine
creatine phosphate (CP)
crimp grip
cross-fiber friction
cross-training
cruxes
CTS (carpal tunnel syndrome)
Cycle of Improvement

D

dangle-arm shakeouts
deadpoints
death board
dehydration
delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)
detraining
diets. See also nutrition
differential relaxation
dips
disassociated visualization
discrete skills
disinhibition
dislocations, partial shoulder
DOMS (delayed-onset muscle soreness)
Double Dynos, Campus
downclimbing routes
down pull
drop-and-catch exercises
drop-knee moves
drugs, performance
Dumbell Internal and External Rotations
dynamic moves
dyno. See lunges (dyno)

E

eccentric contractions and strength
Eckenstein, Oscar
elbow injuries
electrolytes
elimination drills
elite (advanced) climbers
body fat percentages
campus board training
classification requirements
complex training
cortisol and steroid use
finger and forearm training exercises
hypergravity training
overuse injuries
power training methods
pull-muscle exercises
reactive training for
training focus and weakness targets
workout schedules for
embarrassment, fear of
emotions
endurance training. See also anaerobic endurance (A-E); stamina training
for forearms
for pull muscles
strength training vs.
Enduro Steep-Wall Lock-Offs
energy
body fat percentages and

emotions and
intraday recovery and
muscles and production of
energy bars
Energy-Emotion Matrix
epiphyseal fractures
Ewing, Jim
exercise physiology

F

failure, fear of
falling
fast twitch (FT) muscle fibers
fat
body
dietary
fatigue
campus training during
causes of
as dehydration symptom
lactic acid and
learning acquisition and
limiting magnitude of
overgripping and
recovery time and
sports drinks and
fatigued skill practice
fear management
feet-off bouldering (campusing)
feet-on training
female climbers
body fat percentage, optimum
mineral supplements for
shoulder press weight
training issues for
Fig Newtons
fingerboards
exercises with

injury prevention
overview
power training
pyramid training method for
repeater workout schedule
finger jamming
finger rolls
fingers. See also grip strength
anatomy of
bouldering for grip strength training
fatigue recovery strategies for
fingerboard training for
flexibility stretches for
injuries and treatments
maximum-strength exercises
positions and movements
taping
training overview
finger strength
First Touch
fish oil supplements
fist jamming
fitness. See strength and fitness training
flagging
Flash Training (Hörst, E. J.)
flexibility training
lower-torso and leg stretches
overview
tips for safe and effective
upper-body stretches
focus. See also goal setting
foot placement
flagging
heel hooks, toe hooks, knee locks

jam crack climbing and
opposing forces and
precision and weight balance
quiet movements
twist lock and backstep
force, maximum
Forearm Pronator
forearm pump
forearms
anaerobic endurance training for
climb-specific exercise training for
conditioning exercises for
elbow injuries
endurance exercises for
fatigue recovery strategies for
maximum-strength exercises for
taping of
4-3-2-1 Training Cycles
Frenchies
Front Levers
FT (fast twitch) muscle fibers
full crimp
functional isometrics

G

Gaston
Gatorade
gender comparisons
genetics
body composition limitations and
performance and role of
GI (glycemic index)
Gill, John
biographies of
core-muscle exercises
grading system developed by
legacy of
milk as protein source
as over-fifty climber
rope climbing training
glucosamine sulfate
glucose
glycemic index (GI)
glycogen
goal setting
Goddard, Dale
Goldstone, Richard
golf
golfer’s elbow
Golgi tendon organ
grading systems
gravity, center of
Griffith, Christian

gripping. See also fingers
finger positions
techniques for
grip-relax repeating sequence (GRRS)
grip strength
and body-mass ratios
bouldering and hyperbouldering as training for
contact strength exercises for
finger/forearm training for maximum
rate of force production
specificity in training and
training vs. climbing and
groin stretch
growth hormones
growth plate injuries
GRRS (grip-relax repeating sequence)
G-Tox
Güllich, Wolfgang
death of
legacy of
on mental performance
reactive training of
gyms, climbing

H

half crimp
hamstrings stretches
hand-foot matching
handholds
hand jamming
hands
hangdogging
hanging exercises
hanging knee lifts
Harrington, Emily
heating pads
Heavy Finger Rolls
heel hooks
height
high-repetition training
Hill, Lynn
Hindenburgian forearm pump
hip flexors
HIT. See Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT)
HIT Strip System
Hoffman, Phil
home walls
hormones
Hörst, Lisa Ann
How to Climb 5.12 (Hörst, E. J.)
How to Rock Climb! (Long)
Huber, Alex
Huber, Thomas

hydration
hyperemia
hypergravity bouldering
Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT)
complex training using
with fingerboards
for forearm endurance
for grip strength training
overview and history
for pull-muscle training
for strength training
Hypergravity Pull-Ups
hypertrophy
hypogravity

I

ibuprofen
impingement syndrome
individualization
indoor walls
injuries
antagonist muscles and
arthritis
campus boards and
carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)
elbow
factors contributing to
finger
fingerboards and
finger positions and overuse
finger rolls
finger taping
first studies on
forearm bracing
hypergravity pull-ups and
knee
over-fifty climbers and
overview
pain medications
reactive training and
shoulder
straight-arm hangs and
strategies for overuse prevention
stretching and

types of
youth climbers and
interday recovery
intermediate climbers. See accomplished (intermediate) climbers
interval training
climbing
rest periods and
running
intraclimb recovery
intraday recovery
iron
isometric contractions

J

Jacobson, Edmund
jam crack climbing
jersey finger
jogging
junior climbers

K

knee injuries
knee lifts
knee locks
Kor, Layton
Kraus, Hans

L

lactic acid (LA)
as energy system component
recovery and removal of
ladders
inverted (Bachar)
rope
lateral tendinosis
latissimus stretches
Lat Pull-Downs
learning processes
Learning to Climb Indoors (Hörst, E. J.)
Left-Right Rule
legs
flexibility training and stretches for
muscular hypertrophy of
LeMénestral, Antoine
LeMénestral, Marc
liebacking
lock-offs
arm positions for
contact strength exercises
endurance-training exercises
injuries and
pull-muscle training exercises
strength training for
lock-off strength
Long, John
low-carbohydrate diets

lunges (dyno)
as dynamic move technique
as strength/power exercise

M

macrocycle training schedules
macronutrients
magnesium
male climbers
Mallory, George Leigh
mantling
Marvez, Sarah
massage
Master of Rock (Ament)
Meagher, Jack
median tendinosis/tendinitis
Meinhold, Stephen
Melville, Rachel
meniscus tears
menstruation
mental demands
mental training
emotional management
focus
problem solving and learning strategies
relaxation and centering
strategies for
as training subtype, overview
visualization
Mental Wings. See mental training
mesocycle training schedules
methylsulfonylmethane (MSM)
microcycle training schedules

micronutrients
microtraumas
milk
mineral supplements
Mises, Ludwig von
mitochondria
MLP (motor learning and performance)
modeling
monounsaturated fatty acids
Moors, Caves, and Crags (Baker)
motivation
motor learning and performance (MLP)
Motor Learning and Performance (Schmidt)
MSM (methylsulfonylmethane)
multipitch climbing
multisensory learning
muscle cramps
muscle failure
muscles
creatine supplementing and
delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)
endurance training tips
energy production and
fatigue and
fiber types
maximum strength training tips
motor units of
movement and roles of
overdevelopment and growth of
physiological training adaptations
sport massage affect on
strength training adaptations of
strength vs. power
stress affecting

N

National Academy of Sports Medicine
nature-versus-nurture
negative visualizations
negativity
neural system adaptation
Nicole, François
Nicole, Frederic
novice climbers. See beginner (novice) climbers
NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatories)
nutrition
caloric needs
crash dieting
injury prevention and
macronutrients
for optimizing body composition
performance and, overview
recovery acceleration and
refueling strategies during/after climb
strength gains and
supplements
tips, overview
water

O

Olympics
omega-3 fatty acids
One-Arm, One-Leg Bridge
One-Arm Lock-Offs
One-Arm Lunging
One-Arm Pull-Ups
One-Arm Traversing
100-meter dashes
One Move Too Many (Hochholzer, Schoffl, and Lightner)
on-sight ascents
open hand
opposing forces
osteoarthritis
over-fifty climbers
overgripping
overload, progressive
overtraining

P

pace
pain. See also injuries
anti-inflammatory medications
fear of
muscle soreness
Papert, Ines
paratenonitis
partners
passive rest
peaking
perfect economy
performance
genetics and
modern improvements in
practice and maximizing improvement of
practice layoffs and
problem solving vs.
self-image vs.
strategies for success
performance nutrition. See nutrition
Performance Rock Climbing (Goddard)
periodization
physical demands
physiological stresses
pinch grip
plyometric training. See also reactive training
PNF (proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation)
polyunsaturated fatty acids

posture
Power Pull-Ups
power training
complex training combinations with
overview and methods for strength building
for pull-muscle training
sample workouts for accomplished (intermediate) climbers
sample workouts for elite (advanced) climbers
practice
performance and
skill acquisition and improvement strategies
strategies to accelerate learning
training drills
as training subtype
Pratt, Chuck
prehydration
preparation
Principle of Specificity
problem solving strategies
progressive overload
Progressive Relaxation
pronator exercises
proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF)
protein
protein powders
Prudden, Bonnie
pull-down exercises
pull muscles
classification of exercises, overview
endurance training for
maximum-strength training for
power training for
pull-up bars
pull-up exercises

for endurance
for maximum strength
for power training
specificity and
pump, muscular
push-ups (bench press)

R

Raether, Andy
random skill practice
RDA (recommended daily allowances)
reactive (plyometric) training
climber classifications and safety
as component of complex training
contact strength exercises for
overview
Rearick, Dave
rebuild recovery
recharge recovery
recommended daily allowances (RDA)
recovery curve
recovery (supercompensation)
accelerated, overview
active rest
attitude and stress reduction
body fat percentages and
central fatigue and
from complex training workouts
long-term/interday (rebuild)
massage for
medium-term/intraday (refuel)
microcycle training and
muscular and energy systems and
nutrition for
periods of, overview
rest and

shakeouts
short-term/intraclimb (recharge)
sleep
visualization exercises during
water intake
Red Cross Boulder
redpoint ascents
refuel recovery
rehabilitation exercises, shoulder
relaxation
Reminiscence Effect
rest. See also recovery (supercompensation)
accelerated recovery with
climbing visualizations during
finger/forearm training and
injury prevention and
lactic acid clearance time
microcycle training programs and importance of
as training principle
rest positions
reverse side pulls
Reverse Wrist Curls
rhomboids and trapezius stretches
rhythm
RICE (rest, ice, compression, and elevation)
risk management
rituals
focus
preclimb
worry
Robbins, Royal
Robinson, Mark
rock climbing, overview. See also related topics
genetics and performance

history of
mental, physical and technical demands of
Rohrbough, Joel
rope climbing (Bachar Ladders)
rubber bands
running
running intervals
ruptures, tendon

S

Sacherer, Frank
SAID (Specific Adaptation to Imposed Demands) Principle
saturated fats
schema theory
Schmidt, Richard
selenium
self-assessments
Cycle of Improvement
fear management
objective evaluations
technical abilities
tests for
weakness targeting
self-confidence
self-image
self-massage
self-talk
Send Me
serial skills
shakeout techniques
Sharma, Chris
Sherrick, Mike
shoulders
conditioning exercises for
flexibility stretches for
injuries and treatments
rehabilitation exercises for
side hip raises

side pulls
side pulls, reverse
Single-Leg Squats
skills
acquisition rates
definition
learning and practicing, as training subtype
motor learning theories and
practice strategies for
schemas
strength/fitness vs., relationship
tips for development of
training drills for
transference of
types of
Skinner, Todd
sledgehammers
sleep habits
slow twitch (ST) muscle fibers
smiling
smoking
Specific Adaptation to Imposed Demands (SAID) Principle
specificity
speed training
sport climbing
SAID Principle and
training focus
as training program subdiscipline target
Sportklettern Heute (Güllich)
sport massage
sports drinks
Sports Illustrated
Sports Massage (Meagher)
Sports Medicine (journal)

sprains
stability
stabilizer muscles
stamina training. See also anaerobic endurance (A-E) training; endurance
training
for big-wall and alpine climbers
for boulder, sport and multipitch climbers
overview
for strength training
tips for
Steep-Wall Lock-Offs
Steep-Wall Traversing
steroids
Stick Game, The
Straight-Arm Fingerboard Hangs
strength
climbing ability correlation with
definition
skill vs., relationship
strength and fitness training
anaerobic endurance (A-E) training for
bouldering as
climbing ability correlation with fitness
complex training for
concepts of
exercise physiology and
female climbers and
functional isometrics as
goals of, overview
hypergravity training as
physiological adaptations to
power training for
principles of
skill vs. fitness relationship

stamina training and
as training subtype, overview
strength deficits
strength gains, rates of
stress
stretching. See also warm-ups
abdominals
arms
back
buttocks and lower-back
fingers
groin
as injury treatment
legs
overview
to prevent injuries
for recovery acceleration
shoulders
ST (slow twitch) muscle fibers
subdiscipline targeting
subluxation
Sullivan, Alyssa
supercompensation. See recovery
supplements
surgery
surgical tubing
swimming
Swiss finger taping methods
System Wall Training

T

Tabata, Izumi
Tabata Protocol, The
taping, prophylactic
of fingers
of forearms
techniques, fundamental
dynamic moves and economy
energy conservation
foot flagging and stability
foot placements
footwork creativity
handholds and grips
jam crack climbing
mantling and hand-foot matching
opposing forces, use of
overview and tips
perfect economy movements
rest positions
self-assessment of
stability and Left-Right Rule
twist lock and backsteps
teenage climbers
tendon injuries and inflammations
elbows
fingers
shoulders
tendon insertions
tennis elbow

tension
Teres, Lorin
testosterone boosters
Thimble, The
3-2-1 Training Cycles
toe hooks
topical rubs
toproping
touch exercises
tracking
training, overview. See also specific types of training
Training for Climbing (first edition) (Hörst, E. J.)
training programs
for accomplished (intermediate) climbers- 84, 180f, 182t, 183t
for beginning (novice) workouts
conditioning goals
for elite (advanced) climbers
for female climbers
injury prevention and
premeditative planning and components
subdiscipline targeting
workout schedules and cycles
training support activities
trans fatty acids
traversing
tricep stretches
Turner, Barb Branda
twist lock

U

underclings
University of Nürenberg

V

variable practice
variation
velocity
vertical jumps
videos for self-assessments
visualization
“vitamin I,”
vitamin supplements
voices, critic vs. doer
VO2 max

W

warm-ups
campus board training
before fingerboard training
for Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT)
injury prevention and
injury studies and
before stretching
water intake
weight
center of gravity
hypergravity training with additional
rest positions and
weight belts
weight control
weight pull-ups
whey
Williams, Dick
women. See female climbers
Woods, Daniel
workout schedules
for accomplished (intermediate) climbers
for beginner (novice) climbers
for elite (advanced) climbers
injury prevention and
macrocycles
mesocycles
microcycles
worry rituals

wrist curls

X

X finger taping method

Y

Yaniro, Tony
Yosemite’s Camp
youth climbers

Z

zinc
“zone, the,”

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

An accomplished climber of more than thirty years, Eric J. Hörst
(pronounced hurst) has climbed extensively across the United States and
has established more than 450 first ascents. A student and teacher of
climbing performance, Eric has personally helped train hundreds of
climbers, and his training books and concepts have spread to climbers in
more than fifty countries. He is widely recognized for his innovative
practice methods and training techniques, and since 1994 he has served as a
training products design consultant and online Training Center editor for
Nicros, Inc., a leading manufacturer of climbing walls and handholds.
Eric is author of Conditioning for Climbers, How to Climb 5.12, and
Learning to Climb Indoors, all of which have foreign translations. He
regularly contributes to outdoor and fitness magazines such as Climbing,
Rock and Ice, Urban Climber, Outside, National Geographic Adventure,
Men’s Health, Muscle and Fitness, Experience Life, and Men’s Journal, and
he has appeared on numerous TV broadcasts. Eric broadcasts twicemonthly Training Tip podcasts at PodClimber.com. Visit Eric’s Web site,
Training-ForClimbing. com, for training articles and information on all his
books, or to schedule a training seminar, an editorial interview, or speaking
engagement.

Eric currently lives in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, with his wife, Lisa Ann,
and his sons, Cameron and Jonathan.

OTHER BOOKS BY ERIC J. HÖRST
Conditioning for Climbers (FalconGuides, 2008) is the ultimate manual for
climbers who are looking to improve their physical capabilities. Regardless
of your age, ability, or sports background, this book will empower you to
develop and engage in a supremely effective conditioning program. The
book follows a logical progression of self-assessment, goal setting, general
conditioning and weight loss, core conditioning, and climbing-specific
training to develop strength, power, and endurance. The text concludes with
guidance in developing a personalized conditioning program, complete with
tips on preventing injury and improving nutrition for peak performance.

How to Climb 5.12 (FalconGuides, 2003) is a performance guidebook to
attaining the most rapid gains in climbing ability possible. It provides
streamlined instruction on vital topics such as accelerating learning of
skills, training the mind and body, and becoming an effective on-sight and
redpoint climber.

Learning to Climb Indoors (FalconGuides, 2006) is the most complete
book available on indoor climbing. Topics covered include beginning and
advanced climbing techniques, tactics, strategy, basic gear, safety
techniques, self-assessment, and a primer on mental training and physical
conditioning. This guide includes everything you need to know from day
one as a climber through your first year or two in the sport.

