ngf rClim ing

re

A

The Definitive Guide to Improving
Your Climbing Performance
•-#

.:•• "••
,mM^

¥»"'

»**

•f
. ''if;

u

Er ic J. Ho rs t
h o w t© c l i m b ser ies

Training for Climbing
The Definitive Guide to
Improving Your Climbing Performance

"Training for Climbing is a great r e s o u r c e . W h e t h e r y o u ' r e j u s t starting o u t or already
ticking 5.13, y o u ' l l find v a l u a b l e i n f o r m a t i o n h e r e t o h e l p y o u climb h a r d e r . This is
t h e m o s t c o m p l e t e a n d u p - t o - d a t e t r a i n i n g g u i d e available. Better yet, it's p r e s e n t e d
in a clean a n d easily u n d e r s t a n d a b l e format, w i t h inspiring a n d illustrative p h o t o s . "
—MARK EIXBR, ASSOCIATE EDITOR,
ROCK & ICE MAGAZINE

"Eric Horst h a s t a k e n c o m p l e x scientific training concepts a n d integrated t h e s e w i t h
c o n t e m p o r a r y r e s e a r c h o n climbing t o p r o d u c e a v e r y r e a d a b l e a n d useful training
g u i d e . This b o o k will lead t h e climber t o n e w h e i g h t s of p e r f o r m a n c e . "
—PHILLIP B. WATTS, PH.D.,
EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGIST & CLIMBING RESEARCHER,
NORTHERN MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY

"Horst is u n i q u e l y p o s i t i o n e d t o b r i n g c u r r e n t m e t h o d s i n sports psychology a n d
exercise science to t h e w o r l d of climbing, a n d h e h a s hit t h e m a r k in s u p e r b style!
If y o u are p a s s i o n a t e a b o u t climbing a n d getting better, Training for Climbing will
become your d6g-eared companion!"
—RICHARD K. FLEMING, PH.D.,
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF PSYCHOLOGY,
UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL SCHOOL

"With c o m p r e h e n s i v e t e x t b o o k - l i k e descriptions of n u t r i t i o n , recovery, w e i g h t training
a n d s t r u c t u r e d w o r k o u t s , Training for Climbing is a crucial addition to y o u r climbing
library. Use this b o o k t o m a k e 5.13 a reality instead of j u s t a d r e a m . "
—MICHELLE HURNI,
AUTHOR OF COACHING CLIMBING

•

w

/IFALCONGUIDEc
H O W

TO

C L I M B

S E R I E S

Training for Climbing
The Definitive Guide to
Improving Your Climbing Performance

Eric J. Horst

FALCON GUIDE8
GUILFORD, CONNECTICUT
HELENA. MONTANA
AN IMPRINT OF THE GLOBE PEQUOT PRESS

/I FALCON GUIDE
Copyright © 2003 by The Globe Pequot Press
Portions of this book are based on information from Flash Training by Eric J.
Horst, previously published by Falcon Publishing and Chockstone Press.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, except as may be
expressly permitted by the 1976 Copyright Act or by the publisher. Requests for
permission should be made in writing to The Globe Pequot Press, P.O. Box 480,
Guilford, Connecticut 06437.
Falcon and FalconGuide are registered trademarks of The Globe Pequot Press.
Page design: Casey Shain
Chart design: Mary Ballachino
Illustrations: Judy Newhouse
Photo on table of contents page by Stewart Green.
All other interior photos courtesy of the author, unless otherwise credited.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Horst, Eric J.
Training for climbing: the definitive guide fo improving your climbing
performance / Eric J. Horst.—1st ed.
p. cm. — (How to climb series) (A Falcon guide)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7627-2313-0
1. Rock climbing—Training. I. Title. II. Series. III. Series: A Falcon guide
GV200.2.H685 2002
796.52'23—dc21
2002029463
Manufactured in the United States of America
First Edition, Fifth Printing

»«'

Warning: Climbing is a dangerous sport. You can be seriously injured or
die. Read t h e following before y o u use this book.
This is an instruction book about rock climbing, a sport that is inherently
dangerous. Do not depend solely on information from this book for your personal safety. Your climbing safety depends on your own judgment based on
competent instruction, experience, and a realistic assessment of your climbing
ability.
The training and nutritional advice given in this book are the author's opinions. Consult your physician before engaging in any part of the training and
nutritional program described by the author.
There are no warranties, either expressed or implied, that this instruction
book contains accurate and reliable information. There are no warranties as to
fitness for a particular purpose or that this book is merchantable. Your use of
this book indicates your assumption of the risk of death or serious injury as a
result of climbing's risks and is an acknowledgment of your own sole responsibility for your safety in climbing or in training for climbing.
The Globe Pequot Press assumes no liability for accidents happening to, or
injuries sustained by, readers who engage in the activities described in this
book.

I dedicate this book to two of the strongest, most
innovative and humble men ever to pull down on rock.
The "Master of Rock," John Gill and the late, great
Wolfgang Gullich.

A

C

K

N

O

W

L

E

D

G

M

E

N

T

S

W

riting a book is an Everest-like undertaking. It is a team effort that
takes many months or years to plan and execute, but getting to the
summit still takes an immense individual effort and an indomitably singular focus.
Having completed this climb, I reflect on all that has brought me to this
point—the thousands of wonderful days I've spent on the rock, the countless climbers from around the world I've had the pleasure to meet, and the
dozens of partners I am grateful to have shared a rope with. Learning to
climb is a long, continuous process with no end, and I thank all the people
who have influenced me from my days as a wide-eyed fourteen-year-old
rock jock to an almost forty-year-old veteran climber. I must thank directly
John Gill, the late Wolfgang Giillich, Lynn Hill, John Long, Jim McCarthy,
Mark Robinson, Todd Skinner, and Tony Yaniro—all of you, knowingly or
unknowingly, have inspired me and contributed to this book in some way.
Though I continue to view myself as a student of rock climbing, I enjoy
more every year the role of teacher. I am humbled by all the letters and emails received from climbers in more than forty countries who have read
my books and articles. I appreciate all the feedback, the suggestions, and,
most of all, the success stories of those who have benefited from my works.
Writing climbing books is certainly not a lucrative endeavor; still, knowing
that I've helped thousands of people from around the planet climb better is
priceless.
My appreciation extends to Jeff Serena, Shelley Wolf, and everyone at
Falcon Press and Globe Pequot who have helped bring this book to fruition.
I am also very appreciative of all the climbing companies that support me
and my many projects, including Nicros, La Sportiva, Prana, and Sterling.
Many thanks to my close friend Eric McCallister, my wife, Lisa Ann, and my
family for their support and proofreading over the last six months of pedalto-the-metal writing. I am most grateful for the encouragement and input
from Mark Robinson, M.D., and Phil Watts, M.D., and I thank Russ Clune,
Rick Fleming, Richard Goldstone, Jeff Leads, Keith McCallister, Travis Peck,

XI

I

N

T

R

O

D

U

C

T

I

O

N

Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by the things that you didn't do than by
the ones you did do. So throw off the bowlines.
Sail away from the safe harbor. Catch the trade
winds in your sails. Explore. Dream. Discover.

T

raining for Climbing is a unique synthesis of twenty-five years of studying, imagining, and experimenting with ways to increase climbing
performance. Building on the foundation laid out in my first two books,
Flash Training and How to Climb 5.12, and the dozens of magazine articles
that I've authored, this text offers a new level of comprehensive instruction not available from any other resource.
Training for Climbing blends leading-edge sports science, tried-andtrue practice strategies, and powerful mental-training techniques into a
single text that will help you climb better regardless of your present ability. By faithfully applying just 50 percent of the methods contained herein, you will surely grow to outperform the mass of climbers. And if you
integrate most of the material into your training, climbing, and living, you
may very well progress to levels beyond your current comprehension!
Training for Climbing is as much about developing new ways of thinking as it is about engaging in new ways of training. A common thread that
weaves throughout this book is that "intelligence in climbing is not measured by IQ, but instead by your thoughts and actions." The thoughts you
carry and the things you do (or don't do) are ultimately what separate
you from the mass of climbers. Whether you flash or fall, become superstrong or get injured, or feel happy or frustrated, springs forth from subtle differences in the ways you think, feel, and act compared to other
climbers. Therefore, the primary goal of this book is to help guide you to
more deliberate and effective ways of thinking and acting in your pursuit
of peak climbing performance.

Xlll

Since climbing is all about an intimate dance between you and the
rock, it's vital to recognize that your climbing performance evolves from
the inside out, and that you only trip and fall when you blow a move.
Goethe wrote, "Nature understands no jesting; she is always true, always
serious, always severe; she is always right, and the errors and faults are
always those of man. The man incapable of appreciating her, she despises; and only to the apt, the pure, and the true, does she resign herself and
reveal her secrets." From this perspective it becomes obvious that we must
always look inside ourselves to see what's holding us back. Looking outward for the reason or to place blame is a loser's game.
This book begins with a logical progression of self-analysis, goal setting, mental training, and technique training before ever lifting a weight.
Chapters 1 through 4 are focused on helping you learn, most quickly, the
vital mental and technical skills that separate the best from the rest in this
sport. After a brief review of the history of training for climbing, you'll get
started on the road to better climbing by taking a self-evaluation test that
will reveal your true strengths and weaknesses as a climber. Armed with
this information, you can apply more effectively the material that follows
on the subjects of training your mind and developing better climbing
technique and strategy.
Chapters 5 through 7 present the most in-depth look at strength
training for climbing ever published. As a n intensely practical person with
a background in math and science, I have always felt it important to
delve into the theory and application of cutting-edge sports science.
Transferring this technology to training for climbing is vital to unlocking
the most effective training methods and strategies. In reading these chapters, I trust you will gain new insight into the physiology of climbing performance and thus become a more physiologically effective student of
training for climbing.

XIV

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

M M

The concluding Chapters 8 through 10 cover the often overlooked (or
ignored) subjects of performance nutrition, recovery, and proper treatment and prevention of climbing injuries. Becoming a complete climber
requires that you embrace these subjects with the same fervor as you
would in executing your training program or plotting your next climb.
Throughout the text, I have footnoted the relevant scientific literature so
you can peruse the nitty-gritty details if you are so impassioned. These
references and other useful information can be found in the back of the
book.
To glean the greatest benefit in reading Training for Climbing, you are
encouraged to employ active reading techniques such as underlining key
passages, putting a star next to the most meaningful strategies, and taking
notes for later review. Try lifting the most powerful phrases and posting
them in places where you will see them throughout the day. Review these
highlighted passages and your notes at least once a week, then reread the
entire book in three months and, again, in one year. Not only will this
reinforce your understanding and mastery of the concepts, but you also
will gain new insight and distinctions as you become a different person at
each read-through.
. As you cast off into the depths of this book, I want to wish you success and happiness as you climb through this world of wonder. Though
we may never meet, we are connected through our shared passion for
climbing. I am grateful for you taking the time to read this book, and I
hope you find the material entertaining and immensely beneficial. I welcome your feedback, and look forward to hearing from you after some
grand success that undoubtedly awaits you. I wish you the best both on
and off the rock.

Introduction

XV

Wolfgang Gullich on Action Directe (5.14d),
Frankenjura, Germany,
TBO H

H

R

An Overview
of Training for Climbing
A man's reach should exceed his
grasp or what's a heaven for?

because we are standing on the shoulders of the giants
who preceded us. Next, we'll explore the interesting
subject of genetics and the possible genetic limitations
to climbing performance. This leads us into an
overview of training for climbing and the things you
any words can describe the wonderful activity
should consider in your quest for the biggest gains in
of rock climbing—elegant, powerful, rewarding, performance in the shortest possible time.
and, sometimes, frustrating. While there may be nothA Brief History of Training for Climbing
ing more natural and intuitive than climbing (just
watch how children climb around on everything in
Compared to many other sports, the science of rock
climbing is still quite young. Well over one hundred
sight!), rock climbing is indeed a complex activity with
years of literature exists on, say, the technical aspects
demands unique from those of living and playing in
of the golf swing; the diverse array of Olympic sports
the everyday, horizontal world.
have been the subject of thousands of research studies
Performing in the vertical plane requires physical
during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
capabilities such as strength, power, and endurance. It
Conversely, technical rock climbing was born in the
also demands the development of technical skills such
early 1900s as an offshoot of mountaineering and, as
as balance and economic movement while gripping
an activity far removed from the mainstream, never
and stepping in an infinite variety of ways, positions,
garnered the attention of sports scientists. What little
and angles. Most important, the inherent stress of
information existed on the technical aspects of climbclimbing away from the safety of the ground requires
ing was mainly passed on by word of mouth in the
acute control of your thoughts, focus, anxiety, and
form of tips on technique and equipment—virtually no
fears. In aggregate, the above factors dovetail into
one considered climbing to be a sport that required
what may be one of the more complex sporting activtraining outside of climbing itself. That is, until a young
ities on this third rock from the sun.
man from Alabama began climbing in the early 1950s.
The goal of this book is to explore all the topics
Now one of the legends of climbing, John Gill was
relevant to increasing the effectiveness of your trainthe
first person to experiment with sport-specific
ing and the quality of your climbing. As a climber of
training
for climbing. Unlike other climbers of that
more than a quarter century (who's been fortunate
day,
who
were lured to climb towering cliffs and
enough to meet and climb with many brilliant indimountains,
Gill was enamored with short, overhangviduals), I feel the journey should begin with a primer
ing faces on boulders lying around the base of mounon the history of training for rock climbing. Clearly,
tains or in river valleys. Bagging summits or climbing
the advancements we make today are possible only

M

:-;;v;fe%i!>''\;

-.•'.'•„•:.•.:'
big walls had less appeal to Gill; instead he sought the
kinesthetic feel of gymnasticlike movement up overhanging rock.
From the mid-1950s through the mid-1970s, Gill
trained on a gym rope, on the rings, and with weighted, fingertip pull-ups (often one-arm!) in preparation
for his increasingly powerful ascents on boulders in the
Midwest, Southeast, and Rocky Mountain states. In
the early years Gill's dynamic boulder problems, use of
gymnastics chalk, and amazing feats of strength were
viewed, by most, with amusement. Today we acknowledge that John Gill was an innovator, a visionary, and,
in fact, the father of both bouldering (as a subdiscipline
of climbing) and training for climbing. His technical
climbing ability was years ahead of everyone else—
consider his 1961 free-solo ascent of the 30-foot
Thimble, in South Dakota, now considered V5
(5.12b/c)—and, as it turns out, he was an early prototype of today's high-end climbers who possess precise
footwork, intense focus, and awesome power.

By the mid-1960s a handful of climbers began to
recognize the importance of what Gill was doing.
Famed Shawangunks hardman Richard Goldstone
met Gill during a summer trip out west, and he was
enormously impressed with Gill's one-arm pull-ups,
front levers, and the difficulty of his boulder problems.
Goldstone returned to the University of Chicago with
an enthusiasm for training and adapted the use of surgical tubing (as used by gymnasts to learn an iron
cross) as a training aid for portions of his workouts.
A few years later Goldstone returned east and
became a player during the golden years of free climbing at the Shawangunks. Soon, other East Coast
climbers like Gunks icon Jim McCarthy began to apply
some of the Gill-inspired training strategies.
Similarly, it seems that Jim Bridwell was the first
West Coast climber to begin serious sport-specific
training, possibly influenced by Goldstone's propensity
to hang a pull-up bar in every climbers' campground,
including Yosemite's Camp Four. Bridwell and others

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

went on to develop an array of training rigs around
Camp Four. Warren Harding soon dubbed the area
"Olympic Training Village" due to all the training
apparatti that had been installed. In the years that followed, the Camp Four workout rigs introduced countless climbers from around the world to some of the
basic elements of training for climbing.
Still, sports scientists in the university community
and in Eastern and Western Europe had yet to view
climbing as a worthy subject of study. Though first
ascents of the world's highest mountains were a source
of national pride in Europe, there were no Olympic
medals to be won. Therefore, research remained
focused on refining the science of weight lifting, the
track and field events, and other sports where world
records could be broken. Still, the increasing popularity of climbing in Europe during the 1970s eventually
gave birth to the first studies relating to injuries and
the physiological stresses of rock climbing.
Master of Rock was published in 1977. This biography of John Gill, though not a training book, did serve
to document Gill's strength-training techniques and
quickly became a kind of bible for a new generation of
climbers interested in pushing the physical limits of
climbing. Other climbing books of the era, such as
Royal Robbins's Basic Rockcraft, focused on climbing
techniques and equipment, not strength or mental
training.
From the mid-1970s through the 1980s, the
worldwide growth of technical rock climbing and the
first climbing competitions produced an exchange of
ideas among European, Soviet, and American climbers.
In Yosemite's Camp Four; Boulder, Colorado; and at
the Shawangunks in New York, small groups trained
and free climbed with increasing fervor as energetic
newcomers like John Bachar, Jim Collins, Lynn Hill,
Jim Holloway, John Long, Ron Kauk, Todd Skinner,
Tony Yanirq, and others arrived on the scene. The first
few articles on the subject of climbing performance
were published in American climbing magazines, and
numerous research studies were performed, although
primarily on the subject of the unique injuries
incurred by climbers. Strength-training techniques
remained relatively crude, although a few innovations

An Overview of Training for Climbing

John Gill on the
famous Left
Eliminator (V5) in
1968, Horse Tooth
Reservoir, Fort
Collins, Colorado.

such as the Bachar Ladder and the fingerboard took
generic pull-up training to a higher level of intensity
and specificity.
In Britain indoor climbing walls had already
taken hold, but it was not until 1987 that the first
commercial climbing gyms opened in the United
States. Meanwhile, at the Campus Center—a weightlifting facility at the University of Niirnberg—a strong
German climber named Wolfgang Gullich invented a
sport-specific form of plyometric training known
today simply as campus training. Between 1985 and
1991 Gullich went on to establish the world's hardest
climbs (he also wrote a breakthrough training book,
Sportklettern Heute, in 1986), and campus training
became a staple exercise of many elite climbers the
world over. For a time campus training was viewed as
the end-all in sport-specific training for climbing, but
we later found that this was not quite true.
The 1990s saw climbing go mainstream with televised competitions and dozens, if not hundreds, of
well-sponsored full-time climbers training yearround. At last, two books were published by American
authors on the subject of training—Performance Rock
Climbing (Goddard 1993) and Flash Training (Horst
1994)—and climbing magazines began to regularly
run training articles. But the proliferation of indoor
walls was the real wild card that allowed the average
climber to practice more frequently and climb harder
than ever. All the above-mentioned factors, along
with improved equipment, made what was once the
maximum grade of 5.10 achievable by the masses and
5.13 quickly attainable by a handful of youngsters not
even old enough to drive.
Beginning a new millennium, we find climbing as
popular as ever and the benchmark of maximum difficulty at the cusp of 5.15. University researchers,
awakened to the unique physiological demands of
climbing, have published more than thirty studies in
the 1990s and over a dozen in the first two years of
this new millennium. In aggregate the body of knowledge on the science of climbing performance has
grown by leaps and bounds since I entered the sport
twenty-five years ago. Still, I feel we are in the adolescence stage of our knowledge on the subject.

Whereas the climbers of my generation trained
largely in accordance to myth, anecdote, and trial and
error, those entering the sport today have a significant
amount of quality information on the subject, if they
choose to use it. As I proclaimed at the beginning of
How to Climb 5.12, "If you are reading this book,
chances are you have what it takes to climb 5.12." As
I complete this latest book, I maintain this same sentiment—in fact I now surmise that there's a good
chance you have what it takes to climb 5.13! And if
you're genetically blessed, maybe even 5.15. . . .

Genetics and Climbing Performance
Excuses are like parents—everybody has them.
Ironically, your parents, or more precisely the genetic
material you inherited from them, might be the best
excuse why you or I may never climb 5.15. Still, your
genetic makeup, which substantially determines your
height, flexibility, and natural strength, among other
things;; is a poor excuse for not being able to climb
5.10 or even 5.12. Yes, some specific 5.12 climb might
require a long reach or high step that you will never
be capable of making, but numerous research studies
confirm my belief that the mass of climbers have the
potential to succeed at the lofty grade of 5.12, regardless of genetics.

The Role of Genetics in Sports Performance
All other things being equal, genes seem to determine
the differences in performance among individuals. In
a sport as complex as climbing, however, you could
argue that "all other things are never equal" and,
therefore, the role of genetics in climbing performance
is hard to pin down. But let's try!
The role of genetics in what we become has been
a favorite subject of scientists over the years—it's the
old "nature-versus-nurture" argument. Certainly,
genetics would seem to play an underlying role in our
natural mental climate and personality. However, it's
in the physical realm of strength and motor skill that
genetics appear to play the largest role (or at least this
is where genetics seem most observable and measurable for scientists). Interestingly, a review of the
research on the role of genetics on performance

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 1.1 Relative Demands of Various Sports

100-meter dash

rock climbing

reveals an extremely complex subject with contradictory theories and findings among academics. One
study (Ericsson 1993) suggests that hours of deliberate
practice is the most important factor in determining
performance, while another (Fox 1996) found that
genes are responsible for half the variations in performance among individuals.
In the real, nonacademic world, it seems that neither of these studies is unequivocally correct. It
appears that genetics play the greatest role in sports
where the raw physical demands far outweigh the
mental or technical requirements. For example,
excelling at the 100-meter dash requires extreme
explosive power but only basic mental and technical
skill. Conversely, golf requires mastery of a wide range
of technical skills and a well-cultivated mental calm,
but the physical demands are much less noteworthy.
Therefore, while genetics clearly play a major role in
determining who makes it to the Olympics in the 100meter dash, they should have much less influence in
determining who plays in this year's PGA Championship.
Summing up: Hours of deliberate practice are a
requisite for performing at a high level in complex
(technical and mental) sports, whereas ideal genetics
are a prerequisite for achieving greatness in the most
physical pursuits, such as running and weight lifting.
Rock climbing is unique among sports, however, in
that it requires a near-equal balance of mental, techni-

An Overview of Training for Climbing

golf

cal, and physical prowess (see Figure 1.1). So you can
argue that genetics do play a significant, though not
primary, role in determining your level of performance
in this sport.

Genetic Factors Relating to Climbing
Performance
So just what genetic factors might be helping or hurting
you? I bet they are different and more subtle than you
think. Height and weight seem to be what most climbers
consider their blessing or curse, but it's likely a number
of less obvious attributes that help make possible the
incredible 5.14/V14 ascents of climbers like David
Graham, Chris Sharma, Katie Brown, and the Nicole,
Huber, and LeMenestral brothers.
While the aforementioned climbers exhibit a
variety of body shapes and sizes, they all possess
unusually high maximum grip strength, upper-body
power, and/or local (forearm) endurance—beyond
that which can be acquired by the average climber
training "perfectly" for many years. The genetic gifts
enabling these feats probably relate to hard-toobserve factors such as tendon insertions (where they
originate from and insert into the bones of the hand
and arms), lever length (length of bones), muscle fiber
type, and hormone profiles.
With regard to tendon insertions, a slight shift in
the location compared to normal provides additional

leverage that gives a few lucky folks more grip
strength (off the couch!) than others could achieve
through years of training. Similarly, your innate ratio
of fast-twitch to slow-twitch muscle fiber determines
whether your natural aptitude tends toward high
endurance, high strength, or neither. Finally, we each
have unique hormone profiles (testosterone, Cortisol,
and so forth) that vary with age and sex, and this
plays an underlying role in our response to training
and recovery ability (Bloomfield 1994). Because of
this, some people can climb hard three days in a row
or respond more dramatically to training, while most
of us need far more rest in order to perform well, and
our training adaptations are more gradual.
If you still aren't convinced that genetics play a
role in determining who will be the very best climbers,
consider the three pairs of brothers mentioned earlier.
Frederic and Francois Nicole, Alex and Thomas Huber,
and Marc and Antoine LeMenestral have all climbed
at the fringe of maximum difficulty. This is not coincidence, but instead a screaming message that genetic
makeup is a factor in climbing performance.
Your Genetic Potential as a Climber
If you're beginning to sense that you might lack some
or all of the above genetic gifts, don't be depressed! As
I stated earlier, odds are that you're "normal enough"
to climb 5.12 or even 5.13. Because of the large role
that mental and technical skill plays in climbing performance, you can push very high up the grade scale
by maximizing your capabilities in these areas. The
bell curve (see Figure 1.2) depicts that most of the
population falls in the middle of the bell, in the area
representing near-average genetic characteristics. A
much smaller number of folks—call them outliers
(say, one in ten)—have somewhat better or worse
genetics than average. Then there are the extreme
outliers (say, 1 in 1,000 or more) who have the potential to be brilliant if they discover their gift and apply
themselves completely.
The fact that most of us fall somewhere in the
middle of the bell curve can be uplifting or depressing,
depending on your perspective. If you dream of climbing 5.15, the chart shows that even if you do every-

thing right and dedicate your entire life to it, the odds
are low that have the genetic potential to make this
dream a reality. But if you currently climb 5.5, 5.10,
or what have you, you should be psyched that 5.12 is
likely within your reach!
A few recent studies support this idea. One study
(Barss 1997) divided a group of twenty-four recreational climbers into two groups based on climbing
ability. With the exception of a straight-arm hang
endurance test, there was no statistical difference in
the performance of a wide variety of general and
sport-specific tests between the "less skilled" group
(those climbing 5.7 to 5.10a) and the "more skilled"
group (those climbing 5.10b to 5.11b). Therefore, at
the intermediate levels (5.7 to 5.11b), there's a poor
correlation between fitness and climbing ability. The
stronger climbers were not necessarily the better
climbers, so mental and technical differences account
for the difference in ability.
Another, more complex study (Mermier 2000)
looked at a larger group of fourty-four male and
female climbers with a wider range of abilities (5.6 to
5.13c). The results showed that the variance in climbing performance related primarily to trainable variables, and that anthropometric variables (height,
weight, arm and leg length, arm span, percent of body
•e 1.2 Genetic Potential

5.5
5.9
extreme outliers
(negative traits]

5.13 ,, 5.14
5.15
i,- n
extreme outliers
(positive traits]

Chris Sharma and David Graham would tall into the
far right portion of the curve, whereas Verne Troyer
and Shaquille O'Neal would be far left

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

fat, and the like) were not a statistically significant factor. So this study also supports my sense that by optimizing technical and mental skills (the trainable variables), the average climber should be able to progress
to a high level of climbing, possibly even as high as
5.13c. Note that no 5.14 climbers were included in the
study, so we don't know if inclusion of these worldclass individuals would have yielded similar results (I
suspect not).
In fact, a third, very similar study (Watts 1993)
looked only at world-class climbers (those competing
in the semifinals at a World Cup event). It found that
these elite individuals exhibited a higher gripstrength-to-body-mass ratio, had a lower percentage
of body fat, and were of a slightly smaller stature
when compared to other athletic groups. This study
supports the idea that those world-class 5.14 climbers
are born not made in that they are extreme outliers
with just the right build to be able to climb at the
highest levels of difficulty.

f i g u r e 1.3 Genetic Potential

average climber performing optimally

Great Genetics Don't Guarantee
You'll Be a Great Climber
Still, the premise that climbing requires equal mastery of
mental, technical, and physical abilities means that good
genes aren't enough to make you a rock star. Just as
genetically average individual's can progress to climbing
5.12 or 5.13 by perfecting their technical and mental
skill sets, naturally strong, genetic freaks who can crush
bricks in their hands may forever remain 5.10 climbers
due to poor technique or lack of mental skills.
Consider Figure 1.3, which depicts the genetic
potential (solid line) and real-life ability (dashed line)
of a climber with average genetic makeup versus the
brick-crushing genetic freak. Through dedicated,
intelligent training of all the elements under her control, the average climber has pushed her ability almost
the whole way out to her genetic potential. The superstrong genetic freak, on the other hand, with his poor
technique and mental control, is a complete underachieving slacker when you compare his real-life performance to his genetic potential. Comparatively, the
genetically average climber pushed the dashed line
out farther and is, thus, the better climber!

An Overview of Training for Climbing

gifted climber performing poorly
Genetic potential (solid line), versus real-life ability
(dashed line), Who's the peak performer?

Next time you go to the gym or crag, observe all
the men and women, of all ages, shapes, and sizes,
who are climbing 5.11, 5.12, and even 5.13. The vast
majority of these folks are of average genetic makeup
(located near the middle of the bell curve in Figure
1.2), but through dedication and hard work on all
aspects of the climbing game, they have succeeded at
pushing their dashed line out toward the edge of their
genetic limitations.
Limits to Climbing Performance
The top climbing grade exploded upward from 5.12d
in the mid-1970s to 5.14b by the end of the 1980s.
The primary reasons for this marked improvement are

equipment (better shoes, stickier shoe rubber, easy-toplace active camming devices, and bolt-protected
routes), better training (indoor walls, fingerboards,
and so on), and more effective practice methods
(hangdogging). In 1991 Wolfgang Giillich upped the
ante with his ascent of Action Directe (5.14d). This
route went unrepeated for five years and has since
only had three repeats, despite attempts by the world's
best climbers.
Currently (fall 2002) Action Directe is still one of
the world's hardest roped climbs (though a few new
routes in Europe have been reported to be 5.15a), so I
have to wonder if we are approaching h u m a n limitations to free climbing. While we can never rule out
another breakthrough in technology (equipment), it's
most likely that we will never see another grade
explosion as occurred during the 1980s. Instead, slow
increases will likely occur over the time scale of
decades.
For a glimpse of what we might expect, let's look
at several "mature" Olympic events. Over the last fifty
years, improvements per decade have been approximately: sprinting—1 percent; distance running—1.5
percent; jumping—3 percent; pole vaulting—5 percent; swimming—5 percent; skiing—10 percent
(Seiler 2000). Improved equipment surely contributed
to the higher values for pole vaulting (fiberglass
poles), swimming ("frictionless" speed suits), and skiing (ski technology seems to be constantly improving). Unfortunately, performance-enhancing drugs
are also a very real factor in the improvements in
many Olympic events.
Assuming no technological breakthroughs and no
drugs, a good bet would be that the top climbing level
would increase by just a few percent per decade. I
believe these gains will result from identification of
more extreme outliers as participation in climbing
increases and from better matching of appropriate
training on a more individual basis.
Ultimately, it appears that the achievement curve,
which rose rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s, is not linear
(y = kt), but more like a logarithmic curve [y = aLog(l
+ bt)]: increasing, but less so as time goes on.
Furthermore, our current method of rating routes may

8

be on the verge of breaking down—the difference
between 5.15a and 5.15b (or V14 and VI5) may be
purely a function of anatomical variation in the context
of a single move or sequence. This argues for an entirely different system for assessing difficulty at the top levels, such as a scale that counts the number of climbers
able to do a given move or problem. Interestingly, this
is the essence of John Gill's B-scale for grading bouldering problems, developed back in the late 1950s.
Gill says, "My idea was to develop a personal system that allowed basic differentiation for difficulty, but
simultaneously imposed constraints on such differentiation so that an endless, open-ended stream of numbers with plusses and minuses would not result. Usually
such fine differentiation would reflect merely the
anatomical attributes of various climbers. Bl was to
represent the highest levels of normal traditional roped
climbing, and B2 was to represent a broad class of bouldering difficulty greater than B l . B3 was a (usually
temporary) rating signifying a really severe route that
had been done by only one person, but tried by a number of climbers. When a second climber succeeded, the
route would downgrade to B2 or B l . I thought this
would appeal to the competitive spirit, but avoid overcomplicating the whole process and turning it into a
number-chasing game" (Escalade 2001).

Training for Climbing
As discussed earlier, there are many trainable variables
to work on as part of your training for climbing program. In Chapter 2 you will perform a self-assessment
test to determine which of these trainable variables is
most holding you back. The best training program (for
you) will concentrate on the areas that can produce
the greatest gain in performance output for a given
training input. Of course, the goal is to train most
effectively, not maximally.

A Definition of Training for Climbing
I define training for climbing as any practice, exercise, or
discipline that increases absolute climbing performance.
Clearly, this represents a broad spectrum of subjects—
hence the wide range of topics covered in this book.
Through this paradigm you should recognize that

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

training includes a wide range of activities and practices such as bouldering (to learn problem solving and
develop power); climbing on a home wall (to improve
technique and strength); on-sighting, hangdogging, or
for that matter any climbing (to enhance your mental
and physical skill sets); and traveling to experience
many different types of climbing (to gain experience
and a broad range of technical skills). Training also
includes efforts made in ancillary areas such as
stretching (for flexibility and injury prevention), eating properly (to enhance recovery and maintain a low
percentage of body fat), visualization and targeted
thinking (to maximize mind programming and disconnect from bad habits), resting sufficiently and listening to your body (to optimize training results and
to avoid injury), and evaluating yourself regularly (to
determine your current strengths and weaknesses).
Finally, training of course includes proper execution
of various general and sport-specific exercises (to
work toward your physical genetic potential).
For the sake of discriminating among these many
types of training throughout the rest of the book, let's
define several training subtypes—mental training,
skill practice, fitness and strength training, and training support activities—as shown in Figure 1.4.
Mental training involves any thought control, discipline, or mind-programrning activity that will directly or indirectly impact your climbing in a positive way.
The best climbers train mentally 24/7—this is one
activity in which you can never overtrain—by targeting their thoughts only on things that can, in some
way, influence their climbing and by deleting thoughts
and habits that might hold them back. Unfortunately,
many individuals possess mental muscle that's in an
advanced stage of atrophy from underuse. Visualization is just one of the many mental exercises that can
improve your climbing. Chapter 3 lays out an array of
practice methods and mental strategies that will have
a combined effect similar to unloading a heavy weight
from your back (which you've unknowingly been
hauling up routes). Are you ready to spread your
Mental Wings?
Practice relates to time spent learning and refining
actual sport skills and strategies outside of a perform-

An Overview of Training for Climbing

Figure 1.4 Subtypes of Training
Training for Climbing

mental
training

practice
skills and
strategy

strength
and fitness
training

training
support
activities

ance setting. Just as baseball, basketball, and football
players spend many hours practicing their skills outside of competition, climbers must practice by climbing a lot with the sole intention of improving climbing
skill (and not worrying about an outcome such as a
flash, redpoint, or on-sight ascent). It's my sense that
many climbers' training programs are devoid of this
vital subtype of training. We'll take an in-depth look
at the subject of effective skill practice in Chapter 4.
Fitness and strength training covers a wide range of
activities that are performed with the primary intent
of improving your physiological capabilities. This
includes general conditioning activities such as running, stretching, and light free-weight training as well
as the more important sport-specific activities such as
fingerboard, campus, and hypergravity training. Many
other activities can fall under this heading, as long as
they somehow help improve your climbing performance or prevent injury. It's surprising, however, how
many things done in the name of training for climbing actually have a negative effect on climbing performance. Get ready to sort things out, as we take a
cutting-edge look at strength training for climbing in
Chapters 5 and 6. Then in Chapter 7, you will be guided on developing an effective and time-efficient longterm training schedule.
Finally, training support activities are comprised of a
variety of crucial, yet often overlooked (or ignored),
issues outside of your actual physical practice and
training for climbing. Athletes in many other sports
have known the vital role rest, nutrition, and recovery
acceleration techniques play in their ultimate level of

performance. Serious climbers looking to press out
their ability level toward the genetic limit must act on
these issues with utmost discipline. Chapters 8 and 9
cover these important topics—applying the material
may be the key to succeeding on your own "personal
Action Directe!"
The Relationship

Between Skill and Fitness

While the various subtypes of training for climbing
will be discussed separately, they clearly affect each
other. This is especially true when it comes to skill
practice and fitness and strength training, so let's dig a
little deeper.
For a beginning climber in the earliest stages of
learning, a low level of fitness can slow the learning of
climbing skill. A certain level of strength is necessary
in order to practice enough (that is, climb) to develop
the basic skills of movement, hand- and footwork, and
body positioning. Conversely, too much strength
enables a beginner to get by on easy to moderate
routes despite inefficient movement, poor footwork,
and improper body position. Obviously, this will also
slow (or prevent) the development of good technique—unless, that is, the strong person makes good
technique the primary goal, instead of just getting up
the route no matter what.
The problem is further enhanced by the fact that
people tend to develop their talents disproportionately. Strong people are most likely into strength training,
flexible people probably stretch, and skillful people
undoubtedly climb a lot. Sure, the drudgery of working on weak points isn't fun and, at times, can be discouraging. But if you really want to climb harder, you
must train smarter. That means knowing where to
best invest your training time to get the most output
for your input. For the majority of climbers, the best
investment is on further development of climbing
skills and strategy (see Figure 1.5).
Elite climbers may have less to gain from practicing familiar forms of climbing. These expert climbers
are way out on the practice curve near their ultimate
skill potential, so fitness (and the mind) becomes the
crucial factor in performance. Hence, we commonly
see magazine articles about these rock stars that

10

Figure 1.5 Relative Gains

time spent practicing and training
Relative gains from skill practice and strength training.

describe seemingly lethal or disastrously stressful
strength-training regimes that would surely plunge
the ordinary climber into despair, the doctor's office,
or self-defeating over-reliance on strength training as
the key to improvement.
Focused fitness training is of higher importance
for all climbers after a layoff, whether due to injury,
winter, or some other reason (see Figure 1.6). The
rapid loss of strength that occurs when training or
climbing ceases for a period of weeks or months is best
counteracted by several weeks of dedicated fitness

Figure 1.6 Performance Losses

OS

o
e

=
**

a.
practice
and train

>

layoff
[neither
practice
nor train]

resume
training
and
practice

Performance losses [gains] during (and after) a layoff.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 1.7 Continuum of Specific Adaptations for Various Subdiscipiines of Climbing

bouldering

sport climbing

multipitch climbing

training (fortunately, you maintain climbing skill once
it's "hardwired" in the brain). While this short-term
training focus helps in regaining your old form, the
long-term and most significant improvements in
climbing ability will still result from effective skills
practice until late in your career. Only at the lofty
grades of 5.12 and above does sport-specific strength
become a major limiting factor.

Specific Adaptation to Imposed
Demands (SAID)
Serious climbers would be wise to train and climb in
accordance with the cornerstone principles of the field
of exercise science. For example, knowledge of the
SAID Principle (specific adaptation to imposed
demands) can be leveraged to maximize the effectiveness of your training for a specific climbing goal or
dream climb.
The SAID Principle explains that a certain exercise or type of training produces adaptations specific to
the activity performed and only in the muscles (and
energy systems) that are stressed by the activity. For
instance, running produces favorable adaptations in
the leg muscles and the cardiovascular system. But the
muscles and systems not stressed show no adaptation,
so even heroic amounts of running will produce no
favorable changes in, say, the arms. Of course, the
adaptations that result from running do transfer
somewhat to other sports that depend on the same
body parts and systems (such as mountain biking).
Bottom line: The SAID Principle demands that effective training for climbing must target your body in
ways very similar to climbing (body position, muscles
used, energy systems trained, and so forth).
Similarly, your body adapts in a specific fashion to
the specific demands you place on it while climbing. If

An Overview of Training for Climbing

g walls

alpine

you boulder a lot, you will adapt to the specific skill
and strength demands of bouldering. If you climb
mostly one-pitch sport routes, you adapt to the unique
demands of zipping up, say, 30 meters of rock before
muscular failure. If you primarily climb multipitch
routes or big walls, your body will adapt in accordance
to the demands of these longer climbs. Or if your outings are alpine in nature, your physiological response
will be specific to the very unique demands of climbing in the mountains.
The vitally important distinction here is that
while all these activities fall under the headline of
"climbing," they each have unique demands that produce very specific physical adaptations. Therefore, the
training effect from regular bouldering will do very little to enhance your physical ability for alpine climbing. Figure 1.7 shows that the specific demands of
sport climbing are much closer to those of bouldering.
Consequently, the adaptations incurred from frequent
bouldering will largely carry over to sport climbing
(especially short sport climbs) and vice versa.
Due to the SAID Principle, your practice and
training on the rocks should be spent mostly on the
type of climbing in which you wish to excel. It's no
mistake that the best boulderers in the world rarely tie
in to a rope. Likewise, the best alpine climbers spend
little time working 30-meter sport routes. Targeting
your training on the specific demands of your preferred form of climbing is the essence of the SAID
Principle.
In the end you must make a philosophical choice
whether you want to specialize—and therefore
excel—in one or two of the climbing subdiscipiines, or
become a moderately successful all-around climber.
Certainly, there is equal merit and reward in both
approaches.

11

H

W

Self-Assessment
& Goal Setting

O

. . 7 • '•

Of course, a clear understanding of your mega
I know of no more encouraging fact
goals in this sport is equally important to the process
than the unquestionable ability of of succeeding. Only with a clear goal in mind can you
consistent actions that keep you on route, as well
man to elevate his life by conscious take
as have the sense to recognize when you have wandered off route. Finally, at the very deepest level, you
endeavor.

T

he first step to improving your situation—in anything—can be expressed simply as "Know thyself." You cannot progress beyond your current state
with the same thoughts and actions that brought you
here. Therefore, only through constant self-evaluation
will you unlock the secrets to incremental improvement. For instance, you must actively distinguish
what works from what does not work, as well as be
able to recognize what you need to learn versus what
must be unlearned. Often the key elements are not
obvious or clear, but you must accept that life is subtle and only through improving on the little things
will you succeed in the big things.
In climbing, the process of improvement begins
with getting to know your patterns at the crags, in the
gym, and in your everyday life. You must become
aware of your climbing-related strengths and weaknesses in each area of the performance triad—technical, mental, and physical—and learn to leverage your
strengths and improve upon the weaknesses. Toward
this end, your prime directive must be to train intelligently—that is, to engage in training activities that
best address your weaknesses, while not getting
drawn into the trap of training as others do.

must closely examine your level of commitment to
climbing—are you willing to make the sacrifices necessary for reaching your mega goals? This chapter will
guide you through the fundamental steps of selfassessment and goal setting that, in turn, will initiate
your ascent to becoming a better, more successful
climber (no matter your gauge of measuring success).

Self-Assessment: Breakfast off Champions
Identifying personal weaknesses requires a paradigm
shift—a dramatic change in the way you see things—
because it's human nature to think about and practice
the things at which you excel. Consequently, your
strengths could be viewed as a weakness, because they
consume the time and energy you could be using
more productively elsewhere.
Too many climbers (myself included) have wasted precious years practicing and training the things at
which they already excel, while the ball-and-chain of
their weaknesses unknowingly holds them back. For
instance, many climbers think "more strength" is the
panacea to their climbing woes; but as shown in
Figure 1.1 on page 5, it's just one piece of the climbing performance puzzle. It requires an awakening for
most climbers to recognize the thoughts and life patterns that are really holding them back.

13

Introspection and curiosity are key attributes you
must foster because, at least at the first superficial
glance, your real-life experiences with failure on a
climb will almost always appear to result from a lack
of strength. But what about all the underlying causes
that may have led to premature fatigue—poor footwork, bad body positioning, overgripping of holds,
climbing too slowly, dismal focus, a botched sequence
or missed rest, unreasonable fears, or a lack of energy
due to poor diet or dehydration? As you can see, the
other two-thirds of the climbing performance puzzle
(technical and mental) determine how effectively you
use the physical strength and energy reserves you possess. I estimate that average climbers unfortunately
waste up to 50 percent of their strength and energy
due to lackluster technique and poor mental control.
It's like having a 30-miles-per-gallon car that only gets
15 miles per gallon as the result of a horrible tune-up
and a heavy foot!

in the moves prior to where I fall? Do I climb too
slowly through crux moves and consequently come
up short on routes? Do I lack the flexibility to step
onto a crucial hold or do I miss a better, easier foot
placement? Am I really too short for this move or
have I failed to find the body position that makes it
possible for someone my height?
Some questions for identifying mental errors are:
Do I fail to see the sequence, or do I fail to try something new when the obvious doesn't work? Do I sabotage myself before leaving the ground by doubting
my ability or replaying past failures? Do I try too hard
or give up too easily? Am I controlling my internal
self-talk or is the "critic within" doing a hatchet job on
me? Do I monitor and control my body tension or
does my perceived pressure of the situation run the
show? Am I really on a route over my head or am I
overgripping the rock and losing my poise because I'm
anxious or scared?

The moral of the story is that the best training
program for climbing should include lots of climbing
and constant self-evaluation. Spending three or four
days a week on the rock (or an artificial wall) deliberately practicing skill and refining your climber's mindset is far more beneficial than spending those days
strength training in the gym. This is not to say that
you can simply climb a lot and ignore all the other
facets of performance. The best climbers clearly focus
on putting the complete puzzle together, and this
undoubtedly includes a targeted strength-training
program. Still, if you can do ten fingertip pull-ups,
you are probably strong enough to climb most 5.12a
routes! So search vigilantly for the true but often
underlying causes of failure on routes. That's the ultimate secret to optimizing your training program and
establishing new personal bests on the rock.

In addition to investigating yourself, consider
enlisting a coach to provide an even more objective
view of your performance or, at the least, have a friend
shoot some video of you on the rock. These detached
perspectives are especially useful in identifying obvious
flaws in technique, tactics, and your overall economy
of effort. Foi example, feet skidding or popping off
footholds signals lack of attention to footwork, while
constant stretching for holds seemingly just out of
reach is a sign you're missing critical intermediate
holds' or using less effective body positions. In more
general terms, evaluate whether your movement looks
relaxed and fluid or appears rigid and hesitant. These
outside perspectives can be a real eye-opener and
you'll probably be surprised at what you find. Still,
some fundamental mistakes and weaknesses are so
subtle that they are not easily observed by others or by
viewing yourself on video. This is where a detailed selfassessment test comes in handy.

Objective Evaluation
The best way to identify your weaknesses is to ask
yourself a series of detailed questions. To identify
physical and technical weaknesses, ask yourself targeted questions like: Do I fail on a route because I'm
too weak or do I overgrip and hang out too long in the
midst of hard moves? Does my footwork deteriorate

14

Taking the Self-Assessment Test
A good self-assessment test takes the white light of
your climbing performance and, like a prism, breaks it
out into the rainbow of colors representing specific
skills. The results will reveal your true (not perceived)

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

strengths and weaknesses—and possibly even an
unknown Achilles' heel that must be addressed if you
are to ever reach your potential (or break through a
long-term plateau). With this knowledge, you can create the most effective training program for you!
Take the test on pages 15 and 16. In taking this
assessment, it's important to read each question once
and then immediately answer it based on your recent
experiences on the rock. Don't read anything into the

questions or try to figure out their focus or the best
answers. Instead of working in the book, consider making a photocopy of the test pages in order to maintain an
unmarked self-assessment test from which to work (or
copy again) in the future. Of course, it would be ideal to
date your test and file it for future reference. Comparing
successive self-assessments is a powerful way to track
your long-term improvement in each area of the performance triad.

Exercise; Self-Assessment Test
To gauge your current climbing performance, take this
test. Read each question, considering your most
recent experiences on the rock, and then answer
quickly by circling the number that best characterizes
your performance. Don't dwell on each question or
try to read between the lines. You can do that later
when you analyze your final results.
For the purposes of this quiz, use the following
key to your responses:

4 . 1 get anxious and tight as I head into crux j
sequences.
0

1

2

3

4

5

5. My biceps (upper arms) pump out before my fore- 1
arms.
0

1

2

3

4

5

6.1 have difficulty hanging on small, necessary-to- 1
use holds.

0 = almost always
1 = often

0

2 = about half the time

1

2

3

4

5

3 = occasionally
7.1 blow sequences I have wired and know by heart, j

4 = seldom

0

5 = never
1. My footwork (use of feet) deteriorates during the
hardest part of a climb.
0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

3. On hard sequences, I have difficulty stepping onto
critical footholds.
0

1

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

8. I stall at the start of crux sequences. I end up hav- i
ing to hang on the rope and rest before I can give i
it a good, solid try.
0

2. My forearms balloon and my grip begins to fail
even on routes that are easy for me.

1

1

2

3

4

5

4

5

9.1 climb three or four days in a row.
0

1

2

3

10. I get sewing-machine leg ("Elvis leg").
0

1

2

3

4

5

.

L

Self-Assessment & Goal Setting

i

15

11.1 pump out on overhanging climbs no matter how
big the holds.

21. On overhanging routes and roofs, I have difficulty
keeping my feet from cutting loose and swinging
out.

j
j
i

22. While climbing, I get distracted by activity on the
ground and/or I think about whether the belayer
is paying attention.

i
j
j

12.1 get out of breath when I climb.
0

1

2

3

4

5

j 13. I make excuses for why I might fail on a route
before I even begin to climb.

0

1

2

3

4

5

!
23.1 have difficulty reading sequences.
0

1

2

3

4

5

J 14.1 miss hidden holds on routes.
0

1

2

3

4

5

24.1 get a flash pump on the first climb of the day.
0

15.1 have difficulty hanging on to small sloping holds
or pockets.
0

1

2

3

4

5

1

0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

26. My feet unexpectedly pop off footholds.
0

1

2

3

4

|
j
;

1
5

5

17. On a typical climb, I feel like much of my body
weight is hanging on my arms.
0

2

25. I have more difficulty climbing when people are
watching.
0

16.1 grab quick draws, the rope, or other gear instead
of risking a fall trying a hard move of which I am
unsure.

1

5

27.1 experience elbow pain when I climb on a regular
basis.
0

j

4

28. When lead climbing a safe route, I have difficulty
pushing myself to the complete limit.

| 18.1 get very sore the day after climbing at the crags.
0

0

1

2

3

4

I 19.1 have difficulty visualizing myself successfully
climbing the route before I leave the ground.
0

1

2

3

4

16

1

2

3

4

2

3

4

5

29.1 have difficulty finding midroute rest positions
and shakeouts.
0

5
30. My first attempt on a hard route is usually better
than my second or third attempts of the day.

! 20.1 cannot reach key holds on difficult routes.
0

1

5

5

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

\

Looking at Your Test Results
After taking the test, record the scores from each
question in the appropriate column in Figure 2.1
(below), and then add up the scores to gain a final
score for each area of the performance triad. Compare
your mental, technical, and physical scores to gain a

sense of which area is your strong or weak aspect of
the performance triad. Your future training should be
disproportionally targeted on the weak area. If all
three areas are within five points of each other, congratulate yourself for being a climber of balanced abilities (something I find to be a rarity).

Figure 2 . 1 S c o r e Y o u r s e l f
:

Mental

Physical

Technique and Tactics

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

1 10.

11.

12.

1 13.

14.

15.

j 16.

17.

18.

1 19.

20.

21.

1 22.

23.

24.

| 25.

26.

27.

! 28.

29.

30.

1

•

9.

i

1

(Total)

Self-Assessment & Goal Setting

(Total)

(Total)

17

Next, review each question of the self-assessment
test and circle the ones that are a 3 or less. Each of
these low-scoring questions identifies a specific element of your climbing performance that is holding you
back. List on a separate piece of paper or in your training log a brief description of each problem revealed.
Sort and group them according to the aspects of the
performance triad. As you read through the remainder
of the book, keep this list of problem areas nearby and
make notes of the exercises and strategies presented
that address these weaknesses. Creating such a written
"mind map" that displays both the problem areas and
the action-oriented solutions will keep these highly
powerful keys to better climbing in the forefront of
your attention. Only with this awareness will your
training remain on track and effective in the weeks
and months following the self-assessment.
As you move into the goal-setting exercises later
in this chapter, refer back to the self-assessment test or
your summary mind map. Focus your short- and
medium-term training goals on the most dramatic
weaknesses identified (the five or six lowest-scoring
items). As you recognize improvement in these areas,
shift your training focus onto other lower-scoring areas
of the self-assessment or retake the entire test and
develop a new training strategy based on the new
results. For additional training tips that address each
question of the self-assessment, see Appendix B.

The Cycle off Improvement
Your completed self-assessment is your "boarding
pass" to the Cycle of Improvement. This process cycle
has three stages: Set goals, take action, and make
course corrections (see Figure 2.2).
A successful trip around the cycle gives birth to a
new level of climbing performance—the Cycle of
Improvement, in fact, becomes a Spiral of Improvement! Occasionally, reassessments are needed to
update your goals relative to the "new you" and whatever new issues are n o w responsible for holding you
back from further improvement. These new goals give
birth to new actions and even more spectacular results.
Depending on your desires, commitment, and
skill level, one trip around the cycle may take any-

18

Figure 2.2 Cycle of Improvement

Self-Assessment
\
set goals

make course
corrections

take
action

Use this three-step process to elevate your
performance to the next level.

where from a couple of months to a year. Signs you
are ready for a reassessment and a new cycle include
a plateau in performance, training that feels flat, or a
drop in motivation. If you experience more than one
of these signs, take a week off then retake the selfassessment test and start a new cycle.
Remember that there is a big difference between
employing the Cycle of Improvement and just going
climbing year-round with your friends. The latter
approach is unfocused and will yield slow results and
frequent plateaus in performance. Conversely, a deliberate effort in all three stages—setting new goals, taking intelligent action, and making appropriate course
corrections—keeps the spiral going upward toward
your ultimate genetic potential.

Goal Setting
Defining specific goals enables you to perform a gap
analysis of what actions you must take to bridge the
gap (or possibly chasm) between where you are n o w

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

and what you want to become or achieve. Effective
goal setting begins with a pen or pencil and a calendar,
training log, or climbing notebook. If you don't write
down your goals, chances are they will remain intangible hopes and dreams that never materialize.
It's best to set goals in three time frames: short
term (daily), medium term (weekly or monthly), and
long term (multiyear or career goals). Write down the
goals in precise terms and with realistic deadlines. And
since pictures are even more motivating than words
on paper, it's crucial to create a mental picture (representing the goal) that you can recall in your mind's
eye on demand. The more precise and focused the picture and written goal, the easier it will be to zero in on
the target and take actions that will someday land you
right in the middle of your goal.
Next, create a purview that summarizes the overall mission for each goal-setting time frame, such as
"short term, I strive for the most effective ninetyminute workout possible" or "medium term, I am
committed to redpointing my first 5.11 by the end of
the summer."
Finally, write down what one or two (or more)
things you will give up in order to reach your short-,
medium-, and long-term goals. This vital step is missing from most conventional goal-setting exercises, and
it may be the number one reason why so many people fail to achieve their big goals in life. Simply put,
you cannot add something new or achieve anything
meaningful without sacrificing something else in its
place. Ponder this powerful idea. It may explain why
some of your past or present goals remain elusive.
SHORT-TERM GOALS
Short-term goals define your daily game plan. They
help focus your thoughts and actions so that you are
not swayed by what others are doing and don't waste
precious time on less important activities (TV, partying, surfing the Net, excessive socializing). The more
hectic your life, the more crucial it is that you spend a
few minutes before bed or first thing in the morning
doing some short-term goal setting. Folks with less
difficult daily schedules may only need to set short-

Self-Assessment & Goal Setting

term goals relating to the workout du jour. Begin by
writing down the primary mission of the workout,
then list the specific exercises, sets, and reps as well as
the approximate amount of time you will dedicate to
each part of the workout (see "An Example of ShortTerm Goal Setting" on page 20). Don't forget to list
what you will give up (compared to previous days or
your peers) in order to fulfill these short-term commitments.
MEDIUM-TERM GOALS
Medium-term goals give shape and purpose to your
schedule over the course of weeks and months. This
planning is best done on a calendar so you can effectively dovetail your workouts and climbing trips with
your other nonclimbing activities. Try to roughly plan
things out a few months in advance (see the "Setting
Medium-Term Goals" exercise on page 21).
First, block in the big events such as climbing
trips, competitions, work and family obligations, and
the like. Next, write in your proposed workout and
climbing schedule, with special attention to maintaining enough rest days in the game plan. With the most
important items now in place, you can fill in the many
little, less important things in life where time allows
(or this can be done on an ad hoc basis). Remember to
sum up your medium-term goals with one overriding
primary goal, as well as listing the activities you will
forfeit in order to attain this lofty goal.
LONG-TERM GOALS
Long-term goal setting is a fun and invaluable activity
in which you condense onto paper the numerous
"dream" or "I wish" goals floating around in your
mind. If there is to be any chance of them ever becoming reality, it's vital that they be liberated from the
dreamland of your mind and put down in black and
white (see the "Setting Long-Term Goals" exercise on
page 21). A magical force begins to act in your life
when you write down these mega goals—your subconscious mind will go to work day and night on
achieving them, and your conscious mind will suddenly find them more believable (and achievable).

19

An Example of Short-Term Goal Setting
TO D A Y ' S

MISSION

Focus on improving my footwork and conserving energy by practicing skills and
techniques.
WHAT

I

WILL

GIVE

UP

TO

ACHIEVE

THIS

GOAL

The usual bouldering games and competitions at the gym.
For today, I'll stay off all routes that are beyond my on-site ability.
I won't rush home to watch TV.
WHAT

I

WILL

DO

1. Warm up with fifteen minutes of light bouldering, gentle stretching, and two
sets of pull-ups.
2. Perform fifteen minutes of the traverse-training drill.
3. Toprope several climbs within one number grade of my limit with the focus on
practicing technique, not performance outcome (whether or not I fall).
My practice goals are: to concentrate on careful positioning and use of each
foothold; to climb as briskly, smoothly, and decisively as possible between rests;
to accurately read sequences before leaving the ground and while at each rest
position; to remain positive, relaxed, and centered during each climb.
4. Perform three sets of ten repetitions of the one-arm lunging exercise.
5. Cool down with ten more minutes of traversing on a vertical wall.
6. Eat a good meal within one to two hours after the workout.
7. Get seven to eight hours of sleep.

Exercise: Setting Medium-Term Goals

Exercise: Setting Long-Term Goals

Your medium-term goals can include both climbing
and nonclimbing items; we'll focus on the climbingrelated goals here. Write down your top training goals
(mental, physical, and technical) for the next three
months, as well as a few climbing goals such as "todo" routes or a new area to visit. Distill these goals
into a single "primary goal" for the period, and
remember to list a few things you will freely give up
in order to reach these goals.

Go somewhere quiet, allow yourself to relax for a few
minutes, and ponder what long-term mega goals are
out there awaiting your best efforts. I call these mega
goals because they are the few events that you most
want to achieve in your life given your current perspective. For example, you might have an ultimate
grade of climbing you'd like to achieve, or possibly a
specific dream climb to send or mountain to summit.
Think about where you'd go if time and money were
not an issue—put it down on paper and the odds
increase a thousandfold that you will someday be
pulling down there! By all means write down a few of
your nonclimbing mega goals as well, but keep the
total list down to between six and eight items.
As in setting your short- and medium-term goals,
it's absolutely critical that you write down a couple of
major things that you will completely give up in order
to reach these mega goals. Consider the activities, possessions, and people that drain your time, focus, and
energy.

Self-Assessment & Goal Setting

21

Taking Action and Making Course Corrections
The Cycle of Improvement will spiral you upward in
ability as long as the actions taken provide movement
toward your goals. Sadly, taking consistent, disciplined action in the direction of worthy goals is very
difficult for some people. The results of their misdirected actions always seem to leave them in an alltoo-familiar situation. The phrase same shit, different
day is born of this affliction.
If any of this sounds familiar (in climbing or life),
it's important to begin taking notice just who is directing the actions you take on a daily basis. In many cases
you'll discover that outside forces are calling the shots
for you—that is, you are taking the actions someone
else desires you to make, not those congruent with
your goals. This is what the multibillion-dollar advertising industry is all about. Companies spend a ton of
money with the sole intent of directing your actions in
their favor (to make them money and drain your wallet). So while you might have a very worthy goal of,
say, "getting out of debt" or "saving for a house,"
advertisers cleverly divert your actions in their favor.
Unless you are acutely aware of what's going on (and
the power they wield over you), you will veer off your
course and onto theirs—and maybe never reach your
goals.
This may sound negative, but the same thing
often happens when you're training at the gym or
climbing at the crag. Instead of doing the precise exercises and drills you need to improve your weaknesses,
you end up climbing down the blind alley of someone
else's agenda. Consider how many climbing days
you've spent working on someone else's dream project (one that is either over your head or just not what
you had planned) when you would have gained more
by getting on a different type of climb. Or ponder how
often you've gone to the gym and ended up socializing and just climbing mindlessly with no goal or direction. Sure, these kinds of evenings can be relaxing and
fun once in a while, but on a regular basis they will
not make you a better climber.

22

The win-win solution is to find a partner equally
motivated to taking actions that will produce the
fastest possible gains in ability. With this person you
can evenly split the climbing time, so that you each can
work effectively toward your goals. Unfortunately, in
many partnerships one person makes all the calls and
gets most of the benefits of the time spent training or
climbing.
In summary, strive for hour-to-hour, day-to-day
awareness of the "whats" and "whys" of the actions
you are taking. By formulating short-term goals, as
discussed earlier, you can best maintain your focus on
the things you need to do to improve short term and
advance toward your meaningful medium- and longterm goals. Finally, foster an acute awareness of the
results you are getting from your actions. Peak performers are those who most rapidly recognize when
they are off course, and respond with a reassessment
of the situation and an appropriate course correction
toward the desired goal.
If it's beginning to sound like becoming a better
climber is a very mental thing, you are right! So let's
dive into Chapter 3, "Mental Training."

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

H

T

H

R

Mental Training
The wise man will be the master of
his mind. A fool will be its slave.

T

he quickest way to enhance your performance in
almost anything is to improve the quality of your
thinking. This is definitely true in climbing, whether
you're working a highball boulder problem, sport
route, multipitch traditional line, or alpine route. All
performance operates from the inside out—your
beliefs, focus, emotions, confidence, preparation, and
problem-solving abilities form the foundation from
which you will either succeed or fail.
Great performances begin with bulletproof confidence, singular focus, positive emotions, and a bright
picture of and intense belief in a successful final outcome. Conversely, setbacks and failures result from the
worry, doubts, tension, and uncertainties that are born
from a poorly harnessed brain running wild with fearful thoughts. It's my belief that whether you (or I) will
succeed or fail on a climb is often predetermined in
your subconscious (maybe even conscious) before you
ever step off the ground.
While off-season strength training and yearround technique training are paramount for progressing into the higher grades, during the climbing season
your biggest breakthroughs will come from toning
and flexing your mental muscle. Toward this end, this
chapter outlines several powerful mental strategies
and skills that will help elevate your performance and
enjoyment.

Practice these skills with the same dedication and
resolve as you would a new strength-training program,
and you'll be pleasantly surprised with the results.
Obtain the greatest payoff by applying these skills 24/7,
not just when you feel like it. For some, an almost
instant breakthrough will follow on the rock, while others will need to persist and let these mental skills build
to a critical value before they will produce a noticeable
impact on your climbing. (This depends upon the current degree of tone or atrophy of your mental muscle.)
Recognize that all these mental-training skills are
interlaced and can produce a powerful synergy when
all are in practice. In the aggregate they may produce
an effect similar to unloading a ten-pound weight (or
more!) from your back that you have unknowingly
been hauling up climbs. I call this using your Mental
Wings.

Mental Wings for Improving Performance
The late, great Wolfgang Gullich was fond of saying
that "the brain is the most important muscle for
climbing." What makes this statement even more
provocative is the fact that Gullich was one of the
strongest people to ever pull down on stone. From the
mid-1980s until his death in a car accident in 1992, he
opened up several new grades of maximum difficulty
by leveraging the synergy of his physical and mental
fortitude. I support Wolfie's sentiment not only
because the mind is one-third of the climbing performance triad (see Figure 1.1, page 5) but also due
to the fact that poor mental control can instantly sabotage your physical and technical abilities.

23

.s'it>

Below are ten strategies that you can start using
today in all aspects of your life. Apply them faithfully
with the knowledge that most truly successful men
and women in this sport possess these skills.
1. Separate your self-image from your
performance.
If you are reading this book, then climbing surely
plays a major role in your life. Unfortunately, when
your self-image is tied too strongly or singly to this
role, it translates into an overwhelming need to perform perfectly every time in order to prove your
worth in that role and, thus, as a person. The subsequent pressure can become stifling and is maybe the
single greatest cause of frustration in this sport (or in
any endeavor).
Human beings perform best in a process-oriented,
not outcome-oriented, frame of mind. Detaching your
self-image from your climbing performance allows you
to enjoy climbing regardless of the outcome. More
important, it liberates you to try new things, take
chances, or throw a dyno that might be required to get
through a crux sequence. Bottom line: Self-image
detachment will reduce pressure and anxiety and, paradoxically, you'll climb better by not needing to!
2. Surround yourself with positive

people.

There is an aura of influence that surrounds each of us,
and its effects are based on our personality and attitude
toward life and its events. Your thoughts and actions will
affect the thoughts and actions of those around you, and
vice versa. As I see it, there are three options—either
climb alone, climb with upbeat and positive people, or
climb with cynical and negative people. Why would you
ever want to climb with the complainers out there?
Their negative aura impacts your climbing and enjoyment whether you recognize it or not. Vow to climb
either with positive individuals or by yourself—both can
be hugely rewarding. If pushing your limits is the goal
du jour, however, then take advantage of the synergy
afforded to you by having creative, motivating, and positive people by your side.

Mental

Training

3. Stretch your comfort zone.
To improve in anything, your goals must exceed your
current grasp and you must be willing to push beyond
your comfort zone. In performing on the vertical
plain, this means climbing onward despite mental and
physical discomfort; it means challenging your fears
head-on by doing what you fear; it means attempting
what looks impossible to you from your current perspective. Through this process, you stretch the envelope to a new dimension and reshape your personal
vision of what is possible.
4. Assess and proactively

manage your risk.

Climbing is an activity with obvious inherent risks,
and the desire to climb harder requires taking additional risks. These risks can come in the form of obvious physical danger such as a potentially injurious fall,
or of invisible mental risks like opening yourself up to
failure, criticism, and embarrassment. It's interesting
to note that for some climbers the physical danger
feels more benign than the aforementioned mental
dangers. Consider climbers who continue upward on
a horrendously dangerous route they're not prepared
for because they're afraid of being dissed by those
standing safely on the ground!
Make it your goal to always assess the range of
possible risks before you ever start a climb. By objectively analyzing the risks ahead of time, you'll often be
able to lower the risk of the climb (for instance, by
taking other gear or rigging a belay differently than
you normally would) and, at the least, be aware and
able to respond to the most critical risks as you climb.
As for the mental risks, see Mental Wings Strategy 1.
5. Fortify your

confidence.

Your degree of self-confidence is primarily based on
your self-image and the thoughts you hold minute by
minute and day by day. Thoughts of falls or poor performance in the past and self-talk loaded with words
like / can't, don't, impossible, and try lower confidence
and are the seeds of failure. Conversely, focusing on
past successes—by actually visualizing and feeling the
process and exhilaration of positive action—leads to
tremendous feelings of confidence. Using visualization

25

throughout the day, every day to relive great events in
your past—climbing and nonclimbing—is the best way
to reshape and fortify your self-confidence for success
in all future endeavors.
6. Get into the peak performance

zone.

"The zone" is that state where everything comes
together for the perfect ascent that seems almost effortless and automatic. The trick is being able to create this
state on demand and often in stressful situations, such
as at a competition or before a hardest-ever redpoint.
The best way to do this is by using one or more of your
senses to reenact the feelings of a brilliant performance
or event from your past (it doesn't necessarily have to
be a climbing event). Have you ever experienced the
relaxed pleasure that washes over your mind and body
when you hear an old song or smell something familiar that instantly connects you to some great event in
the past? That's what you're after.
If you've been climbing many years, then you
surely have some "perfect" past days you can use as
anchors for your peak performance state. If not, think
back and identify some other event where you felt like
you were in complete control and that "anything is
possible." Create about a sixty-second mental movie
of this past event using all your senses. Make the pictures crisp and bright, and let the feeling and state of
this event take over your body. Some people find that
listening to a particular song through headphones is a
powerful anchor for locking in the peak performance
state. Be creative and experiment in developing your
own pre-performance rituals that can transport you
into the zone.
7. Anchor consistent performance with
rituals.

preclimb

The things you think and do in the minutes and
moments before you climb form the foundation onto
which your performance is built. A shaky foundation
generally leads to a shaky performance; a solid foundation usually gives birth to a solid performance. The
nature of your foundation (sand or stone?) is a result
of the quality of your preclimb rituals. These are
things you do to best prepare for the ascent, including

26

scoping the route, visualizing the sequence, preparing
your gear, warming up, and even your way of putting
on your shoes. Even tiny details, such as breathing
rate, posture, and final thoughts, should be programmed into the rituals that lead up to your stepping
onto the rock.
Develop your rituals based on past experience.
What things did you think or do before some of your
best ascents in the past? What did you eat or drink,
how did you warm up, how long did you rest between
climbs? Awareness of all the things (little and big) that
lead up to your best performances is a key to being
able to reproduce similar results in the future. Once
your rituals become tried and true, stick to them!
8. Control stress and tension before they control
you.
This strategy is central to climbing your best, because
tension kills performance. Period. Tension and stress
work at you from the inside out and are revealed
through your emotions. It's easy to spot the tense,
stressed-out climbers at the crag by their emotional
outbursts. Very few people can leverage their negative
emotions to enhance performance, and odds are you
can't either. Taking a deep breath and "trying softer" is
almost always more fruitful than cursing and throwing a fit.
Controlling stress and tension must be an ongoing
process, and practicing to control them 24/7 will go a
long way toward making you a Zen master at the crags.
It's a good practice to check your tension levels hour to
hour throughout the day and at every rest on a climb.
Here's a six-step process for controlling tension and
returning yourself to an optimal performance state.
1. Strive for acute awareness of rising tension so
that you can counter it before it snowballs out
of control.
2. Normalize your breathing with a few deep
belly breaths, then turn it over to your subconscious.
3. Scan for pockets of muscular tension, and let
the tension escape from these pockets like air
from a balloon.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

4. Let a wave of relaxation wash over your body
from head to foot.
5. Erase all thoughts of the past or future—both are
enemies of competitive excellence in the present—and refocus on the process of climbing.
6. Reset your posture and flash a smile. You may
now proceed to send your route!
9. Engage in positive

self-talk.

Inside our heads, each of us has a "critic" voice and a
"doer" voice that gab throughout our waking hours.
While the critic voice can be useful in a few situations
(such as evaluating weaknesses or performance errors),
it's the doer voice that compels action, keeps us positive, and, in fact, helps us produce our best performances. Controlling this internal self-talk is fundamental
to controlling our attitude and climbing our best.
Which voice—the critic or the doer—rules your
mind? It may be that you don't know, because the chatter is so incessant that it's hard to follow. Even so, this
self-talk wields a powerful influence over you, so tune
in and listen for a few days, particularly while you climb.
How you were raised and whom you hang around
with will help explain what you find—the complainers
of the world were likely raised by complainers or hang
around with other naysayers. That being said, becoming
aware of this self-talk enables you to take control and
give the doer voice the upper hand. When the critic surfaces to make statements, invert them into something
positive. For instance, change "this route looks impossible" to "this route looks challenging"; replace "I feel
nervous" with "I feel energized"; convert "I'll probably
fall" into "I think I can do this, but if I fall it's okay
because I'll get it next time." Constant command of selftalk is a master skill of high achievers.
10. Be happy regardless of
and outcomes.

situations

A superior trait of all real winners is resilience to bad
results and/or criticism and unwavering belief that success will come with time, effort, and patience. Attitude
is the wild card in the climbing performance equation
that can often compensate for what you are lacking in

Mental Training

strength, technique, or reach. I can't overstate the
importance of always having fun. We all get into climbing because we love the outdoor experience and the
feeling of moving over stone, yet in time far too many
climbers become Grinches who have fun only when
they are wirrning.
The biggest secret to better climbing is to love
climbing unconditionally. Vow that any day of climbing is a great day regardless of the results, and you will
usually get the results you desire.
Controlling Your Emotions
Your emotions have a direct effect on your body and
mind. For example, what you are feeling exerts an
influence over what you are doing or how you are
thinking (see Figure 3.1). For instance, nervousness
before a climb can derail your concentration as well as
trigger preclimb jitters throughout your body.
Therefore, becoming an icon of emotional control is
fundamental to performing up to your potential.
Observe some of the very best climbers, like Chris
Sharma and Lynn Hill, and you will see consistently
positive and productive emotions. Even when they
fall, you sense no anger—only love of the process of
climbing, which occasionally includes falling. Now
compare how your emotions change in times of frustration or failure. When the going gets tough, who
runs the show—you or your emotions? A typical
example of how emotions can run the show and kill
climbing performance is portrayed in the story on
page 28. I'm sure you've seen a few climbers act out
this story line; possibly you've experienced it firsthand.
Figure 3.1 How Emotions Run the Show

MIND
[think]

EMOTIONS •*Cfeel)

BODY
Cact]

What you feel exerts an influence over how you think
and what you do. Likewise, ways of thinking and acting affect how you feel.

27

1. The climber leaves the ground and moves cautiously through the initial moves. He looks apprehensive, as if he's trying not to make any mistakes.

Figure 3.2 The Energy-Emotion Matrix
10

II

2. As he enters more difficult moves, his breathing
becomes shallow and irregular. He may even hold
his breath on hard sequences.

high-energy
negative emotion

3. Negative emotional energy rises, resulting in
increased muscular tension and mental stress.
4. This building stress disrupts his coordination, balance, and footwork. Movements become tight,
mechanical, and inefficient. He begins to overgrip
holds.
5. He begins to hold back on hard moves, afraid to
fully commit, and hangs out too long on marginal
rests.
6. The fight-or-flight syndrome is triggered, adding
some adrenaline to the mix. This burst of energy
may help the climber thrash through a few more
moves; more commonly, the jolt causes him to grab
the rope or a quick draw, and retreat from the
route.
7. The death grip sets in and flames out his muscles.
8. He falls and lets loose a few expletives.
Does any part of this story sound familiar? If so, I
have some good news. You can learn to rein in your
emotions and thus open up a whole next level of climbing performance and enjoyment. If you have good
emotional control already, I bet you can still improve
your climbing by optimizing your arousal and emotion.
Let's explore this murky subject of emotions and discuss
how you can make some immediate positive changes.
Evaluating Your Emotional

State

In evaluating your emotional state, the goal is to
become aware of the "sign" of your emotions (positive
or negative) and the magnitude of your arousal (high
or low). Obviously, positive emotions have different
effects on the mind and body than negative emotions.
Similarly, the intensity of these emotions (the arousal

28

-5

C M

N

0

III
low-energy
negative emotion

high-energy
positive emotion

+—e-HMR
G

+5

IV
low-energy
positive emotion

What quadrant of the matrix are you most often in?
level) plays a role in how you think and feel. To better
understand this relationship, consider the EnergyEmotion Matrix (see Figure 3.2).
The Energy-Emotion Matrix has four quadrants:
high energy, positive emotion (upper right); low energy, positive emotion (lower right); high energy, negative emotion (upper left); and low energy, negative
emotion (lower left). The matrix represents a continuum of emotion and energy within these four quadrants. Therefore, you can evaluate your present location in the matrix by grading your current energy
level on a scale from 0 to 10 (low to high) and scoring
your current emotional state on a scale from -5
(extremely negative) to +5 (extremely positive).
Knowing where you are in the matrix and having the
ability to change this location if it's not optimal in the
current situation is fundamental to becoming a peak
performer in any endeavor.
Obviously, your energy level and emotions fluctuate throughout the day and over the course of a
climb, so your place in the matrix changes hour by
hour and, maybe, minute to minute in extreme situations. I believe it's valuable to study your place in the

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

matrix in everyday, nonclimbing situations, since your
most common daily state will heavily determine your
disposition when climbing (it's unlikely you can be a
negative person at home and work, then become
completely positive when you go climbing). Use the
blank E-E Timeline contained in Appendix A on page
175 to plot your changing energy-emotional state
throughout the day, as shown in Figure 3.3. Begin
upon waking in the morning, and score your state
every thirty minutes, or when some event causes your
emotion or energy to change in an instant.
After evaluating your emotional state for a few
days, see if you can identify any patterns. What
time(s) of the day is your energy high or low? What
events seem to trigger you becoming more positive or

negative? Recognizing these patterns (and effects)
empowers you to make modifications, such as striving
to avoid negative triggers. Likewise, you may be able
to see what charges up your energy level (and when)
and what type of things make it tank. If you can't
avoid negative triggers, it's vital that you know how to
turn your states around. Below we'll discuss ways to
modify your emotional state.
It's also beneficial to track how your state changes
over the course of a day at the crags, and especially
during an attempt at a redpoint or on-sight ascent.
While you certainly can't write down your score while
on a route, you can mentally score yourself by simply
asking yourself "what quadrant am I in?"
Before you can change your state, you must first

Figure 3.3 Sample Chart off Energy-Emotion Levels

Name:

high

cffiyiio*, S » m ^

Date: 10-2-02

jf

10

high -10
10 A M

12 P.M

10 P.M.

Sample chart of energy-emotion levels throughout the day, including notes of triggers or events that effected an
energy-emotion change.

Mental

Training

29

determine the optimal state for the present moment.
Of course, beginning in a positive emotional state is
always ideal, but the optimal magnitude of your arousal (energy level) will vary depending on the type of
task you are involved in. For instance, a low-positive
(Quadrant IV) state is ideal for taking a test or meeting
with your boss, while a high-positive (Quadrant II) is
best for working out at the gym or playing a highintensity sport. In climbing, it's almost always best to
be in the low-energy, positive-emotion quadrant—creative thinking, learning, and fine motor skills all
demand a relaxed, positive state. The exception would
be when psyching up for a vicious boulder problem or
a short, powerful sport route.

Changing Your Emotional States
You can rapidly change your emotional state by leveraging the known relationships among the mind, emotions, and body (see Figure 3.1). Just as your emotions
exert an influence over your mind and body, you can
use your mind and body to influence your emotions.
In negative people the process tends to be reactive and
runs itself, whereas happy, productive people are
skilled at using their mind and body to produce positive emotions. It may seem overly simplistic, but if you
carry your body in a positive way (good posture, head
up, smiling) and think in a positive way (grateful for
what you have, reliving only good memories, focusing
on future goals), you will feel positive and, in fact, be
a generally happy person.
You should now have a good sense of the things you
can do to shift into a more positive state. Physiologically,
you can take on a more extended posture, you can jump
up and down or do anything physical, you can pump
your fist in the air and exclaim "yeah!"—even just smiling will do the trick. All these physical things will effect a
rapid change in your emotions—try it now! Mentally,
you can replay great events or climbs from the past, think
about all you've accomplished in your life, ponder your
good health or your fortune to have been born in a firstworld country (where you can actually engage in a luxury activity like climbing), or visualize the medium- and
long-term goals that excite you.
Hopefully, you now recognize that either your

30

emotions are controlling you or you are in control of
your emotions. Happy people and peak performers (in
sports and life) are those who are able to control their
emotions and adjust their arousal level on demand. In
our frantic society, and when participating in a potentially high-stress sport such as climbing, these emotion-modulating skills are invaluable. Strive to monitor your position in the matrix throughout the day
and optimize your state when needed, and you'll discover a new quality of climbing and living!

Dealing with Fear
As I stated in How to Climb 5.12, "the 'no fear' mentality
is for buffoons, beer-guzzling frat boys and couch potatoes." In climbing, reasonable fears keep you alive long
enough to realize your potential and to send a long lifetime's worth of stellar routes. For example, fear of taking a ground fall compels you to seek good protection
on the lead and to drag a rope in the first place.
It's unreasonable fears that derail performance.
Things such as fear of falling on a well-protected
route, fear of physical discomfort, fear of failure, and
fear of embarrassment must all be eliminated if you
are to climb your best. There are also preclimb fears
such as "I might be too tall," "too short," or "too
weak" to do the climb, which—left unchecked—give
birth to reality. Finally, there are subconscious, preprogrammed fears that are the root of many of the
"dumb things" that seem to just happen. Have you
ever fallen after the crux when the route is in the bag?
Or have you slipped off a large hold or botched a
wired sequence even though you felt in control? It
may be that such mistakes are the result of unchallenged inner fears, not lack of ability.
Deal with your fears head-on. Start by writing
down recurrent fears that regularly hurt your performance. If you can't think of any on the spot, go for
a climb and pay special attention to every preclimb
thought and while-you-climb concern. As the fears
reveal themselves, use logic and reason to specifically
counter each. This is usually pretty easy, but if no logical counter is evident, the fear may be reasonable.
Dealing with fear is an ongoing process—our
fears are always changing. Review each poor perform-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

ance and identify which fear(s) may have contributed
to your difficulties. To help you with this analysis,
here's a primer on four basic climbing fears: fear of
falling, fear of pain, fear of failure, and fear of embarrassment.

When pushing your limits, fear of pain and discomfort
can become a critical weakness. This fear causes you
to give up long before your body has reached its physical limitations. The pain of climbing a continuously
strenuous route is akin to that of running a mile at full
speed—it freaking hurts! Fortunately, the pain is brief
and the challenge pays big dividends. Decide to push
yourself a bit farther into the discomfort zone each
time you're on a hard route. Soon your pain threshold will be redefined, as will your limits on the rock.

fear of failure was so gripping that we became immobilized and time seemed to stop. Fortunately, adults
generally don't react quite this intensely, but it's still
common for us to imagine all the bad things that
could possibly go wrong. Once triggered, these negative thoughts can snowball and, more often than not,
become self-fulfilling prophecies.
In climbing, fear of failure causes you to hold
back. As your attack on a route becomes less aggressive than required, you'll find yourself second-guessing
sequences in the midst of doing them, your breathing
will become shallow, and your grip begins to tighten—
you overgrip the rock. You may even fall prey to
paralysis by analysis.
Eliminate fear of failure in one of three ways. First,
focus on what is probable instead of what is possible.
Sure, it's human nature to always consider the worstcase scenario, but this almost never comes true.
Counter these thoughts by considering what is probable and realistic based on past experiences.
The second way to nix this fear is to focus all your
attention on the process of climbing and forget about
the possible outcomes. Concentrate on the things
immediate to your performance—precise foot placements, relaxing your grip, moving quickly onto the
next rest position, and so on. Your limited supply of
energy is too valuable to waste worrying about how
high you will climb or the eventual results. As William
Levinson points out in his book The Way of Strategy, "To
succeed, we must not care if we fail."
Along this same line, you must adopt the attitude
that "it's okay to fall" (assuming a safe fall) and that
"falling won't bother me, I'll just get back up and give
it another go." By willingly accepting this fate (if it
should even happen), you totally dissolve the fear of
failure that handcuffs so many climbers. Therefore, by
being okay with falling, it's less likely you will. This
simple idea is one of the most powerful in this book.

Fear of Failure

Fear of Embarrassment

This deep-seated fear is often instilled during childhood when almost every action is classified by our
family, teachers, and friends as either a success or a
failure. We've all had childhood situations where the

Finally, there is fear of embarrassment and being
dissed. Get over this now or you'll never fully enjoy
climbing, or reach your potential. Realize that occasional bad-performance days are inevitable. Instead of

Fear of Falling
Fear of falling is inherent to climbing. Interestingly
enough, it's not really falling that we fear but not
knowing what the fall will be like. This explains why
your first fall on a route is the scariest, while subsequent falls are often much less stressful. Beginners
probably need some hands-on proof that falls can be
safe. The best way for a would-be leader to gain trust
in the system is by taking some intentional falls. Find
a steep climb with bomber protection, use a good rope
(and double-check your knot and buckle), and take
some falls. Start off with 2-foot falls and build up to
12-footers (with gear just a few feet below you). A
more experienced climber fearful of falling on an
upcoming on-sight climb can counter the fear during
the preclimb warm-up. The tactic here is to mentally
replay some past inconsequential falls and remind
yourself that falls on this climb will be no different (if
that is indeed the case—some falls are obviously deadly, and only a fool would ignore that possibility).

Fear of Pain

Mental

Training

31

trying to avoid them, simply accept that they happen,
analyze why they happened, then bury them. With
this attitude you will be free to try chancy moves and
risk an occasional mistake. In the long run you'll often
look like a hero, but never like a zero. Surely this is
better than embracing the critics and accepting mediocrity all the time.
Don't forget, your friends know how good a
climber you are, and they won't think any worse of
you because of a poor performance. Anyone else critical of you really doesn't matter. Work on improving
your self-confidence and don't let the criticisms of
others invade your thoughts.
In the end, embrace the attitude that there are no
faiiures, only results. If you fall off the first move of a
route, it's due to not paying attention to the move, not
to being a worthless individual. The results might not
be ideal, but they do contain hints for improvement.
Accept that by challenging your fears and doubling
your exposure to these fears, you will double your
rate of achievement and maximum climbing abiiity.

Relaxation Training and Centering
More than ever before, there are a multitude of things
in our lives that can result in high levels of stress. Our
jobs, refationships, possessions, even driving to the
crag can trigger a stress response such as muscular
tension or negative thoughts. Interestingly, it's not the
events or things in our lives that actually cause the
stress, but instead our reaction to them. Knowing this,
you are empowered to control your reactions to
everything you experience and, in turn, regulate the
total amount of stress in your life.
Recognizing that an event or situation is causing
you to become stressed is the first step toward controlling its effects. Foster an acute awareness of your
tension levels by regularly asking yourself things like,
"How do I feel?" or "Are there any growing pockets of
muscular tension?" Make such tension checks a regular part of your day. For instance, do a quick check of
your tension and stress levels every hour, and especially before any type of event that requires an optimal physiological state (a big meeting or hard climb).

32

Keep an eye out for telltale signs of building tension
such as a clenched jaw, overgripping a pencil or the
steering wheel, or tightness and burning in the muscles of your neck, shoulders, or back.
On the rock, tension reveals itself in overgripping
of holds, nervously muscling through a crux move, or
a general lack of fluid motion. Again, your goal is to
recognize and tone down the tension when it begins;
otherwise it will rapidly snowball and sabotage your
performance. This, in fact, is a common cause of blowing a sequence you thought you had wired, or falling
off a route that should be well within your ability. By
killing your economy of movement, building tension
and stress may very well kill your performance. And
it's probably been happening for so long you don't
even recognize it's happening.
The antidote to tension is, of course, relaxation.
Following are two highly effective relaxation strategies as well as a great on-the-rock centering sequence
that I call the ANSWER. Experiment with all three,
and try to incorporate their use throughout your
daily activities. In a short time you will become a
master of stress and find yourself feeling much more
relaxed—and also climbing harder, thanks to an
increase in apparent strength (a result of reduced tension in the antagonist muscles and elimination of
overgripping).

Progressive Relaxation
In the early 1940s American physician Edmund
Jacobson developed a technique known as progressive
relaxation, because he felt that by fully relaxing the
muscles, you would in turn relax the mind (Garfield
1984). He found that relaxation could be best learned
by deliberately tensing and relaxing specific muscle
groups (see the "Progressive Relaxation Sequence"
exercise on page 33). This process results in a sharpened awareness of tension levels in the different parts
of your body, and the ability to drain the tension like
letting air out of a balloon. In time, you will be able to
discern even small increases in muscular tension and
act to immediately eliminate the tension before there's
any degradation in performance.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Exercise: Progressive Relaxation Sequence
Perform the following procedure at least once a day. I
find it most useful during a midday break, as part of a
long rest period at the crag, or last thing before falling
asleep. Initially, the process will take about fifteen
minutes. With practice, you'll be able to move quickly through the sequence and reach a state of complete
relaxation in less than five minutes. Concentrate on
flexing only the muscle(s) specified in each step. This
is an invaluable skill you will find very handy when
using the Differential Relaxation and ANSWER
Sequences that are discussed below.
1. Go to a quiet location and sit or lie in a comfortable position.
2. Close your eyes and begin by taking five deep
belly breaths. Inhale slowly through your nose to
a slow, silent count to five, then gradually exhale
through your mouth to a slow, silent ten-count.
3. Keeping your eyes closed and maintaining slow,
relaxed breathing, tense the muscles in your right
lower leg for five seconds. Feel the tension in your
right foot and calf muscles, then let go and relax
the muscles completely. Compare the difference
in sensation between the tense and relaxed states.
Repeat this process with the left lower leg. Now,
with both lower leg areas relaxed, say to yourself,
"My feet and lower legs feel warm and light."
Upon saying this a few times, the muscles in this
area will drop into a deep state of relaxation.
4. Next, perform the same sequence in the muscles
of the upper leg (one leg at a time). Tense the
muscles in your upper leg for five seconds, then
relax them. After doing this with both legs, finish
up by thinking, "My upper legs feel warm and
light." Feel all tension dissolve as your upper legs
drop into deep relaxation.
5. Repeat this process in your hands and lower arms.
Begin by tensing the muscles below your right
elbow by making a tight fist for five seconds, then
relax these muscles completely. Repeat this with
the left hand and forearm, and conclude with the

Mental

Training

mantra, "My hand and forearm muscles feel
warm and light."
6. Repeat this procedure on the muscles in the upper
7. Next, shift the focus to the many muscles of the
torso (including the chest, abdominal, back, and
shoulder areas). Repeat the process exactly.
8. Conclude with the muscles of the face and neck.
9. You should now be in a deep state of relaxation
(possibly, you will have fallen asleep). Mentally
scan yourself from head to toe for any isolated
pockets of remaining tension, and drain them
with the warm and light mantra.
10. At this point you can open your eyes and return
to work or climbing with a renewed sense of calm
and focus. Or you can leverage this relaxed state
by performing some mind programming—visualization of the process of reaching some goal or the
act of climbing some project route.
Differential

Relaxation

Differential relaxation is used in active situations
where you wish to relax any muscle(s) not needed for
the task at hand. I find this skill especially useful in
regaining an optimal state while hanging out and
chalking at rest positions on the rock. I scan for
unnecessary muscular contractions or pockets of tension and, with a few deep belly breaths, visualize the
tension draining from the muscle like air escaping
from a balloon. Try this next time you go climbing.
Many climbers shortchange themselves and
reduce their apparent strength because of undue tension in muscles not needed for upward motion or stability. Unwanted contraction of the antagonist muscles
or overcontraction of the prime movers interferes
with even the simplest movements and wastes a
tremendous amount of energy. Observe how climbers
who try too hard or get gripped on a route become
extremely rigid and mechanical, maybe even while
moving through an easy sequence. Instead of using
their muscles optimally, they're pitting one muscle

33

against another, resulting in stress, fatigue, and premature failure. Conversely, the best climbers actively
control undue tension (it's often an unconscious
process in top climbers), move with grace and fluidity,
and maximize economy of motion and energy use. As
masters of differential relaxation, they can move
smooth and fast like a Porsche but still get the high
"miles-per-gallon" of a Honda.
Skill in differential relaxation comes with
increased sensitivity to various degrees of relaxation
and tension—something you will learn quickly
through daily use. Practice by releasing tension in
unused muscles while in the midst of common everyday activities like driving your car, sitting at your desk,
working around home, or even lying down for a quick
nap. Scan your body for pockets of tension or any
contracting muscles that aren't critical for the task at
hand. For me, it's typically tension in the shoulders, a
clenched jaw (if I'm concentrating really hard), or
unnecessary fidgeting by my feet.
On the rock, strive for acute awareness of tension
increases so you can nip it in the bud before it results in
a drop-off in performance. It's my practice to perform
these "quality assurance checks" at all rest positions.
Sometimes I recognize things like general tightness in
my shoulders, unnecessary tension in my legs, or a little more contraction of my arm and forearm muscles
than is needed to stick the grip or body position.
Differential relaxation allows me to correct these problems almost instantly—although I find centering and
the ANSWER Sequence to be beneficial in these situations as well.

Getting Centered
Centering is a simple, effective means of maintaining
complete control of your mind and body as you head
up on a difficult climb or into competition. When
you're centered, you feel balanced, relaxed, and confident. Conversely, you will feel out of balance, tense,
awkward, and unsure when you are out of center.
And in climbing, it takes only one burst of adrenaline,
one piece of gear to pop out, or one botched move to
knock you way out of center.
The ANSWER Sequence, a technique detailed

34

below, is a powerful means for returning yourself to
center in just a few seconds. The ANSWER Sequence
involves deliberately redirecting your thoughts
inward for a moment (usually at a rest on a climb) to
modulate your breathing, level of muscle tension,
posture, and mental attitude. Therefore, centering
goes a couple of steps beyond the use of differential
relaxation, since it also addresses your posture and
mental disposition. Make its use as regular and automatic as chalking up, and you'll find yourself climbing
more efficiently and consistently.
Exercise: The ANSWER Sequence
Perform the ANSWER Sequence before and during
each climb and in everyday situations where you need
to control tension, anxiety, and focus. Initially, this
six-step procedure will take a few minutes to perform.
With practice, you'll be able to go through the
sequence in about ten seconds—perfect for use at
marginal rest positions where getting centered could
make the difference between success and failure.
A - A W A R E N E S S

2. Awareness of rising tension, anxiety, or negative thoughts.
Acute awareness of unfavorable mental and physical
changes is fundamental to optimal performance. It
takes a conscious effort to turn your thoughts away
from the outer world toward your inner world. Peak
performers habitually make these tension checks
every few minutes, so they can nix any negative
changes before they snowball out of control. Make
this your goal.
N - N O R M A L I Z E

2. Normalize breathing.
In climbing, your breathing should be as relaxed (basically involuntary or unconscious) and regular as it
would be while on a fast walk. Unfortunately, many
climbers hold their breath while in the midst of a crux
sequence, then breathe heavily afterward in order to
catch their breath. This process creates tension and

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

degrades performance. Your goal is smooth, even,
normal breathing throughout the climb.
S - S C A N

3. Scan for specific areas of muscular

tension.

In this step you perform a tension check. Scan all your
muscles in a quick sweep to locate pockets of tightness.
Commonly tight areas are the forearms (are you overgripping?), shoulders, upper back, chest, abdominals,
and calves. The best way to relax a specific muscle is to
consciously contract that muscle for a few seconds,
then relax it and visualize the tension draining from it
like air from a balloon (in other words, use the differential relaxation technique).
W - W A V E

4. Wave of

relaxation.

Upon completing the tension check above, take a single deep breath and feel a wave of relaxation wash
from your head to your toes.
E - E R A S E

5. Erase thoughts of past events (or the possible
future) and focus on the present.
This step involves freeing your mind from the balland-chain of undesirable past events. There is no benefit to pondering the last failed attempt or the blown
sequence you just barely fought through. Let go of the
past and do not ponder the future—thoughts of the
past and future are enemies of excellence in the present. Refocus on and engage the present moment.
R - R E S E T

6. Reset posture and flash a smile.
It's amazing how much positive energy you can generate simply by resetting your posture and flashing a
smile. This final step of the ANSWER Sequence will
leave you in a peak performance state and ready to
climb into the zone. Trust your skills, have fun, and let
the outcome take care of itself.

Mental

Training

Visualization Training
Let's start off with an example of visualization. Sit
back, relax, and vividly imagine the following scene as
if it were a movie playing out before your eyes.
You are attempting to redpoint a route you have
worked on before. You have just successfully climbed
to the rest position that precedes the route's crux
sequence. You are relaxed, calm, and confident as you
shake out and rechalk. You feel a cool breeze blow
across your body, and it seems to enhance the light,
centered feeling you already possess. You gently grip
the starting hold of the sequence, a sharp, positive fingertip edge. With steady breathing, you flash a smile
and continue climbing.
You match hands and pull the fingertip edge to your
chest. You then high-step your right foot onto a tiny
crescent-shaped flake. You've hit it just right—it feels
bomber. You rock over that glued right foot, spot, and
then grab a matchbook side-pull edge with your right
hand. You flag your left leg across and below your high
right foot, then smoothly extend off the right foot. Your
left hand reaches up to snag a two-finger pocket—it
feels solid. You move your left foot up to a high smear
on the dish hold, and, with relaxed breathing, take aim
on the final lunge. Then, with your mind locked on to
the next hold, you throw the lunge and easily latch on
to the suitcase-handle hold that's been so elusive. You
clip the anchors and feel the rush of having ticked this
personal best route.
This sequence exemplifies a fundamental and
important exercise used by all the world's top athletes.
Although similar to the mental rehearsals performed
by some climbers, visualization goes beyond the simple
task of reviewing route sequences. As in the above
example, visualization involves making and playing a
detailed mental movie, one with touch, sound, color,
and all the kinesthetic feel of doing the moves. These
mental movies enhance your climbing by helping to
hardwire motor skills (moves and sequences), increasing memory, and fortifying confidence. For this reason,
use of visualization is as important to your success as
your use of climbing shoes and a chalk bag. Don't leave
the ground without doing it!
Many studies have shown that the brain is not
always capable of distinguishing between something

35

that actually happened and something that was vividly imagined (Kubistant 1986). (Deja vu is such an
experience—you can't always recall if the clear mental image that just surfaced is an actual memory or
simply something you've thought about or dreamed.)
Therefore, repeated visualization can trick the mind
into thinking you've been there and done that before.
Think of these mental movies as a blueprint for future
actions—with this perspective, you should understand
why visualization must be as detailed and accurate as
possible. Any bad design (wrong moves) or fuzzy
instructions (uncertain sequences) may lead to a
building collapse (a botched sequence or fall).

Types of Visualization
There are two primary modes of visualization: disassociated and associated. Disassociated visualization
provides an "on-TV" perspective, where you see yourself climbing from an observer's point of view. This
mode of visualization is best for reviewing some past
poor performance that you hope to improve upon. As
a detached observer, you can replay the movie and
objectively view the mistakes or falls without reliving
the possibly unhappy emotions of the situation.
Associated visualization provides a "throughyour-own-eyes" perspective and thus triggers small
neurological reactions as if you were doing the climb,
as well as the feel and emotion of the movie you are
playing. This makes associated visualization ideal for
preprogramming some future ascent. As discussed
above, repeated playing of a highly detailed, positive
mental movie helps trick the subconscious mind into
thinking you've done the climb before. Just make sure
you are using the associated, not disassociated, perspective when visualizing some future event.
DISASSOCIATED VISUALIZATION
If you are new to the practice of visualization, I suggest you begin with a simple, nonclimbing example.
Go to a quiet location, sit or lie down comfortably, and
relax. Using an observer's point of view (disassociated), play a mental movie of the following scene as it
might appear in your apartment or home.

36

Visualize yourself sitting on the couch and watching
TV. Note the clothes you are wearing in the scene. See
yourself get up from the couch, walk over to the refrigerator, and open it up. See yourself reaching in and
grabbing a can of soda, then watch yourself close the
fridge. See yourself opening the can as you begin to
walk back toward the couch. Note the way you are
walking and observe the exact instant that you see yourself open the can. Now watch yourself sit back down in
the couch.
In this disassociated example you watched the
scene play out before your eyes but you did not feel or
sense, in any way, what it was like to go get the soda
and drink it. Reserve this perspective for reviewing
negative events from the past, climbing or nonclimbing. Gather the information you need to improve your
performance next time, then engage in associated
visualization to preprogram the corrections into a successful future event.
ASSOCIATED VISUALIZATION
Now let's reshoot the mental movie of the at-home
scene from the associated point of view. This time you
will live the scene through your own eyes. Feel the
action play out in your imagination just as if you were
acting out the scene for real. Again, sit back, relax, and
picture this scene playing out in real-life detail.
As you sit on the couch, you laugh at the closing joke
of a Seinfeld rerun. You decide to go get a soda from the
fridge, so you get up and begin walking toward the
kitchen. Look around the room at the various pieces of
furniture (or pictures on the wall) you pass on your way
to the fridge. Enter the kitchen and open the refrigerator. Feel the cool air rush out and chill your face. As you
reach into the fridge for the soda, notice the colors and
design of the can, then sense the cold, damp feel of the
can in your hand. Now feel your arm slam the door shut
and hear the sound it makes in closing. Conclude the
scene by tasting the soda as you gulp it down—what flavors do you taste?
This example reveals the explicit detail you
should try to build into your associated visualization.
Granted, it will take some practice to develop Steven
Spielberg-like detail into your mental movies, but

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

that's the goal. Commit to making a short film for all
your project routes (or most important goals in life),
and don't hesitate to reshoot or edit the film as you
gain new information or beta for the route. Quality
mind programming will improve the quality of your
real-life performances. Guaranteed!

Uses of Visualization
I hope you now recognize that visualization is an
immensely powerful tool that can be used to enhance
performance in all aspects of your life. I'm sure you
use simple visualization every day, maybe without
even knowing it. For example, when you think about
the best way to drive across town, I'm sure you see the
key turns or landmarks along the way in your mind's
eye beforehand. Visualization is also used "effectively"
by people who worry a lot—part of their worry ritual
is wild visualization of some future event that may or
may not happen to them (or some loved one). This
type of negative visualization is most painful and
depressing when done from an associated perspective.
To me, such negative visualization is insane, since you
are putting yourself through the pain of some future
event that may never happen.
Some climbers become consumed in the same
types of negative moviemaking of future events. For
instance, if you visualize yourself failing on a route or
in competition, you not only preprogram this possible
outcome but also destroy your self-confidence in the
process. To avoid this, it's vital that you visualize only
positive events and ideal outcomes when you project
into the future in the associated state. Switch to the
disassociated mode if you need to visualize things
(from a risk-management perspective) that might go
wrong—say, on an on-sight lead. See from the on-TV
view the possible falls you could take and what risks
might be involved in the ascent. Described below are
several settings where you can use visualization to
improve your safety and mind-set (among other
things), as well as the chances of the ideal outcome
coming true.

Mental Training

PREPROGRAMMING
A REDPOINT ASCENT
Since you've been on the route before, you could
begin with disassociated visualization of your last
attempt. See yourself climbing the route and note
what things need to be corrected or refined for the
next attempt. Now use the associated perspective to
create a movie, as seen through your own eyes, of the
perfect ascent you plan to make. Imagine all the
important aspects of doing the route, including the
crux moves, gear placements or clips, rest positions,
and such. Create all the feel of doing the moves as
well as the feeling of being relaxed and centered as
you move into the crux. Make the movie positive and
perfect in every way, and always conclude with the
feeling of reaching the top.
PREPARING FOR AN
ON-SIGHT ASCENT
Visualization is invaluable when applied to a climb
you've never been on before. Since you have no firsthand experience, it will be very hard to create an
accurate movie from the associated perspective.
Therefore, you'll want to spend most of your time
visualizing from a disassociated perspective.
After studying the climb from below, create images
or a movie of yourself climbing the route from the onTV perspective. See yourself dropping in gear at the
obvious placements as well as hanging out at what
appear to be good rest positions. As described above,
you will want to visualize any hazards unique to this
climb—where a lead fall might be dangerous, what you
can do to minimize the risk, and so forth. Also, if you
can see enough detail from the ground, consider creating two movies of possible sequences through the crux.
This way, if you get up there and find that one will
obviously not work, you can call up the second movie
and continue climbing without delay.
You might finish up your visualization by moving
into the associated state and trying to imagine what
you might feel and see as you climb the sequence you
came up with from the disassociated perspective. This
is not always possible, but would be beneficial.

37

PREPARING FOR COMPETITION
In competition climbing, good visualization skills
might mean the difference between winning and finishing in the middle of the pack. Depending on the
competition format, you will want to employ the redpoint and on-sight visualization strategies discussed
above. Since many events allow only a brief preview
period, you will only be able to create a "rough-cut"
movie, including the basic route path, location of the
obvious rests, and whatever you can glean about the
moves or sequence. Even if you can't decipher a
sequence (or if you didn't get a route preview), you
can still take a mental picture of the wall and project
yourself climbing with grace and confidence to the top.
Most important, strive to eliminate any self-defeating
images that might cross your mind in the hours and
minutes leading up to your ascent of the wall.
"CLIMBING"

I N J U R E D OR TIRED

If you climb for enough years, you will at some point
likely find yourself laid up due to some type of injury.
Whether you are out for a few weeks due to a finger
injury or out for the season with a more serious problem, you can still keep climbing inside your brain!
While this may not sound like much fun, it is an effective way to maintain your knowledge of a sequence
on your project route. Vivid, associated visualization
has been shown to cause low-level neuromuscular
activity that helps enhance motor learning (Feltz
1983) and maintain the feel of performing some skill.
You can also use this effect to your advantage
next time you pump out while working a route.
Instead of thrashing around on a climb for the
umpteenth time (and risking injury), call it a day and
spend the time pumping a few more "mental laps" on
the route. This will help solidify your knowledge of
the sequence without the extra physical strain and
risk of injury.

Creating Laserlike Focus
The ability to narrow and maintain focus is a crucial
sports skill, especially in an activity like climbing
where elements of danger exert a constant pull divert-

38

ing the focus from the task at hand. Widely used, but
often misunderstood in the context of a climber's lexicon, focus is a laserlike concentration of mental energy aimed at the most important task at any particular
instant. Since every movement in climbing possesses a
different most-important task, it's vital to be able to
redirect your focus, in an instant, to the finger or foot
placement most critical at that moment.
Think of focus as a narrowing of your concentration, much like a zoom lens on a camera. At any given
moment you must zoom in on the single task most
critical to your performance—toeing down on a small
pocket, pulling on a manky finger jam, or shifting
your weight to just the right balance point. Think
about anything else and this critical task may fail,
resulting in a fall.
The most difficult part of focusing is learning to
zoom in and out quickly from a pinpoint focus to a
more wide-angle perspective. For example, a quarterback starts a pass play with a broad focus (when in
search for an open receiver), but he instantly zooms in
on a single player as he delivers the pass. In climbing,
you have to do much the same thing—use a broad
focus when hanging out looking for the next hold,
then zoom in tight as you reach toward the hold and
latch on to it. Similarly, you must zoom in tight when
high-stepping on a dime edge, locking off and making
a long reach, or floating a deadpoint. If you focus on
anything else—your gear, your belayer, your pain, or
spectators on the ground—you may as well add a tenpound weight to your back. Poor focus makes hard
moves harder, maybe even impossible.

Practicing Focus
Detailed on page 39 is a practice drill for developing
focus and a preclimbing strategy for gathering focus in
preparation to climb. The "Singular Focus Drill" exercise is best used when you are climbing on toprope
and well below your maximum grade. The
"Pinpointing Your Focus for a Climb" exercise can be
used before attempting any climb, though it's especially effective when preparing to start up a difficult
route.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Exercise: Singular Focus Drill

Exercise: Pinpointing Your Focus for a Climb

The best time to work on your focus is when climbing
a route a couple of grades below your maximum ability. Whether you're at a gym or the crag, on toprope or
lead, attempt to climb a whole route by focusing solely on one aspect of movement.
For instance, try to do a route with your complete
focus on just hand placements. Find the best way to
grab each hold, use the minimum amount of grip
strength necessary to hang on, and feel how your purchase changes as you pull on the hold. Place as little
focus as is safely possible on other areas such as your
feet, balance, belayer, and the like. For now, let these
areas take care of themselves—allow your sixth sense
to determine where your feet go and how your balance should shift.

This exercise will gather your focus into a single
"beam" and quiet your mind as you get ready to cast
off up a climb. Perform it after you've gone through
your preclimb ritual and been put on belay.
Stand at the base of the climb, assume an extended posture (shoulders back), close your eyes, and
place the fingertips of your dominant hand against the
rock face. Your fingertips should be touching the wall
lightly (not gripping a hold), and your hand and arm
should be completely relaxed. Now take three deep
belly breaths, inhaling through your nose to a count
of five and exhaling through your mouth to a count of
ten. Let a wave of relaxation wash across your body,
and then direct your entire focus to the tips of your
fingers touching the rock. Concentrate singly on the
sensation of your fingertips touching the rock—you
should begin to feel the thermal energy moving from
your fingers to the rock (on rare occasions when the
rock is hotter than your body, you will feel thermal
energy conducting into your fingertips). Maintain a
relaxed, singular focus on the energy exchange
between your fingertips and the rock for anywhere
from thirty-seconds to a minute or two. If your focus
ever wanders, simply redirect it to your fingertips.
Soon your mind will become completely still, as all
your focus is pinpointed on the tips of your fingers.
Upon reaching this state, open your eyes and begin
climbing.

Chances are, you'll find this exercise quite difficult. Your thoughts will naturally wander to other
tasks or even be directed to distractions on the
ground. If this occurs, simply redirect your focus to
the predetermined task—in this case, the handholds.
It is this process of becoming aware of your lost focus
and returning it to the critical task that you are after.
Sharpened awareness of lost focus is tantamount to
gaining control of focus.
Repeat this exercise regularly but change the focus
(onto, say, foot placements or weight shifts), each time.
Work on increasing the length of time you can maintain a singular focus—this helps build mental
endurance. As you become more skilled, convert this
singular focus drill into a dynamic focus drill where
your focus constantly shifts to the most critical task at
any moment. The goal is be able to shift your focus
quickly among the various tasks involved in doing a
route, like the nickering beams of a laser light show.
With practice, the process of directing and redirecting focus will become largely subconscious. On the
rare occasions when your focus does wander away
from the task of climbing, your well-trained mind will
instantly recognize this loss and redirect the focus
onto the climb. In this way, becoming constantly
engaged and automatic on the climb helps in achieving the highly desired flow state.

Mental Training

39

:

.;

:

H

T

O

U

R

Training Skill & Strategy
improvement. Still, some climbers just don't want to
We are what we do repeatedly.
spend time practicing on routes below their maximum
Excellence, then, is not an act but a grade; others avoid routes that might highlight their
weaknesses. Can you imagine a baseball player who
habit.
never took batting or fielding practice outside of the

M

oving over stone is the essence of climbing and,
therefore, no subject can be more central to
improving your climbing than this chapter on training
skill and strategy. Despite this, the subject of strength
training tends to get all the attention and hype in conversations among climbers, and getting stronger is the
most popular topic of magazine articles about climbing
performance. In this book mental training and
improving skill and strategy come before the subject of
strength training because I feel most climbers can benefit more and improve more quickly on the rock with
focused training in these areas. If you want to put
yourself on the fast track to the higher grades, strive
to understand and apply the information contained in
this chapter as much as or more than any other chapter in the book. You won't be disappointed!
Ironically, the majority of climbers spend little, if
any, time on dedicated practice of the vast spectrum of
techniques inherent to our sport. With little coaching
or guidance available, most climbers unknowingly
service their lust for ticking routes by constantly
climbing for performance. Of course, becoming proficient (or excellent) at any sport requires focused practice of new skills and work on weaknesses that need

competition of a nine-inning game, or a quarterback
who never threw a pass except on game day?
In this chapter you will learn the three stages of
motor learning involved in acquiring a new climbing
skill or move, as well as how the brain creates "software" to execute the move (in the future) and to
make approximate solutions, on the fly, to unknown
moves. This is powerful information if you understand
it, because it will help compel you to leave the herd
and commence regular skill practice as part of your
training for climbing program.
The action portion of this chapter is a series of
practice drills that you can use year-round whether you
climb indoors or out. Regardless of your tenure in the
sport, significant gains in your climbing technique and
overall ability will result from a commitment to regularly employing some of these drills in your routine.
This chapter does not instruct on any of the specific
climbing techniques—crack climbing, backstepping,
deadpointing, and so forth—but instead gives you the
optimal methods of practice regardless of the type of
move, technique, or strategy you plan to learn.
Instruction on specific climbing moves can be found in
a number of other books, although one-on-one personal instruction and modeling of more advanced
climbers are highly recommended.

41

An Overview off Motor Learning
The importance of motor learning theory to optimizing training for climbing became apparent to me in
the early 1990s as a result of conversations with Dr.
Mark Robinson and thanks to ongoing input from my
wife, Lisa Ann. As an LPGA golf pro (and climber)
with an education in the field of kinesiology, Lisa Ann
occasionally discussed the methods used by elite
golfers to learn very difficult skills (for me, impossible!). At about the same time, Mark Robinson (former
Gunks hardman and, now, an orthopedic surgeon in
California) turned me on to an excellent text on the
subject, Motor Learning & Performance, by Dr. Richard
Schmidt. Robinson then penned a breakthrough piece
on the application of ML&P to climbing for my first
climbing book, Flash Training (1994). Subsequently,
I've studied the subject in depth and formed a full
chapter of How to Climb 5.12 around the use of these
principles for speed learning of climbing skills. Now
it's time to dig even deeper.
Motor learning is the process by which we acquire
some skill set of body movement. Regardless of the
skill—walking, driving, climbing—learning occurs in
three identifiable and overlapping stages: the cognitive,
motor, and autonomous stages (Schmidt 1991).

Cognitive Stage
This stage involves thinking about the activity, listening to explanations of it or comparisons to other familiar things, imaginative projection of what it may be
like to do it, visual or kinesthetic anticipation of
action, and formulation of the goals or desired results
for future performance.
Early attempts in this stage are clumsy, inefficient, and jerky; they expend energy and strength in
wasteful ways. This is what you experience when
making the first few attempts on an unfamiliar type of
climbing (crack, slab, pocketed face, et cetera) or on a
route that's especially hard for you. During practice
sessions in this formative period, you examine the
route from the ground in an attempt to figure out the
moves and rest positions, then attempt to climb via
toprope or, perhaps, bolt to bolt on lead. Typically, the

42

results of such early attempts are rough and imperfect;
with continued attempts (practice), however, the
quality of performance improves.
The underlying capacities involved in this stage
are largely intellectual and character related and, to a
lesser extent, physical. Therefore, people who enjoy
early success—those who appear to have natural talent—are not necessarily the strongest, but instead the
most perceptive, agile, confident, and relaxed. A reallife example of this is seen daily by climbing instructors who observe a novice female climber outperform
her equally novice, but stronger male partner during
their first day on the rocks.

Motor Stage
The motor stage is less a product of self-conscious
effort and thought than one of automatic increases in
the efficiency and organization of the activity by the
nervous system and brain, as a response to continued
practice. A neurological "groove" develops as multiple
attempts and feedback from multiple sources (internal
and external) produce more reliable and effective execution. Energy expenditure decreases, and the natural
inertia of the body and limbs is used to advantage—
this marked increase in economy of movement is the
hallmark of the motor stage of learning.
When working a climb, this stage is represented
by the attempts at redpoint when the moves and clips
are known, and the goals are to develop efficiency and
to preserve power and endurance for the cruxes. The
underlying factors involved in this stage differ from
those that lead to early success. Here, they involve the
sensitivity of internal movement sensors, the accuracy
of limb movement, speed of detection and correction
of minor errors, and the sensitivity of the performance
to anxiety, doubt, and so on. These things are obviously less available to conscious awareness or control
and are thus acquired only through dedicated practice
and the chase of perfection.
In this stage the goal of action becomes more
refined and demanding. The moves must be done well
and efficiently with strength to spare, not eked out,
gasping at the verge of nausea or pulped tips. Early,
crude success should not be accepted since it will not

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

lead to the best ultimate development of technique
and efficiency. Having demanding goals has been
shown experimentally to produce both better performance and faster gains. The goal should be to dominate at, say, 5.10a or 5.12a, not just get by at it.
Autonomous

Stage

The final stage of learning is called the autonomous
stage. At this point the actions are automatic and
require almost no conscious attention, because movement has reached a stable and polished form. You can
often do other things while in this state: For instance,
you can carry on a conversation while driving a car.
Or, like a chess grandmaster thinking six moves
ahead, you can decipher and send a crux sequence in
perfect form, on-sight. This is also the elusive flow
state or zone so often touted by elite athletes. In
climbing, it is reached only through dedicated, disciplined, long-term practice.
On the rock this stage can be experienced on a
successful redpoint, but it more often occurs on the
umpteenth repetition of a route that you have
absolutely wired. You may also experience this flow
state while on-sight climbing well below your maximum ability, and on rare occasions you'll feel the rapture of the zone as you send a personal-best project or
float up a competition route.

adjust muscle forces, body position, and so on, given
the parameters at hand. In climbing, these parameters
include the steepness of the rock, its friction qualities,
the type of holds being used, and the kind of terrain
(roof, corner, or the like). Therefore, if you climb at
only one or two cliffs, you will develop a narrow
range of schemas relative to the rock friction, hold
types, and terrain of these areas. These motor programs, no matter how well learned, will work only for
similar situations—and they may not apply particularly well at the outer limits of difficulty at these crags.
Worse yet, should you travel to new areas, your limited schemas will leave you climbing at a much lower
grade or flailing on routes of the grade you're accustomed to from your home area.
Conversely, if you become a well-traveled climber,
you will in time log tens of thousands, if not millions,
of different moves, positions, angles, and hold configurations into your library of schemas (see Figure 4.1).
This huge resource will enable you to climb at a high
standard on most rock types and at most areas.
Figure 4.1 Developing Schemas

Understanding Schemas:
Your Climbing Software
Climbing skill and technique are specific to the kind of
rock and terrain over which you move. Therefore,
becoming an expert climber requires experience with a
wide range of styles and rock surfaces, even if your
interests are narrowly focused on one type of climbing.
The reason relates to the skill programs or schemas (as
sports scientists call them) that are created as you learn
new moves and positions. (Some literature, mainly
European, uses the term engram to describe such a skill
program. In keeping with the American scientific literature, I use schema throughout the text.)
A schema is a set of rules, usually developed and
applied unconsciously by the motor system in the
brain and spinal cord, relating how to move and

Training Skill & Strategy

F

*'cn *

FR/

cn

Climber A has developed more diverse schemas
(dots) and thus will be able to closely approximate
the novel move [star]—and possibly on-sight it!
Climber B has more limited schemas, which will have
him flailing and probably failing on the novel move
[star].

43

Furthermore, the high density of schemas will help you
guess intuitively, and with surprising accuracy, the best
solution to a novel move or crux sequence on-sight.
Just as a highly skilled skier or surfer can "on-sight"
almost any slope or wave, developing broad schemas
will transform you into a climber who can on-sight at a
high level at almost any crag on the planet.
Dr. Mark Robinson describes an experience he
once had with a top boulderer at a local spot in
California. "This man could do incredible problems in
his local area that very few others could repeat; however, it was obvious that his abilities were limited
because he had difficulty climbing 5.10a on his very
infrequent road trips. The surprising extent of his limits became apparent one day when he went to show
us one of the easier problems at his area. He twirled
and pranced effortlessly up to a recently broken hold,
then flew off. He had grabbed at where the hold used
to be in an artful-looking blind move, only to land on
his butt. By the next week, most other local boulderers, some of only average ability, had worked out a
new sequence. But not our hero. His limited number
of schemas had limited him once again."

Developing Schemas (Learning New Skills)
Learning a new skill requires a progression through
the three stages of motor learning before you will be
able to use the new skill efficiently and intuitively.
Depending on the difficulty of the skill, this process
may be slow, awkward, and frustrating. Therefore,
discipline and an intense belief that you will become
excellent in the skill (with effort) are fundamental to
the process of learning difficult skills. You must not try
to shortcut the process and get around having to learn
it by relying on your strengths in other areas.
Unfortunately, many climbers do exactly this
when they lunge, swing, or scum wildly through a
sequence that could be done more efficiently by learning a new move, technique, or body position. Another
example plays out when a competent gym or face
climber first attempts to learn crack climbing. The common tendency is to avoid the awkward—and possibly
painful—jams and pawl up the face on either side of
the crack. Typically, climbers pump out and exclaim

44

that the route felt way harder than its grade—which,
of course, it did, since they weren't using the techniques required to climb the route most efficiently.
The moral of the story is that you must convince
yourself that no matter how hard a new move feels at
first, it will become easier to execute—and maybe
even intuitive—as the result of focused practice. Also,
keep in mind that you will become most competent at
a new skill by practicing it on as many different rock
varieties, angles, and settings as possible. So in the
crack-climbing example above, you'd want to practice
on cracks of all widths, depths, and lengths, as well as
on as many types of rock and rock angles as possible.
Surely climbing a slick, parallel-sized sandstone hand
crack will feel different than jamming up a gritty granite crack that features slight variations in width. This
difference in feel is evidence that somewhat different
schemas are called upon in climbing these similar
routes. Consequently, to perform optimally in both
settings requires prior practice on both types of cracks.
Another important principle states that learning
becomes slow and difficult in states of fatigue, fear, and
urgency, whereas a fresh, relaxed, and confident
approach yields rapid acquisition of new skills. Consequently, it's best to practice new skills (and develop
solid schemas) early in your training sessions and to
employ liberal hangdogging when working on hard
routes. Both approaches will enable you to learn most
quickly.
Despite this, there is no single best way to train or
practice for any particular kind of climbing. It seems
that as people learn any new skill, even babies learning how to walk, the brain generates numerous different solutions. These solutions are tried, the successful
ones are retained, and the unsuccessful ones are discarded. This process—neural Darwinism—is constantly at work as you learn a new climbing move or
attempt an unfamiliar style of climbing or a hard route.
Furthermore, original and creative solutions to
problems of movement are routinely created as part of
the learning process, and they may be recognized and
learned by others. Until a certain point in time,
unique moves like the heel hook, deadpoint, backstep, or Figure 4 simply did not exist and could not be

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

learned. Somebody or perhaps many people created
them in the course of learning to climb, and now
these moves are commonplace. In the end, the most
important prerequisites to becoming a skilled climber
may be an open mind, curiosity, and a willingness to
learn new techniques no matter how unimportant,
unexciting, and awkward they may seem.
Transference of Skill

ultimate limit

/
2

In motor learning the idea of transference relates to
how practice or skill in one activity accelerates or
improves learning of another, different activity. One
startling, but apparently consistent, result in this field
of study is that transfer is usually either absent or
small, even between seemingly similar activities
(Schmidt 1991). The complexity, coordination, and
integration of skilled movement are so specific that
they derive very little help from other skilled movements. Therefore, practice at climbing will improve
climbing skill, balance, and technique, while playing
around on a slack chain, kicking a Hacky Sack, snowboarding, or what have you are wastes of time for the
purpose of improving climbing performance.
This helps us understand why the old assumption
that gymnasts, with their incredible strength and
motor skills, would instantly and effortlessly become
excellent climbers has not proven true. Although
climbing and gymnastics obviously share certain physical requirements, the motor skills are largely unrelated and they are based, in part, on markedly different
underlying capacities.
Rate of Improvement
Ultimate Skill Level

Figure 4.2 Rate off Skill Acquisition

and Your

According to the Law of Practice, performance
improves rapidly from its baseline level when the
activity is first practiced and continues to improve in
slowly decreasing amounts as ability approaches some
ultimate (personal) skill level (see Figure 4.2). In
learning a simple task, like driving a car, it only takes
a few weeks to become fairly skilled. Beyond this, all
the thousands of hours you spend driving over the
rest of your life will yield only a small amount of
improvement.

Training Skill & Strategy

'

: /

s

\l s
k

1

'

s

'&**
^

s

i*

,•'

*•

.-^""

SS—i

1

1

1

5

10

15

20

»

years of practice

Performance improves rapidly from its baseline level
when the activity is first practiced and continues to
improve at a slower rate as ability approaches some
ultimate personal skill level.
The learning curve for complex activities, like golf
or climbing, also rises rapidly upward as a result of the
initial practice sessions. Because of the high complexity
and wide range of skills inherent to these sports, however, you can continue to improve for many years, even
decades. In fact, golf is clearly the more technically difficult sport of the two, since several gifted climbers have
reached world-class status in less than five years, while
the best golfer ever, Tiger Woods, took fifteen years to
ascend to that level—and that was unusually fast!
As discussed in Chapter 1, you can maximize your
rate of improvement in a specific style of climbing by
focusing your practice and training in that one area.
It's increasingly common to observe climbers who
quickly progress to a high level of ability in one type
of climbing—say, indoor bouldering competitions or
flashing overhanging crimpfest routes. Since both
these endeavors require only a small subset of total
climbing skills, it's possible to focus your practice on
developing the small set of schemas necessary to excel
on said terrain. The trade-off, of course, is that your
limited schemas will make climbing other types of
routes very difficult, if not impossible.
The bottom line: Becoming a proficient, all-around

45

climber is a long-term proposition. Developing wideranging schemas will take you at least five to ten years
of climbing at many different areas, and you can still
continue to improve your skills even after twenty or
thirty years in the sport. Consequently, the most intelligent approach to training for climbing would be to
emphasize learning skill over getting wickedly strong
during your first few years in the sport, and even likely
beyond that. If you hope to become a tiger on the rocks,
be prepared to invest many years of dedicated practice
and strive to become a solid all-around technician.

The Keys to Effective Practice
Effective skill practice requires knowledge of your
technical weaknesses on the rock (skill and strategy),
liberal amounts of dedicated practice time, and an
arsenal of Smart Training Drills for enhancing the
learning of new skills.
Your completed self-assessment from Chapter 2
should have helped identify some of your technical
weaknesses. Still, it will be beneficial to perform a
more focused assessment that will highlight specific
flaws in your technique and strategy. Take a few minutes and work through the following exercise.

Exercise: Uncovering Technical Weaknesses
Think back over the last few occasions that you really
struggled on the rock or even at a particular climbing
area. Close your eyes and replay the routes and
sequences where you became frustrated, fell, or were
completely shut down by the route. Also, review the
moves and situations where you became anxious,
tight, and felt like you were close to losing it, even if
you didn't fall. Reliving the situation in vivid detail
will help you get to the heart of the matter.
Take out a sheet of paper and write down all the
things that seemed to contribute to your struggle or
frustration. No doubt you will list numerous mental
and physical issues, but it's important to dig deeper
and discover the underlying technical weaknesses that
caused you to get physically pumped or mentally
stressed. When you've run out of reasons, cross out all
the physical and mental issues and distill only the
technical issues onto a new list on a separate piece of

46

paper. Finally, order the technical reasons into a "top
ten list" of sorts, with the most critical technical flaws
heading the list. For example, the list might read:
1. My footwork deteriorates on difficult moves.
2. I climb way too slow over steep, pumpy terrain.
3. I always seem to miss key holds.
4. I often miss rest positions.
Now put a star next to your top three technical
flaws—these are the items on which you must focus
your skill practice in the weeks to come. Once you
recognize significant improvement in these areas,
begin practice on correcting the next three problems
on the list. You may want to perform this exercise
again in case new technical problems have moved into
the "starred positions."
m m «

Now that you have a clear picture of your technical weaknesses, you must dedicate a portion of two
practice sessions per week to correcting them.
Whether you plan to practice in a climbing gym or at
the crags, it's important that you make the distinction
between practice and performance days. Most
climbers handicap themselves by constantly focusing
on performance during weekly visits to the cliff or
gym. Even if you don't have a specific tick list, it's easy
to succumb to the natural tendency to climb as close
to your limit as possible—this can be most gratifying,
but it's not the most effective use of practice time.
As you can see, this inclination to perform all the
time conflicts with the processes required for improving technical problem areas. We've all seen climbers
with horrible footwork flailing repeatedly on a steep
route so that they can eventually tick some impressively difficult route. While they may ultimately succeed at sending their "5.hard" climbs, they gain little
in technical ability from this exercise—and in fact they
further groove their bad habits and poor technique. I
call such practices "stupid training."
Conversely, intelligent climbers will dedicate a
block of practice time early in the workout when
they're mentally and physically fresh. During this practice period or day (if at the crags), the goal is to seek

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

out routes that will target the technical weaknesses.
Since performance is not a goal, there is no hesitation
to hang on the rope and experiment with moves, body
positions, and sequences that feel awkward or difficult.
For example, if backstep and drop knee moves
are a weakness, you'll want to dedicate some time
during each workout to getting onto steep routes that
demand these moves if you're to climb them most
efficiently. Chances are, the type of route you must
get on will be intimidating, since up to this point it's
probably been your tendency to climb routes that
favor your strengths. If you are poor at drop-knee
moves, for instance, I'll bet you avoid steep routes
because they feel especially hard and look overly
intimidating to you. The same goes for any style of
climbing—slab, thin face, cracks, roofs, what have
you. You must partake in regular practice on the terrain and type of routes that target your top three technical weaknesses. Excellence comes no other way.
Finally, I want to touch on a few practice drills
and games that can enhance your rate of learning new
skills and correcting weaknesses, as well as making
the process a little more fun. More examples of such
speed learning practices can be found in my book How
to Climb 5.12.

Smart Training Drills for Enhanced
Learning off Motor Skills and Strategy
Bouldering
Bouldering is often touted as the supreme method for
developing sport-specific strength, but it's even more
effective for learning climbing skills and acquiring new
schemas. For proof of this, consider a recent bouldering session in which you worked a difficult problem a
few times before eventually succeeding. Did you ultimately succeed because your strength increased after
each attempt, or did each successive attempt result in
learning of the body positioning, feel, and hand- and
footwork necessary to do the moves most efficiently
and successfully? I think the answer is obvious.
With all the restraints of roped climbing removed,
bouldering allows you to narrow the focus and partake
in relaxed, repeated attempts at learning a specific skill

Training Skill & Strategy

or sequence of moves. Sports scientists call this blocked
practice, because the fixed moves can be practiced over
and over again until they are successfully acquired.
Once a skill is perfected, however, there is little benefit
to additional blocked practice of that skill. Further learning demands that you either move on to practicing a
new skill via blocked practice (say, a new boulder problem with new moves and positions) or modify the original problem so that some element of it has changed
(say, angle, hold size, hold position or spacing, or the
like). This latter strategy is known as variable practice,
and it's the gold standard for learning a skill that must be
performed in a variety of positions or settings: hitting a
golf ball from an infinite variety of lies, shooting a basketball from anywhere on the court, floating a deadpoint from any one of a million different body positions.
Indoor walls and home gyms are the ideal setting
for variable practice. Supposed you want to gain skill
at, say, using undercling holds and hip turns on overhanging cliffs. To begin, set a problem with a relatively
easy sequence of underclings and hip turns. Practice the
sequence several times until you feel it's 100 percent
wired. Now redesign the problem with slight changes in
the hold positions and locations, and repeat the practice
drill until this, too, is wired. Next, reduce the hand- and
foothold size and repeat the drill. Keep repeating this
process until you've exhausted the possibilities.
Completion of this variable practice drill might
take anywhere from a single evening to a couple of
weeks. Regardless, the end result is comprehensive
schemas surrounding this type of movement, and
rapid recall and execution of the skill in some future
performance setting. So, while bouldering outdoors
on a wide range of move types and angles is best for
building a diverse library of climbing skills, using the
variable practice strategy on an artificial wall enables
comprehensive learning of a new type of movement
in a wide range of configurations. Clearly, there is
great value in both formats, so get busy!

Traverse Training
Like bouldering, traverse training is a no-frills activity
that affords focused practice on numerous technical
aspects of the climbing game. Although some people

47

find "ad lib" traversing along a cliff base or at a climbing gym boring next to climbing boulder problems, this
drill does have some major benefits when compared to
working a known, graded boulder problem. When
working the graded boulder problem, it's natural to
want to succeed at any cost, even if your technique is
sloppy and inefficient. As discussed earlier, it's difficult
to develop new skills in such a performance setting.
Conversely, traversing for the sake of practicing
technique and movement eliminates the pressure to
perform. You can experiment with new grip positions,
gentle and precise foot placements, and various body
positions with no concern about whether or not you
step off the wall. Maximize the benefit of this drill by
carefully spotting each foot placement, concentrating
on keeping your weight over your feet, relaxing your
grip as much as possible, and learning to move quickly and confidently through thin, tenuous sequences.
Finally, strive to remain calm and relaxed at all times,
and refocus on your feet anytime you sense you're
losing control.
To mix things up and increase the intensity and
benefit of traverse training, you can also play around
with various elimination or focus drills. For example,
try doing a complete traverse using only two fingers
(index and middle fingers, for example, or middle and
ring fingers) of each hand. This drill forces you to maximize the weighting of your feet (a good thing); it's also
an excellent way to increase your finger strength. As
another variation, challenge yourself to do a complete
traverse using only open-grip finger positions. (This
will be especially difficult and beneficiai if you naturally favor the crimp grip.) Be creative and make up other
drills, such as "side-pull only," "undercling only," or
"cross-through only" elimination traverses. Beginner
and intermediate climbers have much to gain from
performing these drills on a regular basis.

Toproping and Hangdogging
Toproping and hangdogging are the ideal formats for
practicing difficult moves near your limit or when diving into unfamiliar terrain like pocket or crack climbing. As discussed earlier, a relaxed, low-stress environment is critical to rapid learning of new skills.

48

Obviously, climbing on toprope or on lead, bolt to
bolt, represents a low-stress setting where you can
experiment with tricky, awkward moves without the
risk of a serious fall and injury.
When attempting a route that is continuously hard
or with multiple cruxes, it's best to break down this
route into smaller sections or chunks. This reduces the
mental burden by allowing you to view and solve the
route in parts. Much like working a boulder problem,
you can employ blocked practice to work a sequence
repeatedly. Once a problem is solved and programmed
to a high likelihood of success, you can move on and
begin work on the next chunk. Upon solving all the
chunks (and after a good rest), your next goal should be
to combine chunks. For example, on a route that you
had broken down into four hard sections, you would
try to link the top two chunks, and then move down
and link the top three chunks. Such incremental learning will wire you for a successful redpoint or toprope
ascent after another rest or on your next outing or day
at that area. (Note: See Chapter 5 of How to Climb 5.12 to
learn many more strategies for working and sending
project routes.)

The Stick Game [aka Send Me)
This popular game is great for learning to quickly
assess and execute a novel, unknown move on-sight
(a vital skill when on-sight climbing at the crag or in
competition). Best played on an indoor wall, the drill
requires at least two players who take turns pointing
out (with a broomstick) impromptu boulder problems. Begin by identifying the starting hand- and
footholds for the "victim"; then, as the climber pulls
up on them, the course setter points to the next hold
to be used. Continue in this fashion until the climber
falls or the problem is done. Commonly, the game is
played with open feet—while the climber can use only
the handholds that the course setter specifies, all
footholds are on route.

First Touch
First Touch is a great practice drill for would-be competition and on-sight climbers—though anyone can benefit from its use. An indoor facility with a wide range of

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

toprope routes is the ideal setting for this drill. As the
name implies, you must climb a route by using each
handhold in the exact way that you first grab it—no
readjusting or changing your grip after you first touch
it. By climbing many routes in this fashion (and, of
course, obeying the guidelines completely), you will
learn to examine holds more closely—both from the
ground and while climbing—and thus increase the likelihood you'll use them optimally from the first touch.
On lead, this skill saves you time and energy, both of
which increase your odds of on-sighting a route.

Tracking and Elimination
This drill can be used indoors when bouldering or on
toprope. The goal is simply to climb a route by tracking your feet on the exact same holds used by your
hands. It's kind of like climbing a ladder, where you
press down on a rung with your right hand and make
room to step on that same rung with your right foot.
As a type of elimination drill, this will make a climb
much harder than it would be if climbed with all the
holds on route. Therefore, if you normally practice
skill by climbing 5.10 or 5.11 routes, you'll want to do
this drill on routes in the range of 5.7 to 5.9.
If you climb indoors a lot, exercise your creativity and develop other elimination drills that might
improve your skill, strategy, and strength. For
instance, begin eliminating certain hand- and
footholds from the routes you have ruthlessly wired.
There's little to be gained from blocked practice of the
same tired routes over and over again. So challenge
yourself by eliminating the five biggest holds from the
route, or by limiting yourself to grabbing the holds
only as side pulls or underclings, or with only two fingers, or what have you. Not only can this make for
some good fun for you and your friends, but it's also
an excellent way to enhance your skill practice and
overall ability.

Downclimbing Routes
When leading or toproping indoors, it's rare that I
climb a route to the top and lower off without trying
to downclimb as much of the route as possible. There

Training Skill & Strategy

are many benefits to this practice beyond the obvious
one of doubling the pump. If you know you are going
to downclimb a route, you become a more observant
and focused climber on the way up. What's more,
since poor footwork is a leading handicap for many
climbers, there's a lot to be gained from this practice,
which demands intense concentration on footwork!
At first you will find downclimbing to be difficult,
awkward, and very pumpy. But that's the M.O. when
first attempting anything new that's worthwhile (read
challenging). As your hold recognition improves, however, and as you learn to relax and fluidly reverse the
route, you'll find that downclimbing a route often feels
easier than sending it in the first place. This is because
your eccentric (lowering) strength is greater than your
concentric (pulling) strength, and due to the fact that
by leading with the feet while downclimbing you learn
to maximally weight them and conserve energy. All of
the above make downclimbing a killer drill—one not
to be overlooked by any serious climber!

Speed Training
When the rock gets steep and the moves hard, there's
no more important weapon to have in your arsenal
than being able to climb fast and precisely. Climbing
quickly is primarily a function of skill, not strength or
power (I'm not talking about lunging wildly up a
route). In fact, the less strength and endurance you
possess, the more important this skill becomes.
To begin with, it's important to note that there is
no benefit to climbing faster if you begin to botch
sequences or if your technique degrades. Therefore,
you want to practice speed climbing on routes you
have completely wired and, likely, at a number grade
or two below your personal best. Climb several laps on
the route (rest between attempts), each incrementally
faster than the previous. Attempt to climb about 10
percent faster on each successive lap, but back off the
accelerator at the first sign that your technique is
suffering.
Perform this drill a few times a week for several
months, and you'll find yourself naturally moving
faster when climbing on-sight or redpoint at the crags.
This new skill alone could push your redpoint ability

49

a full grade higher over the course of a single season—
a much greater gain than you'd achieve from strength
training alone!

Mental Wings Strategies to Enhance
Problem Solving and Learning
I conclude this chapter with six mental strategies to
enhance your skills at on-the-spot problem solving
and learning of a difficult sequence or complex route.
Being able to quickly decipher perplexing cruxes
while conserving mental and physical energy is a master skill in our sport. Learn to utilize these skills effectively and you're on your way to becoming a grand
master at flashing.

Focus on Problem Solving, Not Performance
One thing I love about working a hard boulder problem or project route is the challenge of studying a
complex problem and gradually seeing a beautiful,
unique sequence take form. Just like piecing together
a puzzle when you were a kid, you can best solve a
rock puzzle by remaining focused on the task and having fun regardless of how the long the puzzle takes to
complete.
For instance, when working a boulder problem or
crux sequence, ponder the beauty of this rock puzzle
and feel the joy of being engaged in this challenging
process. This disposition will shift you out of the can'tfail mind-set of frustration and help turn your focus
away from the problem and onto finding a solution.
Remember, the brain naturally magnifies whatever
you focus on. Obviously you want to magnify the possible solution, not the problem, so always be solution
oriented.

Relax and Remain Positive
Both problem solving and motor learning occur most
rapidly in a stress- and anxiety-free state. Therefore,
controlling tension through deep breathing, positive
visualization, and remaining process oriented is crucial for accelerating these processes.
It's also fundamental that you eliminate thoughts
of "needing to flash the route" or "having to redpoint
the climb this attempt"—these are both positions that

50

work against you. By entertaining such needs, you
create stress and anxiety that may prevent the very
thing you desire. Instead, acknowledge that falling is
part of the learning process and accept each fall as a
personal clue from the route (don't ignore it!)
instructing you on what needs to be done differently
or better. Predetermine that you will accept a fall (the
clue) if it happens and believe completely that success
will come with creativity, effort, and patience. In
doing so, you create the optimal state for learning and
succeeding most quickly.

Chunk Down the Route
As mentioned earlier, chunking down a long, hard
route into a series of short problems makes the climb
less overwhelming and easier to learn. Furthermore,
these short problems or chunks can each be viewed as
a short-term goal to be reached or accomplished. So,
while you may fail for several days on the project as a
whole, you will experience short-term success as you
solve each of the individual chunks. This sense of success helps keep you energized, positive, and on track
to eventually succeeding on the route.
When working through the individual chunks,
avoid becoming obsessed on any one of them. Beating
yourself up on, say, the second chunk of a six-chunk
route is self-defeating, since even if you eventually
solve this chunk, you'll be too mentally and physically wasted to put in meaningful work on the other
chunks. Therefore, it's best to move on to working the
next chunk upon the onset of frustration or any judgmental self-talk, such as "I can't do this" or "I'll never
figure this out." If allowed to burrow into your subconscious, such judgments form the basis for reality.
You are much better off solving the rest of the route
before returning to the problem section.
Long-term achievement of a formidable goal
(where short-term failures are inevitable) demands
mental agility as well as the ability to trick yourself
into persevering in the face of adversity. Breaking a
climb into a series of more manageable chunks and
setting yourself up for several small wins is a most
effective strategy.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Engage Both Sides of the Brain
You may be familiar with the fact that the brain has
two hemispheres—the left hemisphere, which presides over logical, practical, language, mathematical,
and related matters, and the right hemisphere, which
dominates in creative, artistic, intuitive, situational,
and imaginary matters. The majority of people are
"left-brained" and, even if you aren't, intense situations with lots of information—like climbing—tend to
bring the left brain into command. The result is that
many climbers leave their right brain on the ground
and therefore handicap their problem-solving ability,
big time! I can think of countless times I've fallen on
routes because I was thinking in a linear fashion and
with blinders on that prevented me from finding a key
hold, sequence, or rest. (Cut me a break, I'm a scientist, not an artist!)
The right brain is best accessed when you are in a
relaxed state (another reason some climbers have a
tough time freeing it up). Thus, bringing it into play
requires that you resist the Type A behavior of rushing up to a route and quickly going for the send, and
instead get comfortable at the base of the climb, warm
up slowly, and make a relaxed study of the climb
before tying in to the rope. Some severely left-brained
people will need to force themselves to think out of
the box. Seeing the big picture and imagining all the
possible approaches and sequences on a climb is a
habit you may need to foster through your own initiative. Your goal should be a balanced approach to
problem solving in which you can think logically and
practically as well as intuitively and creatively. Being
able to create (on demand) and leverage this state is
one of the hallmarks of brilliant climbers such as Lynn
Hill and Chris Sharma, who can perform at an exceedingly high level in a wide range of styles and settings.

Employ Multisensory Learning
Everything we learn comes through one of our five
senses, and the more senses we use in learning, the
faster and easier it becomes. Climbers tend to use primarily the sense of vision before they leave the
ground, and feel once they begin to climb. While the
senses of smell and taste can't contribute to perform-

Training Skill & Strategy

ance in this sport, the auditory sense can also be a
powerful learning tool (Knudson 1997), particularly
when faced with a tricky boulder problem or when
working to memorize a difficult sequence. Climbers
who give names to key holds and moves and then create verbal beta are using this trick. Remembering an
obscure sequence of tiny holds by feel or vision can be
enhanced with descriptive verbal beta like "high-step
to the dime edge, then deadpoint to the potato chip
flake." It may sound funny, but it works.
Multisensory learning is a sign of the intelligent
climber, so begin to talk through your sequences in
addition to visualizing and feeling the moves. By talking the talk, you make it easier to climb the climb!

Try Something Ridiculous
The biggest block to learning is judgment. Self-talk
like "Others use this sequence, so that must be the
best way," or discounting a novel or improbable
sequence that flashes into your mind without trying it
first, is a form of self-sabotage. It's vital that you don't
limit yourself this way—your brain doesn't know
what you can or cannot do until you tell it. Don't prejudge sequences or your capabilities!
The best problem solvers are both creative and
uninhibited. They never hesitate to try a novel solution that's entirely different from the known
sequence. You can foster these skills by ignoring the
obvious solution—the one that's not currently working for you—and attempting a few completely different, even ridiculous sequences.
Regardless of how improbable a given technique
looks—heel hook, undercling, high step, kneebar—
don't pass judgment on it until you make a few attempts
with that technique. Try a variety of body positions, foot
flags, lunges, and don't ignore the nonpositive holds like
gastons, side pulls, and pinches. Eliminate the seemingly must-use hold—or at least try using it with the opposite hand. Search for unchalked holds that might unlock
the sequence, and keep a constant watch for footholds
that are off the main line of the route—a single missed
foothold or high step can make the difference between
"impossible" and "possible."

51

Eric Mushial on Coral Sea
(5.13b), Waimea, Rumney,
New Hampshire.
PH 0 T 0 G R A P H

BY

M l C H A E L L A N D K R O O N

H

T

V

Theory & Methods
of Strength Training
Man is in a position to act because
he has the ability to discover causal
relations which determine change
and becoming in the Universe.

P

erhaps no sport can match rock climbing for the
dramatic increase in the mean level of performance of its participants in recent years. Today's average
climber is capable of a standard that few climbers
dreamed of achieving when I began climbing in the
mid-1970s. Furthermore, many weekend warriors are
able to progress to the lofty levels of 5.12 and 5.13—
grades that hardly existed two decades ago. The reasons for these incredible improvements include stickysoled shoes, sport-climbing tactics, and, more than
anything else, the advent of climbing gyms and a
growing focus on sport-specific strength training.
Still, there are many arguments among climbers
about the best way to train, and people frequently tell
me that they are confused by the often conflicting
training information published in the climbing rags.
Surely an article or book describing the training practices of some 5.14 climber is of little help for average
climbers—it might even get them injured. Alternatively, joining a health club and performing the typical weight-lifting workout would be of little benefit

for most climbers; in fact, it may even hurt their
climbing performance!
As a resuft of all the confusion, numerous
climbers have quipped to me that they have decided
to "just climb, as training for climbing." While this is
an excellent strategy for a novice climber, intermediate and advanced climbers definitely need to partake
in some sport-specific strength training if they want to
continue to improve and, hopefully, someday reach
their genetic potential.
The goal of this chapter (as with this whole book)
is to help you avoid—or step out of—the muck and
mire of confusion that surrounds so much information on strength training for climbing. Toward this
end, I will arm you with a basic understanding of the
theory and science of strength training. I have always
felt that the theoretical person is a practical person.
Therefore, gaining knowledge of training theory will
enable you to act and train more practically and effectively. Furthermore, you will be able to evaluate more
critically and effectiveiy what you read elsewhere.

Overview of Strength
and Fitness Training for Climbing
One reason that climbing is not the best training for
climbing is because the ultimate goals of these two activities are very different. For instance, when rock climbing
it's your goaf to avoid muscular failure at all costs—ideally, you want to reach the top of a boulder problem or
climb before the muscles of your arms and forearms
pump out. Conversely, when training for climbing you

53

want to exercise at the highest possible intensity and
produce muscular failure in a few minutes, if not a few
seconds. In other words, when climbing, you avoid failure; when training, you pursue failure.
Another example that underscores the difference
between climbing and training for climbing is the way
in which you grip the rock. In climbing, the rock dictates a random use of many different grip positions; at
times you may even deliberately vary the way you
grip the rock. As a result it's unlikely that any single
grip position will ever get worked maximally, and
therefore the individual grip positions (crimp, open
hand, pinch, and so forth) are slow to increase
strength. This should help you understand why a full
season of climbing will indeed improve your anaerobic endurance (endurance of strength), but do little to
increase your absolute maximum grip strength.
Therefore, varying grip positions is a great strategy for
maximizing endurance when climbing for performance, but it stinks for training maximum grip strength.
Effective finger-strength training demands you target
a specific grip position and work it until failure.
On the following pages, we'll delve into the science of strength training and reveal some of the other
secrets to highly effective training for climbing.

• Concentric contraction: Muscle action in which
the tension developed produces a shortening of the
musculature, as in the biceps during the upward
phase of a pull-up.
• Eccentric contraction: Muscle action in which
the muscle resists as it's forced to lengthen, as in
the biceps during the lowering phase of a pull-up.
• Isometric contraction: Muscle action resulting in
no shortening of the muscle (no movement), as in
musculature of the forearm while gripping a handhold.
• Agonist: The muscle or muscle groups causing an
action to occur. For instance, the biceps and the latissimus muscles of the back are some of the prime
movers in the pulling motions common to climbing.
• Antagonist: The muscle or muscles providing an
opposing force to the primary muscles in action.
For example, the muscles on the back of your forearm oppose the forearm flexor muscles when
squeezing a rubber doughnut.
•

Primer on Exercise Physiology
While there is no need to get into an advanced-level
discussion of exercise physiology, I feel it's beneficial
to have a basic understanding of some functions
involved in strength training. For instance, understanding how different types of muscle fiber become
"recruited" into action and how the muscles adapt to
training stress are key distinctions in how you might
best go about training your upper body. Furthermore,
knowledge of the body's energy systems and why
muscles fail can give clues as to how you might modify your climbing to maximize power or endurance.
Let's get started.

Muscle Movements and Roles
In producing movement, there are three different
muscular actions as well as three basic roles they can
play during a sports performance.

54

Stabilizer: The muscle or muscle groups that help
stabilize the skeletal structures so that tension of
the agonist (prime movers) can effectively produce
movement. In climbing, there are many small and
large stabilizers that come into play, from the arms
to the core muscles of the torso and down through
the legs.

Muscle Fiber Types
There are two distinct types of muscle fiber: slow
twitch and fast twitch. Fast-twitch fibers are further
subdivided into two main subcategories: Type Ha and
Type lib. A third subcategory of Type lie fibers has
been identified, though they only exist in very small
numbers.
•

Slow Twitch (ST): These Type I fibers comprise
approximately 50 percent of total skeletal muscle,
though genetic variation can range from about 20
percent to 80 percent (Bloomfield, et al., 1992).
They are recruited primarily during low-intensity,
aerobic endurance activities.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

• Fast Twitch (FT): These fibers are recruited during high-intensity movements or activities. Type Ha
(FTaj fibers are energized through both aerobic and
anaerobic processes and are, therefore, fatigue
resistant. These fibers excel at longer-duration
high-intensity activity, and they would be most
active when climbing long, hard routes. Type lib
(FTb) fibers have the fastest contraction time and
generate energy almost entirely through the anaerobic system. These fibers are recruited during brief,
maximum movements such as a difficult boulder
problem or a powerful crux move.
Your relative percentage of FT and ST muscle
fibers is genetically determined and varies little in
response to training. Naturally strong climbers are
likely gifted with a higher-than-normal percentage of
FT fibers (among other things), whereas gifted mountaineers, who can keep on going like the Energizer
Rabbit, are likely have a higher percentage of ST
fibers. Fortunately, ST fibers can be taught to act like
FT fibers through use of certain training protocols
(Chu 1996), which I will introduce later.
RECRUITMENT

Muscle fibers of the same type are organized into
motor units. ST motor units innervate between 10 and
180 fibers, while FT motor units innervate up to 800
fibers (Bloomfield, et al., 1994). When a muscular
contraction is triggered, motor units are recruited on
an as-needed basis beginning with the smaller ST
motor units. As muscular tension increases, a greater
number of ST motor units will join in, and if the tension grows further, the larger FT motor units will
begin to fire. Maximum muscular force is eventually
achieved if all motor units (ST and FT) are recruited
into action (see Figure 5.1).
Knowing this physiological process should help
you understand why it's important to train with high
intensity and with maximum weight (resistance) if
you want to recruit, and make stronger, the FT fibers.
Compare this to "just climbing a lot of routes" for
training: That way you would recruit primarily ST
fibers on the many moderate moves and only occa-

Theory & Methods of Strength

Training

Figure 5.1 Muscular Force Production

100

FTb
FTa
ST

Fast twitch l i b
Fast twitch Ha
Slow twitch

•o
0)
(A
3

50

0
light —> moderate —• maximum
intensity
Maximum muscular force eventually can be
achieved if all motor units (ST and FT) are recruited
into action.

sionally recruit the FT a fibers when you encounter
hard moves. The high-threshold FT b fibers would seldom be called into action—only when a move or
sequence requires explosive power or application of
maximum strength.

Muscular Adaptations to Strength Training
Two primary adaptations occur in response to strength
training—adaptation of the neural system and adaptation of the muscular system.
ADAPTATION OF THE NEURAL SYSTEM

The nervous system adapts to strength training in
three ways: motor learning, motor unit synchronization, and disinhibition.
• Motor Learning: The first neural adaptation,
motor learning, should sound familiar after reading
Chapter 4. During the initial work at a new exercise
(say, uneven-grip pull-ups or even campus training),
your primary limitation will be a lack of coordination and feel for the exercise. The first few weeks

55

should yield rapid improvement as a result of motor
learning and improved coordination among the
prime mover, stabilizer, and antagonist muscles.
Beyond this point, further strength gains will
depend on other adaptations taking place.
Motor Unit Synchronization: Motor unit synchronization is the second neural adaptation that
increases strength. Suppose you have acquired the
coordination and motor skills needed for performing
a given exercise—or perhaps you're adding a new
exercise that requires no learning (such as hanging
on a fingerboard). Initial training triggers motor
units to fire in a rather random, asynchronous manner. However, continued training enhances motor
unit synchronization and, eventually, most of the
motor units will fire in unison, resulting in more
strength and power.
Disinhibition: The final neurai adaptation, disinhibition, is most important (and exciting) for intermediate to advanced climbers in search of gains in
maximum strength and power. The neuromuscular
system has a built-in feedback mechanism that acts
as a safeguard during times of increasing force production. The Golgi tendon organ, located in the
musculotendinous junction, is sensitive to the level
of tension in the muscle, and in situations of high
force it sends inhibitory signals that prevent further
motor units from firing. In most individuals this
protective response limits force production to some
amount far below your absolute maximum-forceproducing potential. It's like putting a restrictor
plate on the engine of a race car to limit its top
speed to 150 miles per hour, even though it's capable of 225. Fortunately, regular high-intensity training reduces the sensitivity of the Golgi tendon organ
(disinhibition) and thus opens up a new level of
maximum strength.
The difference between your maximum voluntary force and the absolute maximum capacity is
called the strength deficit. Research has shown that
significant gains in strength are possible by training
to reduce these neural inhibitions. One study
(Tidow 1990) showed that untrained individuals

56

possessed strength deficits of up to 45 percent; that
is, neural inhibition was reducing their maximum
strength to almost half of their absolute capacity.
The study also revealed that targeted training by
elite athletes reduced strength deficits to only 5 percent. Therefore, large gains in strength are possible
without ever growing a larger, heavier muscle 1
As a final note, the best type of training to produce disinhibition depends of the magnitude of your
strength deficit. Intermediate climbers, who likely
have larger strength deficits, would benefit most by
training with heavy loads (heavy pulldowns, hypergravity training on a fingerboard or HIT system, and
so forth). Elite climbers with smaller strength deficits
might realize further improvements only through a
combination of heavy loads (hypergravity training)
and high speed (plyometric training).
ADAPTATION OF
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM
Long-term gains in muscular strength result from
increases in the size of the individual muscle fibers
(see Figure 5.2). This process of growing larger muscles is known as hypertrophy. Since there is a strong
relationship between the size and the strength of muscles, your ability to grow stronger, long term, will
somewhat depend on hypertrophy.
Certainly large muscles in the wrong place (such
as legs, chest, and shoulders) are a liability to climbers.
Even overdevelopment of the all-important pull muscles can be a bad thing if it's the result of exercising in
a nonspecific way (such as free-weight or circuit training). For example, baseball-sized biceps that result
from doing heavy biceps curls will not only underperform on the rock but also get in the way and prevent you from locking off effectively while you are
climbing.
Still, any muscular hypertrophy occurring in the
forearms, arms, and back resulting from sport-specific
training should be viewed as a good thing. In fact, an
experienced climber who has been training for a long
time and doesn't realize a little hypertrophy probably
isn't training effectively. Since most hypertrophy
occurs in response to high-intensity, heavy-load train-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 5.2 Muscular Adaptations

absolute strength

y>"

(A
in

^

£
P

ATP-CP

^

neural adaptations

a

#

y'

hypertrophy

time (long-term training)
Initial gains in strength result mostly from neural
adaptations, whereas long-term gains will somewhat
depend on hypertrophy.

ing, you would want to train with higher resistances
(weighted pull-ups or hypergravity) to trigger this
adaptation.
It's interesting to note that a well-developed neuromuscular system is not absolutely necessary for
being a strong climber. As mentioned in Chapter 1, a
small number of individuals possess tendon insertion
points at a larger distance from the joint (axis of rotation) than the rest of us with average genetics. These
gifted people will exhibit what seems to be amazing
strength given their modest body builds. Other genetic factors, such as having a slight build or an unusually high percentage of fast-twitch fibers, may further
enhance their physical prowess. With this in mind,
you can see why these rare climbers will be incredibly
strong regardless of the type of training, if any, in
which they engage. Hence, it would be a mistake to
copy their training methods, and you should question
the advice of anyone who instructs you to train like
"such-and-such a 5.14 climber does."
Energy Systems
In climbing, energy production in the crucial pull
muscles most often comes from the ATP-CP system

Theory & Methods of Strength

and the lactic acid system. The lactic acid system can
function both in the presence (aerobic) or absence
(anaerobic) of oxygen.

Training

The ATP-CP system provides rapid energy for brief,
intense movements such as a vigorous boulder problem or a few maximal crux moves. In training, the
ATP-CP system is the primary fuel source for brief,
intense exercise lasting less than fifteen seconds—for
example, campus training or doing a one-arm pull-up.
ATP and CP are high-energy phosphate compounds
resident in all muscle cells in small amounts; intense
exercise, however, will exhaust the supply in a matter
of seconds.
LACTIC ACID

Consistent, high-intensity exercise lasting up to three
minutes calls the lactic acid energy system into play.
This is the primary energy system that fuels your
climbing through the long crux section of some
heinous route. Carbohydrates, in the form of glycogen, fuel the lactic acid system, which can operate in
either the presence or absence of oxygen.
• Anaerobic: High-intensity exercise forces the muscles to create energy in the absence of oxygen
(anaerobic) and at the expense of lactic acid production. The resulting accumulation of lactic acid leads
to fatigue, muscular pain, and, quite soon, muscular
failure. This limitation of anaerobic energy production helps explain why sustained climbing on maximally difficult moves is limited to about three
minutes or less (if there are no rests). Consequently,
climbing as quickly as possible from rest to rest is the
best strategy on hard, sustained routes.
The anaerobic threshold is defined as the workload or oxygen consumption level at which lactate
production by the working muscle exceeds the
body's ability to remove lactate. Therefore, once
you cross this threshold level, the net amount of
lactic acid increases, and muscular failure soon follows (see Figure 5.3). Depending on your level of
conditioning, the anaerobic threshold may be

57

Figure 5.3 Anaerobic Threshold Level
i

— Aerobic

—

Muscular Energy Production

Anaerobic
and Aerobic

la

1
/

lfi

f—\

o
.a

3

•a
o

^ u
•^
F
1?
^
•o
?o^

1

a£

o

CD

•B
u

—
4 _

>

2 —

e -a

H

to

o
u
to

anaerobic energy (lactic acid system]
aerobic energy

II

"°
o
CD

H

E3 stored energy CATP-CP]
•
•

5 =I
•2

O

1*

n

£

jg

It)

100%-f-

O

co
Q3

l

1

1

I

i

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

1

1

80

90

1

O.

J • ss ill
2' 3'

6'

till
10'

time (sec-min)

relative intensity of work ( % m a x i m u m ]

Once the anaerobic threshold level is crossed,
the net amount of lactic acid increases, and
muscular failure soon follows.

4'

20' 30' 40'

Brief, maximal muscular action is fueled by ATP-CP.
After about fifteen seconds, anaerobic energy production becomes the primary energy source. Exercise
lasting longer than three minutes depends mostly on
aerobic energy production, though muscular output
is only a fraction of maximal.

crossed at an exercise intensity of anywhere
between 50 percent and 80 percent of maximum.
Becoming winded and burning muscles are two
signs you have crossed the anaerobic threshold.
The above knowledge underscores the importance of using an interval approach to high-intensity climbing. In sending a hard route, you want to
avoid crossing the anaerobic threshold for as long
as possible and, once you do cross it, climb as
quickly as possible to a rest or easier terrain. Only
then will you get back down below the anaerobic
threshold and allow your body to begin lowering
blood lactate concentration. Depending on the
amount of lactic acid in your system, it could take
twenty minutes or more to return to a baseline
level of blood lactate (Watts 1996).

Training Principles

Aerobic: Muscular action lasting longer than three
minutes demands use of oxygen to produce energy. With ATP-CP reserves depleted and high muscle and blood lactate levels (from anaerobic energy
production), exercise can continue only if the
intensity of movement is reduced (see Figure 5.4).

Possessing a basic understanding of relevant training
principles empowers you to make the most of your
time investment in training. Without getting too
deeply into sports science, let's examine the important
principles of specificity, individualization, progressive
overload, variation, rest, and detraining.

58

Anaerobic energy production is limited to an
amount proportionate to the liver's ability to
remove lactic acid (and convert back to glucose)
from the blood. Therefore, aerobic energy production takes over and powers most of the muscle
action by means of a breakdown of carbohydrates,
fats, and (if exercise continues long enough) protein in the presence of oxygen. Since aerobic energy production does not produce lactic acid, lowintensity movements may continue for up to an
hour or two without cessation (as in hiking or
climbing over easy terrain).

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Specificity
The principle of specificity of training may be the most
important of all. It simply states that the more specific a training activity is to a given sport—velocity of
movement, pattern of movement, body posture, range
of motion, and type of contraction—the more it will
contribute to increasing performance in that sport.
Therefore, for an exercise to be effective at producing
usable strength gains for climbing (such as grip
strength, lock-off strength, or lunging power), it must
be markedly similar to climbing in many ways. The
more specific the training activity or exercise, the
greater the benefit to your climbing performance.
Let's look at a few examples of how this rule applies to
training for climbing.
Circuit training or pumping iron does not train
the muscles in the slightest way similar to their use in
rock climbing. Consequently, health-club-style weight
training is basically a waste of time for all climbers,
except those possessing unusually poor levels of general fitness. Some intermediate climbers have disputed me on this, since they have noticed improvement
on the rock while participating in weight-training regimens. Since gains in climbing skill and strategy produce most of the increase in overall ability during the
first few years in the sport, however, these folks would
have improved regardless of the type of training they
participated in. They probably would have improved
as much with a training regimen outside of climbing
itself consisting of ice skating and poker playing.
Squeezing a rubber hand doughnut (or other
similar spring-loaded device) is likewise unproductive
for improving your finger strength for climbing. Grip
strength shows a remarkable amount of specificity
depending on the grip position (crimp, open hand,
pinch), the positions of the wrist and elbow, the intensity of the contraction, and even the type of contraction (isometric, concentric). Furthermore, since your
grip tends to fail while you are pulling down on it
with near maximum load, it must be trained in much
this same way. Consequently, squeezing a rubber
doughnut is basically useless as climbing training,
though it may have some merit as a warm-up exercise
or in injury rehabilitation.

Theory & Methods of Strength

Training

What about the basic pull-up (palms away), a
most popular exercise among climbers? Obviously the
motion is similar to climbing, but your posture, your
degree of body tension, and the exact position of your
hands and arms do not vary randomly as they do on
rock. What's more, the ability to stop or lock off your
arm in some novel position is often more vital in
climbing than is the simple act of pulling. Therefore,
to produce the most transfer of your pull-up training
to the rocks, you want to alter the pull-up in a variety
of ways with every set. For example, you might
change the distance between your hands, stagger one
hand lower than the other (use a webbing loop), and
include some lock-offs or stops in the motion at a variety of arm angles. This approach would be much more
advantageous than just doing pull-ups in the same
fixed position.
Finally, let's consider the concept of cross-training
as some individuals try to apply it to climbing. Clearly,
the idea that performing any other sports activity
might improve climbing performance is in blatant
conflict with the principle of specificity. In fact, the
only sports in which cross-training seems to be practical are the aerobic endurance sports, as popularized by
the triathlon phenomenon.

Individualization
No climber on this planet is quite like you; therefore
the most effective training program for you will be different than that of any other climber. This might
sound obvious, but many climbers copy the training
program of their peers or, worse yet, imitate what
some elite climber does. I consider this a rather stupid
approach to training.
The most intelligent training program (for you)
would take into account your strengths, weaknesses,
and previous injuries, as well as your goals and the
amount of time you have available to work out.
Furthermore, since you may recover from training at
a faster or slower rate than others, your optimal
amount of rest may dictate a different workout frequency. Consequently, it would be wise to develop
and execute what seems to be the best program for
you and ignore how others train.

59

Progressive

Overload

This granddaddy of strength-training principles states
that in order to increase muscular strength, it is necessary to expose the musculature to a level of stress
beyond that to which it is accustomed. You can
achieve this overload by increasing the intensity, volume, or speed of training, or by decreasing the rest
interval between successive sets. While it's probably a
good idea to vary the method of overload from time to
time, increasing intensity (using a higher training
load) appears to be the most important in triggering
long-term muscular adaptations.
In training for climbing, you should look for ways
to incorporate (and alternate) all the above methods
of overload, especially the practice of increasing intensity through greater training loads. This is best
achieved through a variety of hypergravity exercises
such as weighted pull-ups and fingerboard hangs, or
the HIT workout. All will be discussed in depth later.
Variation
One of the most common training errors among all
athletes is the failure to regularly change their training
program. This principle states that the body becomes
accustomed to training stimuli that are repeatedly
applied in the same way. Therefore, if you go to the
climbing gym and engage in the same basic routine
every time, your strength and climbing gains will
eventually plateau despite what feel like good workouts. Strive to vary your training by manipulating the
type of overload (per above) as well as mixing up the
type and order of climbs and exercises performed.
Periodization, another form of variation, involves
alternating the overall workout intensity and volume
from session to session. For example, with indoor
training you might alternate workouts among "high
volume" (doing many moderate routes), "high intensity" (hard, powerful bouldering), and "high, high"
(climbing as many hard routes as possible). You could
also vary your workouts every few weeks as in the
4-3-2-1 training schedule described in Chapter 7.
Bottom line: Make the principle of variation a cornerstone of your training for climbing program and you
will get uncommonly good results!

60

Rest
The muscular adaptations discussed earlier occur
between, not during, workouts. Sufficient rest and
healthy lifestyle habits (including proper nutrition and
adequate sleep) are fundamental to maximizing the
strength gains that result from training stimuli. As a
rough guideline, complete recovery (supercompensation) takes anywhere from twenty-four to seventy-two
hours depending on the intensity and volume of the
stimulus (see Figure 5.5). For example, it might only
take one day to recover from a high volume of lowintensity activity like climbing a bunch of really easy
routes or just hiking, whereas it would probably take
three or more days to recover completely from a high
volume of high-intensity exercise, such as climbing a
bunch of routes near your limit, or performing hypergravity and campus training in a single workout.
The importance of this principle cannot be overstated, since training too often (or resting too little)
will eventually lead to a decline in performance
and/or injury (see Figure 5.6). This is known as the
overtraining syndrome, and it's surprisingly common

f i g u r e 5,5 Supercompensation Cycle

workout
stimulus

normal
biological
state

\ /
fatigue compensation supercomp.

involution

Complete recovery (supercompensation) takes
anywhere from twenty-four to seventy-two hours,
depending on the intensity and volume of the training
stimulus.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 5.6 Long-Term Training Response

or climbing does not resume. While some
downtime is a good thing each year (mentally
and in the case of nagging injuries), fregains in
quent breaks in training make it very difficult
performance
to acquire long-term gains in strength.
If you are someone who travels a lot on
business, or for some other reason frequently
\ decline in
misses a week or two of training, you can
performance
temporarily delay the detraining by leveraging your knowledge of the lengthened superAdequate rest between workouts allows full supercompensation
compensation period after high-intensity
and long-term gains in performance. Conversely, workouts too
workouts. Since we know that it can take
close together result in a long-term decline in performance.
three or more days to recover from an intense
workout, performing such a workout the day
before the beginning of your break would delay the
among climbers—observe how many climbers out
beginning of detraining by a few more days. Therefore,
there are whining about their nagging injuries or
you might return from the break and be at peak
complaining that they are "not getting stronger"
strength even after ten or more days off. This long peridespite their dedication to hard training.
od of supercompensation after extremely strenuous
Another factor leading to overtraining or unusualtraining or climbing explains why the many enthusiasly long workout recovery is the mistake of placing too
tic climbers who are unknowingly overtraining discovmuch training stimulus on the neuromuscular system.
er a new level of strength after taking a week or two off.
As shown in the Supercompensation Cycle (Figure

}

5.5), the workout stimulus results in neuromuscular
fatigue and a temporary degradation in functional ability. With adequate rest, the system regenerates to a
level higher than before the workout. Interestingly,
working out beyond a certain point provides no additional stimulus for growth, though it does make further inroads (muscular breakdown) from which you
must recover. This is an important concept to keep in
mind when performing high-intensity training. Doing
ten sets of campus training probably provides no more
stimulus for growth than five sets, but by doing ten sets
you dig yourself a deeper hole from which it will take
longer to recover. The same argument could be made
against doing twenty sets of pull-ups or spending sixty
minutes training on a fingerboard. Summing up: In
high-intensity training, less is usually more.
Detraining
Upon cessation of strength training (or frequent climbing), recent gains in strength begin to erode slightly in
just ten to fourteen days. A more significant decrease in
strength will occur in the weeks that follow if training

Theory & Methods of Strength

Training

Training M e t h o d s
Detailed below are the concepts and methods central
to effective strength training for climbing. Since the
pull muscles are most often the limiting physical factor in climbing, examples of how this information
applies to climbing will focus on training these body
parts.
Strength Training versus Endurance

Training

Strength training results in neural and muscular adaptations that eventually enable muscle action at higher
loads. Meanwhile, strength-endurance (aka anaerobic
endurance) training produces different adaptations,
such as increased capillary and mitochondrial (little ATP
"factories" inside cells) density, that enable greater volumes of exercise (see Figure 5.7). Certainly climbers
would benefit from enhancement in both areas; gains in
strength training, however, are more vitally important.
As climbing icon Tony Yaniro astutely points out, "If you
cannot pull a single hard move, you have nothing to
endure." So strength training is paramount.

61

Figure 5.7 Physiological Adaptations to Training

Therefore, power is the result of strength
and speed. This would be expressed as:
power = strength x speed (where speed =
Structure, System
Adaptations from
Adaptations from
distance/time).
Strength Training
Endurance Training
or Energy Source
So while strength and power are
clearly related, they differ in the rate at
Muscle fiber size
Increase
No change or decrease
which a force is applied. A real-life examCapillary density
No change or decrease Increase
ple that helps clarify this distinction relates
to your ability to grip a tiny hold versus
No change
Neural disinhibition
Increase
your ability to quickly stick (draw in) a
Mitochondrial density
No change or decrease Increase
small handhold at the end of a lunge.
Figure 5.8 shows hypothetical force-time
Increase
Muscle glycogen
Increase
curves for three climbers. Climber A posNo change
ATP-CP
Increase
sesses the strongest grip strength and can
hang on the smallest holds, but he is not
very powerful. Climber B has less absolute
Adaptations from strength versus endurance training.
strength than Climber A, but she is more
powerful. Consequently, she can summon her strength
This notion is supported by the fact that strengthmore quickly (that is, she has greater contact strength),
ening a muscle also improves its endurance, because a
and she will be more successful at throwing dynos and
stronger muscle can use a smaller percentage of maxiquickly latching on to holds. Climber C is neither strong
mum strength to execute a sequence of nonmaximum
nor
powerful—he'd better stick to climbing slabs.
moves. What's more, a stronger muscle will have a
higher relative anaerobic threshold than a weaker
muscle with higher endurance capabilities. Conversely,
endurance training will not increase maximum
strength one iota.
In the final analysis, the best all-around climbers
will exhibit prowess at muscular strength and
endurance of strength as a result of long-term training
of both systems. Individuals who focus on training just
maximum strength (and power) will excel mainly on
boulder problems and short routes, while those
climbers who emphasize high-volume training will be
best at climbing much longer routes. As discussed in
Chapter 1, you must always consider your climbing
goals when deciding on the best form of training.

Obviously, it's ideal to maximize your strength
and power, much like Climber B. This can be achieved
Figure 5,8 Rate of Force Production

slope here determines
contact strength

Muscular Strength versus Muscular Power
Strength is defined as the force a muscle group can
exert in one maximum effort. Your ability to pull a single hard movement or grip a small, difficult handhold
is a function of your maximum strength. Muscular
power is more complex, because it is the product of
force and the distance through which the force acts.

62

100

200

300

400

t i m e (milliseconds)
Hypothetical grip strength of three climbers.
Climber A has the greatest absolute grip strength,
while Climber B has the best contact strength.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

by partaking in a variety of exercises that train both
strength and power.

Training for Strength
Rate of strength gains, as a result of training, decreases
as a function of your current level of strength.
Therefore, initial increases in strength will result from
even a poorly conceived and executed training regimen. Adaptations in stronger, more advanced
climbers occur more slowly—and possibly not at all
unless they are using the best training methods. This
helps explain why so many intermediate to advanced
climbers feel they are no longer getting stronger: For
them, further gains require advanced training techniques and the discipline to apply them precisely over
a long period of time.
In terms of training maximum strength—your
ability to pull a single maximum move or grip a small
edge or pocket under full body weight—it is widely
accepted by sports scientists that exercising at high
intensity and heavy loads is the most important factor.
Furthermore, the muscles must be progressively
loaded beyond the point to which they are accustomed. In the weight-lifting world, this is achieved by
performing five to ten repetitions at some high load,
which is increased over time. Unfortunately, this is a
difficult protocol to create for the purpose of developing finger strength for climbing. For instance, what do
you do to create progressive overload of the fingers
(forearm muscles) once you are strong enough to
handle your own body weight over steep terrain? The
obvious answer is to "climb longer," which is exactly
what many climbers do. This strategy, however, develops endurance of strength (anaerobic endurance), not
maximum strength.
BOULDERING AS
STRENGTH TRAINING
A better strategy is to seek out progressively more
strenuous boulder problems that seem to require
near-maximum strength. The drawback here relates
to the fact that it's very difficult to say if you fell off a
move because of muscular failure or because you performed the movement poorly (bad technique).

Theory & Methods of Strength Training

Further diluting the training effect is the random size
and shape of handholds, which dictate use of different
grip positions—we now know that varying grip position is a good endurance strategy, but it's poor for
building maximum grip strength. Consequently, while
you may notice some gains in strength and power
from bouldering, you can assume that it's not providing you with the greatest strength gains possible.
There are just too many variables involved.
Bouldering on a steep artificial wall represents a
better format for upper-body strength training, because
you can control the size and distance between holds
and rninimize the technical aspects that might spit you
off before muscular failure. Still, there are practical limits to how far you can increase hold spacing and
decrease the size of the handholds—beyond a certain
point the moves will become overly technical or the
tiny holds too painful to climb on. As described above,
it's necessary to perform five to ten maximum repetitions before reaching muscular failure (for the purpose
of developing maximum strength); in the case of climbing with both hands, you would need to perform ten to
twenty total hand movements before failure.
HYPERGRAVITY TRAINING
Once the above strategies have been exhausted for the
purpose of developing further gains in maximum grip
strength, you need to up the ante by employing hypergravity training. At advanced levels of training for
climbing, the importance of training at progressively
higher intensity and with heavier loads cannot be
overstated. This is best achieved by adding extra
weight to your body while performing certain controlled, sport-specific movements. As a result, your fingers (and other upper-body pull muscles) are exposed
to a load and intensity not previously experienced at
normal body weight. The extra weight simulates a
greater-than-normal gravitational pull (hence the
name I coined for this technique—hypergravity). After a
period of hypergravity training, you will return to the
rock and feel like you are climbing on the moon!
The dramatic gains in strength produced by
hypergravity training are the result of neural and
muscular adaptations (discussed earlier). In particular,

63

it likely triggers a higher degree of disinhibition and
hypertrophy that may never result from climbing at
the lower resistances of body weight. I also suspect
that hypergravity training may trick ST muscle fibers
into acting like FT fiber—more on this later.
As a disclaimer, it must be pointed out that
hypergravity training is an advanced strength-training
method to be used only by well-conditioned and
advanced climbers with no recent history of injury.
Chapter 6 discusses the four best applications of
hypergravity: weighted pull-ups, weighted fingerboard hangs, weighted bouldering, and Hypergravity
Isolation Training (HIT).
FUNCTIONAL ISOMETRICS
Functional isometrics involve superimposing one or
more isometric contractions within the concentric or
eccentric phase of an exercise motion. This strategy
has been shown to provide significantly greater
strength gains (16 percent more in one study) than
those achieved by doing the same exercise without
intermittent isometric contractions (O'Shea 1989).
Greater overload during the isometric contractions is
what stimulates the muscle for enhanced strength
gains. The overload is created by removing the loadlightening effects of momentum and use of stored
potential energy (a benefit of the elastic properties of
muscle and tendon).

to effectively train the other factor in the power equation, speed.
First, you must recognize that there is an inverse
relationship between force and velocity—creating
maximum force, as in high-load strength training, can
only be done at relatively slow speeds (see Figure
5.9). Conversely, performing an exercise at high speed
demands use of relatively light weights (low force production). Therefore, you could conclude that there are
a number of effective ways to train maximum power:
Use a high force and low speed, use a low force and
high speed, or use a moderate force and moderate
speed. Research has shown, however, that the latter
method of training—moderate force at a moderate
speed—is best for developing power (Kaneko 1983).
BOULDERING TO TRAIN POWER

No doubt there are some boulder problems that
demand the moderate force production and fasterthan-normal (for climbing), moderate-speed movements required for optimal power training. Unfortunately, the typical boulder problem might only
include one or two such moves, and as such it lacks the
repeated movement ideal for training. This is, again,
where indoor walls are preferable to outdoor boulder-

Force Versus Velocity Curve

You can best leverage this method when training
to strengthen your pull-up and lock-off strength.
Superimposing numerous lock-offs (isometric contractions) within a set of pull-ups will produce surprising
gains in absolute strength. And unlike hypergravity
training, even novice climbers can safely incorporate
this strategy into their training regimen. The exercise
known as Frenchies (described in Chapter 6) represents an optimal use of functional isometrics.
Power

Training

As I discussed earlier, power is the product 1 of strength
and speed as expressed by the equation: power =
strength X speed (where speed = distance/time). Since
you have just learned several leading-edge methods
for increasing strength, we now need to consider ways

64

velocity
Creating maximum force, as in high-load strength
training, can be done only at relatively slow speeds.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

ing, since you can design a problem up a steep wall that
requires several moderate-force, moderate-speed
movements. Power gains realized from this strategy will
come primarily to the larger pull muscles of the upper
arm and back.
PULL-UP POWER TRAINING
Another good power-training strategy would be to perform pull-ups at a faster-than-normal-rate—but not at
ballistic speed. After a thorough warm-up, you would
perform these "power pull-ups" in sets of six to ten repetitions, with a change in arm position or spacing for
each set. This strategy only works, however, if yau are *
already a moderately strong climber—able to do at least
fifteen pull-ups at normal speed. In this case you should
try to simulate hypogravity (reduced gravitational
force) so that you are executing the correct number of
pull-ups at a resistance less than body weight. You can
achieve this by using a Gravitron (or some other pulldown machine) or by standing in several loops of thick
elastic cord, surgical tubing, or a cut bicycle inner tube.
PLYOMETRIC FINGER TRAINING
Plyometric training involves a dynamic coupling of
explosive eccentric and concentric muscular contractions, such as in doing consecutive vertical (leg) jumps
without hesitation. First used by Russian athletes in
the 1960s, the method was originally applied to climb-,
ing by the late Wolfgang Gullich with the advent of
campus training. Before we get into this and other
types of plyometric training for climbing, let's first
look at the unique stimulus (and results) created by
these powerful movements.
First, consider that since plyometrics are performed at relatively high velocity, the resistance used
(training "load") will be significantly less than in the
maximum strength-training exercises above. For this
reason, the adaptations that result from plyometric
training are primarily neural, not muscular. This
explains why plyometric training alone produces little
in the way of hypertrophy or gains in maximum
strength. Still, the numerous neural adaptations
resulting from plyometric training will indeed produce
noticeable improvement in your ability to make pow-

Theory & Methods of Strength Training

erful lunging arm movements or stick (like Climber B
in Figure 5.8) a fast grab at a difficult handhold.
It should be noted that the dynamic, high-velocity
nature of plyometric training makes it one of the most
stressful and dangerous training exercises. Impact
forces can become dangerously large; injury may
result from improper execution or overuse of plyometric training. Fortunately, there are several plyometric exercises—with a range of potential risks (and
benefits)—that are applicable to climbing. Campus
training is by far the best known (and most dangerous), but Chapter 6 will outline other, somewhat
diluted (and safer) methods such as one-arm lunging,
one-arm traversing, feet-off climbing, and feet-on
campus training.

Anaerobic Endurance (A-E) Training
Anaerobic endurance training is of high importance if
your goal is sending difficult rope-length routes or
long, sustained boulder problems. Think of A-E as
your ability to maintain a high level of strength output over a relatively long period of time. As shown in
Figure 5.4, true maximum strength output (near 100
percent intensity) can only be sustained for a few
fleeting moments. Anaerobic endurance relates to
how long the muscle can function above the anaerobic threshold—that is, at a level not far below the
' absolute maximum. Of course, muscle action above
this threshold generates lactic acid faster than the liver
can metabolize it. Inevitably, blood lactate concentrations become so high that the working muscle fails or
functions only at a much lower aerobic intensity
(below the anaerobic threshold).
The goal of A-E training is to produce muscular
adaptations that will enable you to climb above the
anaerobic threshold for as long as possible. Through
repeated exposure, the muscles adapt by developing a
higher tolerance to elevated blood lactate, enhanced lactate removal (due to increased capillary density) and
metabolism, and other increases in cardiovascular efficiency. If you regularly climb to the point of getting a
Hindenburgian forearm pump (muscle failure), you
have already acquired some of these adaptations. You
can also pat yourself on the back if you sometimes climb

65

several hard routes in a row with only brief rests in
between—this is one of the best A-E training methods.
HIGH-REPETITION TRAINING

High-repetition training involves performing a relatively high number of muscular movements at an
intensity above the anaerobic threshold. Although the
exact level of this threshold varies according to your
conditioning, 70 percent of maximum intensity is the
average threshold value commonly quoted in scientific literature. In high-repetition training your goal is to
climb or exercise for as long as possible at an intensity level above this threshold. Gauging the proper
intensity for A-E training is a sense you will develop
with practice. As a rule you are training at too high an
intensity if muscular failure occurs in less than one
minute, whereas your intensity is too low if you are
still climbing and feeling good after four or five minutes. Anaerobic endurance training creates a rapid lactic acid buildup and thus represents one of the more
uncomfortable, often painful, types of training.
If you don't have access to a climbing wall, you
can train A-E in a somewhat sport-specific way using
a pull-up bar, fingerboard, or pulldown machine. In
each case, you want to reduce the resistance to a level
that allows you to exercise for one to three minutes.
For the forearm muscles, you might simply try to hang
on a pull-up bar or fingerboard for as long as possible.
After muscular failure, rest for a minute or two and
repeat. Since only a small amount of lactic acid will be
removed during the brief rest period, you will find
each set more difficult and painful. Repeated longterm training will produce adaptations that transfer
favorably to the rock. Similarly, you could perform
several sets of high-repetition pulldowns or pull-ups
at less than body weight. The goal should be thirty to
fifty repetitions at a moderate weight and speed.
INTERVAL TRAINING

Interval training is the gold standard when it comes to
A-E training, because it's so similar (specific) to how we
climb on hard routes. That is, most difficult climbs
(except one-move wonders) feature several sections
that will work you pretty hard (high-intensity move-

66

ments) as well as intermittent sections of easier terrain—and maybe even a couple of rests. In the gym you
want to simulate this exact scenario by alternately
climbing above your anaerobic threshold for one to
three minutes, then backing off and climbing easier
moves (recovery period) for one to three minutes. This,
in fact, mirrors the way serious runners (and other athletes) perform interval training—runners commonly
alternate fast and slow intervals in 100-, 200-, or 400meter increments. Interval climbing is just another one
of the ways we can successfully transfer to climbing the
training methodology used in other sports (though
more often than not this isn't possible). You will learn
several applications of interval training in Chapter 6.

Training Pure Endurance
Pure endurance and maximum strength are at opposite ends of the muscular strength spectrum.
Therefore, you cannot optimally train for both maximum strength and maximum endurance—nor can
you expect to become excellent at both. Just as no one
has ever won an Olympic gold medal in both the 100meter dash and the marathon, it's highly unlikely
we'll ever see a climber who boulders V14 and summits Mount Everest without oxygen. The mental and
physiological requirements are just too different.
Chapter 1 introduced the SAID Principle, which
explains that training time should be invested in a
way most specific to your primary focus in climbing. If
your focus is bouldering, sport climbing, or multipitch
free climbing, then training maximum strength and
anaerobic endurance must be at the center of your fitness-training program, whereas serious alpine
climbers would want to spend much of their time
training for pure endurance.
It's well known that the best method for developing pure endurance is long, slow distance aerobic
training. Applying this method to climbing involves
performing a high volume of low- to moderate-intensity exercise lasting at least thirty minutes, though one
to two hours is ideal. While climbing many pitches on
easy to moderate terrain would produce some stimulus for increasing endurance, this is generally neither
practical nor most effective. Developing pure endur-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

ance requires numerous adaptations within the cardiovascular system such as increased heart stroke volume, lung capacity, and intramuscular capillary density. In the aggregate these adaptations will improve
pure endurance as well as the ability to function at
altitude.
In the final analysis, the average rock climber will
not benefit from large amounts of endurance training.
With the exception of the overweight climber (wanting
to lower percentage of body fat), any aerobic activity
beyond a few twenty-minute sessions per week would
not be advantageous. As stated above, endurance and
strength training are opposites, so excessive aerobic
training should be viewed as an enemy of anyone pursuing maximum strength.

ible 10.7-centimeter increase in jumping ability.
To understand why a coupling of these two exercises produces such a synergistic gain in strength and
power, we must examine the unique ways in which the
neuromuscular system is stressed. This two-step process
begins with high-intensity strength training that excites
the muscle to near-maximum motor unit recruitment.
The second step takes the already excited muscle and
challenges it to function at higher speed. In this way
complex training stimulates the muscle fibers in conjunction with the nervous system in such a way that
slow-twitch fibers are taught to behave like fast-twitch
fibers (Chu 1996). Consequently, complex training
could be viewed as the "magic bullet" exercise for the
average climber born with an average percentage of
fast-twitch fibers (approximately 50 percent).

Complex Training

Incorporating the complex training method into
your program could be done in several ways.
Remember, the key is a back-to-back coupling of a
maximum strength exercise and a power exercise.
Intermediate climbers might couple light hypergravity
training with dynamic one-arm traversing. Or they
could perform a few maximum boulder problems that
are really fingery and, upon getting pumped, immediately crank out a few sets of one-arm lunges.

I'll conclude this section on training methodology, by
introducing you to the exciting concept of complex
training. Complex training represents the leading edge
of strength and power training, and it's now in use by
elite athletes in numerous sports. Applied to climbing,
the complex training protocol described below may
represent the most powerful training concept known
to climbers at this time.
Complex training involves coupling a highintensity, low-speed exercise with a moderate-intensity, moderate-speed exercise. Of this pair, the first
exercise caters to developing maximum strength,
while the second exercise zeros in on developing
power. Research has shown that performing these two
very different exercises back to back (and in the order
of strength first, power second) produces gains in
strength and power beyond that achieved by performing either exercise alone. While no studies have been
done with climbers, there is compelling research in
the use of complex training to increase vertical jump
that shows phenomenal gains in absolute ability
(Adam, et al., 1992). In this study six weeks of
strength training produced a 3.3-centimeter increase
in the vertical jump, compared to a 3.8-centimeter
increase after six weeks of plyometric (power) training. The group performing complex training (strength
and plyometric) for six weeks experienced an incred-

Theory & Methods of Strength

Training

A more advanced protocol would begin with
some heavy Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT),
then immediately turn to a few maximum sets on the
campus board. This latter strategy of combining HIT
and plyometrics should be a staple technique of elite
climbers: It may represent the single best training protocol for fulfilling genetic potential in finger strength
and upper-body power.
Obviously, complex training is an advanced technique that produces both high passive and active stresses—it should be used only by well-conditioned climbers
with no recent history of injury. Furthermore, its use
should be limited to once every four days, and it should
be cycled on and off about every two weeks. Finally,
complete recovery from a complex workout could take
as long as three to five days. Any other strenuous training or climbing during the supercompensation period
would tend to negate its benefits.

67

Lisa Rands on
White Arete (V7J,
IliOX. Uli-h. 4 n

c

H

X

Strength & ^ *
Conditioning Exercises
What lies behind us and what lies ing the body to adapt to the sport-specific stresses
placed on the fingers, arms, and the joints of the upper
before us are tiny matters compared body. Finally, the C exercises are for advanced climbers
who no longer benefit from performing A and B exerto what lies within us.
cises (though these exercises might be excellent as part
I he previous chapter provided an overview of the
principles and methods of strength and fitness
training for climbing. With this understanding, we can
now take a more purposeful look at the dozens of conditioning exercises that are of value to climbers. Of
course, the exercises holding the most value for you
are those that target the specific physical weaknesses
you identified in Chapter 2's self-assessment test or
from your on-the-rock experience.
Another key factor in exercise selection is your
current level of fitness and climbing ability. Obviously,
novice and moderately out-of-shape climbers would
not want to perform the same strength-training exercises as a well-honed climber with a few years of
experience on the rock. Similarly, a wickedly strong,
elite climber would gain little by performing the same
training exercises used by the aforementioned intermediate climber. Therefore, I've graded the exercises
in this chapter on an A through C scale similar to that
used to classify gymnastics moves.
A exercises are the most basic, and they can be
used by all climbers regardless of ability. B exercises are
more difficult, requiring both a base level of fitness and
a year or more of exposure to the unique stresses of
climbing. This period of exposure is crucial for allow-

of a warm-up or cool-down) and who have acquired
high levels of mental and technical mastery. For these
elite climbers, further gains on the rock demand that
they push their absolute level of strength, power, and
anaerobic endurance up another notch. This can be
achieved only by exposing the body to the "shock" of
the high-force, high-stress C exercises.
The format of this chapter is not one that makes
for a smooth, entertaining read from beginning to
end. Instead, you may want to initially skim through
the pages, paying special attention to the type of training and grade of exercise that best matches your ability level (A for beginners, B for accomplished, C for
advanced). Then in Chapter 7 you will be guided in
developing an effective training program given your
current weaknesses, ability level, and available time.

Matching Exercises to Training Goals
When it comes to physical conditioning for climbing,
most people are interested in strengthening the allimportant pull muscles of the upper body. While
many of the exercises in this chapter are central to this
theme, there are several other important goals of conditioning for climbing. Chapter 5 introduced you to
five such goals, and this chapter will detail at least a
few exercises and strategies useful for improving in
each of these areas (see Figure 6.1).

69

Optimizing Body Composition
As stated earlier, climbers with less-than-ideal body
composition can increase their strength-to-weight
ratio most quickly by decreasing weight, not by
increasing strength. Knowing your approximate percentage of body fat is the best way to determine if you
need to work on this area or if you would be better off
placing your training focus elsewhere.
Measuring

Your Percentage of Body Fat

Most health clubs and some universities have the
equipment necessary to measure your percentage of
body fat, so getting your body fat measured may be just
a phone call and a few miles away. A study of athletes
in a variety of sports reported that males possessed body
fat ranging from 4 percent in wrestlers to 8-12 percent
in runners and 16 percent in football players, with an
elite average of below 12 percent (Wilmore 1983). The
same study showed that female athletes possessed body
fat between 8 and 25 percent, with an elite average of
15 percent. Therefore, a percentage of body fat near (or
slightly below) these elite average levels (12 percent
men, 15 percent women) would seem to be a good goal
for most cfimbers.
f i g u r e 8.1 Training Goals

Strategies for Optimizing Body

Goals of Strength and Fitness
Training for Climbing

optimize
body composition

increase
flexibility

antagonistmuscle training
[to prevent injury)

improve aerobic
capacity and
recovery ability

increase sport-specific
strength, power, and
anaerobic endurance

An ideal training program will optimize conditioning
in these five areas.

70

If you are unable to get a professional body fat
measurement, you can always employ the highly economical, at-home method—that is, pinch a fold of
skin just above your hip. If you can pinch an inch or
more (thickness of the fold), you definitely need to
drop some body fat. A fold between 'A and 1 inch thick
indicates you may be slightly overweight for a climber.
If you pinch less than lA inch of fat, then your body fat
is likely at or below the target averages stated above.
In addition to optimizing your percentage of body
fat, you should consider the size and location of the
muscles you carry. For instance, it is indisputable that
possessing hulking leg muscles is as bad or worse for a
climber than carrying a spare tire around the waist
(especially since muscle weighs more than fat per unit
volume). Since the legs muscles are never the weakest link while climbing, you should say good-bye to
any training practices that might increase the size of
your legs. The same goes for any weight-lifting exercise or practice that produces a bulking-up effect in
any other part of the body. This subject has been discussed earlier in the book, but it's worth pointing out
again that strength training must be extremely specific in order to transfer to climbing. Squats, heavy
bench presses, and other traditional muscle-building
exercises are of little benefit for many high-level athletes since they lack absolute specificity (Bell 1989).
And for climbers, these exercises may be counterproductive since they will likely result in weight gain.
Composition

Certainly there are genetic limitations to how much
you can change your body composition through training and diet. Some people are naturally going to carry
a little more body fat; others naturally have a larger
frame and bulkier muscles. Still, many novice climbers
can improve their body composition significantly in a
way that will benefit their climbing. The two key
strategies are improved dietary surveillance and
increased aerobic training.
Performance nutrition will be discussed in depth
in Chapter 8, but for now let me state the obvious—
reducing body fat is possible only if you create a net
calorie deficit over the course of several days and

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

weeks. Simply put, burning more calories than you
consume causes the body to tap into and burn fat
reserves. Crash dieting is unhealthy and dangerous,
especially for a serious athlete. Instead strive for, at
most, a 500-calorie deficit per day. Over the course of
a week, this would add up to a 3,500-calorie deficit
and equal the loss of one pound of body fat. Surely the
bathroom scales will indicate that you've lost more
weight, but this additional weight loss is all in the
form of water and glycogen. This nonfat weight loss
will return next time you eat a surplus of calories that
can replenish the muscle glycogen stores.
Your daily calorie deficit is best created by a combination of reduced calorie intake and increased calorie expenditure. For burning fat, nothing beats aerobic
activities such as running, biking, and swimming.
Given a healthy back and knees, select running as your
choice activity since it will not result in muscle hypertrophy (larger muscles) in the legs. Relaxed swimming
and biking on relatively flat terrain are the next best
alternatives. Unfortunately, mountain biking over
rugged terrain is a leg-muscle builder. No matter what
you choose, make it your goal to perform a minimum
of thirty minutes of sustained moderate-intensity aerobic activity at least four days per week.
If your schedule is too busy to accommodate this
two-plus hours of aerobics per week, recent research
indicates you can get a similar (and possibly better) fatburning effect from shorter, high-intensity interval
training (King 2001). For instance, after a three-minute
slow warm-up jog, alternate a minute of sprinting with
a minute of jogging for an additional twelve minutes.
This vigorous fifteen minutes of interval training may
burn less fat during the actual training than the slow
thirty-minute run, but its metabolism-elevating effect
will have you burning more calories for the rest of the
day. Regardless of your chosen mode of aerobic training, you can maximize the fat-burning effect by doing
it first thing in the morning and before eating breakfast.
Upon reaching your desired percentage of body
fat, cut back somewhat on the aerobic training and
refocus your efforts elsewhere. Slowly reintroduce
more calories incrementally and watch your waistline
and body weight. The goal is to find a level of calorie

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

consumption equal to your daily energy use and thus
maintain a steady body weight.
Summing up: The subject of body composition is
most important for sports that require a high strengthto-weight ratio—but it's not everything. Some climbers obsess over minimizing percentage of body fat to
the point of starving themselves. A few of these
anorexic-looking climbers may climb at an exceedingly high level (due to their finely tuned mental and
technical skills), but their malnutrition is certainly
holding them back from climbing even harder. We'll
talk more about the subject of nutrition and performance in Chapter 8, but it's important to note here that
extreme dieting and excessive aerobic activity are not
good training strategies for rock climbers.

Flexibility Training
There is little need for extraordinary flexibility in climbing—in fact, some of the best climbers I know are about
as flexible as a 4-by-4! While there are, no doubt, a few
routes out there that require some extreme stemming
or some Cirque du Soleil body contortion, the vast
majority of climbs do not. Therefore, the primary goal
of stretching is to help prepare the body for training and
climbing, and to aid in the recovery process (to be discussed more in Chapter 9). The secondary goal of
stretching is to enhance your lower body's range of
motion. Still, simply climbing a lot is an excellent active
stretch for the lower body and will, over time, produce
noticeable gains in functional flexibility (high-stepping
and stemming). As for the upper body, some gentle
stretching exercises are excellent as warm-up and cooldown activities, but excessive stretching and loose
joints may actually open you up to injury.
Detailed below are fourteen stretches that are
ideal for fulfilling the above-stated goals. Certainly,
there's no need to spend an hour stretching each day;
in fact, that could be viewed as a poor use of your
training time. Instead, commit to about ten minutes of
gentle stretching as part of your warm-up for climbing
and strength training. Some additional stretching on
rest days may be beneficial, especially if you indeed
feel a need to improve your lower-body flexibility.
It's important to point out that stretching as a

71

Front of shoulders, chest, and biceps.

warm-up for training and, before climbing
should always be gentle and nonpainful.
While stretching does increase blood flow to
the muscles and help them warm up, forceful
stretching of a cold muscle could be disastrous.
Consequently, it's best to perform some light
aerobic or other exercise activity for a few
minutes before stretching. For instance, a few
minutes of jogging or even some jumping
jacks will increase your heart rate and noticeably warm the muscles. When climbing outdoors, the hike to the cliff base often provides
the perfect lead-in to your preclimb stretching.
Upper-Body

Finger and Forearm Flexors

Stretches

FRONT OF SHOULDERS, CHEST, AND
BICEPS

Sit on the floor with your arms just behind
your hips, elbows straight, palms flat, and fingers pointing back. Slowly walk your hands
away from your hips until you feel tension in
your chest, shoulders, and biceps. Hold for ten
to twenty seconds and repeat.
FINGER AND
FOREARM FLEXORS

1. Fingers pointing up.

2. Fingers pointing down.

Finger and Forearm Extensors

Before doing this stretch, perform twenty "finger flexors" (quickly open and close your hand
as if you were flicking water off your fingers).
Now straighten one arm and place the fingers
(arm to be stretched) into the palm of the
opposite hand. Pull back on the fingers/hand
of the straight arm until you feel the stretch
begin. Perform this stretch in two positions—
fingers up and fingers down. Hold each stretch
for ten to fifteen seconds.
FINGER AND
FOREARM EXTENSORS

1. Fist pulled inward.

72

2. Forearm rotated to
work the stretch.

Straighten one arm and make a fist (arm to be
stretched). Place the fist in the palm of the
other hand and gently pull the fist inward so
as to stretch the back of the forearm. Hold the

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

stretch for fifteen to twenty seconds, during
which time you rotate your forearm so as to
work the stretch with your fisted hand turned
upward, inward, and downward. Repeat this
stretch two to three times with each arm. It's a
vital stretch for preventing elbow tendonitis.
SHOULDERS AND UPPER BACK

Pull your elbow across your chest toward the
opposite shoulder. While still pulling, slowly
move the elbow up and down to work the
complete stretch. Hold for ten to fifteen seconds and repeat.

Shoulders and upper back.

TRICEPS, SHOULDERS,
AND UPPER BACK

Triceps, shoulders,
and upper back.

With your arms overhead and bent at the
elbows, grab one elbow and pull it behind
your head until you feel a stretch in your triceps and shoulder. Finish by slowly leaning
sideways in the direction of the stretch to
extend it below the shoulder and into the back
muscles. As with previous stretches, remember to work both sides.
ARMS AND UPPER TORSO

This is a great "finish" stretch because it revisits many of the muscles isolated previously.
Begin with your arms overhead, crossed at the
wrists, and with palms together, and stretch
upward as if reaching for the sky. Repeat several times, moving your hands slightly forward
or backward to vary the stretch.
Lower-Body Stretches
The legs, hips, and lower back are areas where
many climbers benefit from improved flexibility. While your ultimate degree of flexibility is
largely a function of genetics, dedicated daily
stretching will produce some gains in functional flexibility. You will need to decide if performing twenty minutes of lower-body
stretches is a good use of your training for
climbing time (is lack of flexibility holding you

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

Aims and upper torso.

73

back on the rock?). If so, spend quality time each day
working through each stretch using the five-phase
procedure described below (adapted from The Book
About Stretching by Sven Solveborn).
Phase 1: Wake-up stretch. Perform a gentle stretch
with only light tension. There should be no pain
involved.
Phase 2: Building stretch. Apply more light tension
to the active muscles, but begin to "try" the muscle a
bit more than in the first stretch.
Phase 3: Work stretch. Hold steady muscular tension
for a few breathing cycles (about twenty to thirty
seconds).

Phase 4: Gain stretch. Work the stretch even more.
You should feel some discomfort, but not pain.
Again, hold each stretch for three to five breaths.
Phase 5: Another gain stretch. Focus on making an
advance, even if small, beyond prior sessions.
KNEE TO CHEST

This stretch feels good because it loosens the often
tense muscles of the lower back. Pull one knee toward
your chest while keeping your other leg straight and
flat on the floor. As a variation, you can pull your
knee slightly across your body toward the opposite
shoulder to stretch the outside of the hip.
WALL SPLIT

Knee to chest

This is an easy stretch that is very
effective at stretching the legs
and groin area. Start with your
legs elevated and together, and
your butt no more than a few
inches away from the wall.
Slowly separate your legs—heels
resting on the wall—until you
feel the stretching begin in your
groin. Hold for up to one minute,
relax, and repeat. Maintain a flat
lower back (not arched) and consider wearing socks to reduce the
friction between your heels and
the wail.
STRADDLE SPLIT

Wall split

74

This one is another good stretch
for the groin, hips, and legs. Sit
with your legs split in a V position and slowly lean forward.
Bend at the hips and keep your
spine straight—do not lean forward with your head and
shoulders! To stretch one leg at
a time, turn to face one foot and
bend forward from the hips.
Hold each stretch for twenty to
thirty seconds.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

FROGGIES (AKA BUTTERFLY)
Lie on your back with your knees bent and soles of
your feet together. Relax and let gravity pull your
knees down. Hold for one to two minutes. Keep your
spine straight and flat on the floor.
The sitting butterfly is a variation performed in a
sitting position with just a slight bit of added pressure
applied with your elbows. Keep your spine straight,
lean forward at your hips, and gently press down on
your legs (a few inches above the knee) with your
elbows. Perform this stretch with your feet together
but at varying distances from your groin. Hold for
twenty to thirty seconds.
Straddle split
DOUBLE STAG
Safer than the infamous hurdler's stretch for working
the quadriceps muscle. With one knee on the floor,
step forward so your forward knee is directly over the
foot (the knee should never pass forward of the foot).
Now reach back with the hand opposite the rear leg,
and pull that foot gently toward your buttocks.
SPINAL TWIST
Sit with one leg flat on the floor and the other bent
and crossed over the flat leg. Place the elbow opposite
the bent leg on the outside of the bent leg. Turn gently at the hips as if to look over your shoulder. Hold for
ten to twenty seconds and repeat. Note: Do not force
this stretch beyond the point of mild tension.
Froggies.

Double stag.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

Spinal twist

75

ABDOMINAL SEAL STRETCH
Perform this stretch carefully, particularly if you have
lower-back problems. Lying flat on your stomach, press
your shoulders away from the floor while keeping your
legs and pelvis in contact with the floor. Relax and
allow the curve of your spine to extend up through
your upper back and neck. Note: Contract your buttocks
to maintain a "grounded" pelvis—this will help reduce
the stress placed on your lower back. Hold the stretch
for ten to twenty seconds, relax, and repeat.

CALF STRETCH
Start on all fours and walk your hands and feet
together until the angle formed at your hips is about
ninety degrees. Relax one leg, moving it slightly forward while keeping the rear leg straight. Hold the rear
heel to the floor and move your hips forward and
backward to regulate the tension of the stretch. Hold
for twenty to thirty seconds and repeat. Alternatively,
you can perform this stretch by leaning forward
against a wall or rock face.
Overview of Sport-Specific Strength Training

Abdominal seal.

When it comes to training for climbing, increasing
sport-specific strength is what most climbers wish to
accomplish. To this end, the following pages will serve
up a veritable cornucopia of exercises that will increase
your functional strength, power and anaerobic
endurance on the rocks. Be forewarned, however, that
all the exercises are not for all people. As discussed at
the start of the chapter, each exercise is graded on an
A, B, or C scale for beginner, accomplished, and elite
climbers, respectively. Furthermore, determining
which exercises to do on what days is also a matter of
your day-to-day training and long-term travel schedule. Suggestions for developing a comprehensive training schedule are forthcoming in Chapter 7.
Finger

Calf stretch.

76

Positions

Before we get to the actual exercises, it's important to
recognize the basic finger positions we use when
climbing. According to the Principle of Specificity,
gains in strength from training will transfer favorably
to climbing only if the exercise is extremely similar in
motion, body position, and functional use. Therefore,
it would be best to incorporate these finger positions,
whenever possible, as you perform the exercises contained in this chapter.
The basic finger grip positions are full crimp, half
crimp, open hand, and pinch. Of course, there are
many variations of the above positions—for instance,
a one-, two-, or three-finger pocket can be gripped
with a half-crimp or an open-hand position.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

CRIMP GRIP AND
HALF-CRIMP GRIP
The full-crimp and half-crimp grips are favored by many
climbers, especially beginners. Although this grip feels extremely natural to use, it's the most stressful on the joints and tendons.
Orthopedic surgeon Dr. Mark Robinson says, "The crimp grip
places high passive (uncontrolled) forces on the first joint of the
finger, which in time may result in swelling and even arthritis."
He also points out that use of the crimp grip sacrifices the full
force potential available in the flexor tendons.
Consequently it would be best to limit your use of this grip
to the occasional hold that requires its use (such as small edges,
flakes, or incut holds). It's also good not to overuse this grip when
training. A limited amount of crimp training (less than one-half
of total) is necessary since grip strength is specific to the position
of the fingers. The goal would be quality training of the crimp
positions while avoiding the most tweaky, painful handholds.

Full-crimp grip (with thumb lock).

OPEN-HAND GRIP
The open-hand grip, also known as the extended grip, has distinct advantages over the crimp grip. Most important, it's the
safest grip due to reduced tendon strain and because the joints
receive some support from the rock. Furthermore, the flexor
tendon can be used to its full advantage, allowing you to train
closer to your absolute maximum grip strength.
This grip is most effective on rounded or sloping holds, and
particularly when pulling on pockets. If you're unfamiliar with the
open-hand grip, it will feel quite awkward and unlikely at first. But
rest assured that your open-hand grip strength will improve
markedly with targeted training. As Dr. Robinson points out, "The
open-hand grip is so effective that it's also the grip preferred by
arboreal apes for locomotion!"

. :^:J,.

Half-crimp grip.

PINCH GRIP
The pinch grip is vital for latching on to protruding holds such as
pebbles, rock ribs, or opposing edges. Though used less frequently than the crimp and open-hand grips, the pinch grip is
still worthy of training. Possessing viselike crimp grip strength
does not guarantee you'll be equally strong on pinch holds.
Specificity of training demands you train all grip positions,
including a variety of pinches (different widths).
Open-hand grip.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

77

Arm Positions and Movements
The three basic arm positions are down pull, undercling, and
side pull. As with finger positions, it's advantageous to incorporate the arm positions you actually use in climbing when doing
these exercises.
DOWN PULL

Pulling down or locking off on a horizontal handhold results in
what's called the down-pull arm movement or position, respectively. This is the most common position and movement in
climbing, of course, and it's typified by the arm-bent, elbow-out
position.
UNDERCLING PULL

Pinch grip.

An inverted, downward-facing handhold demands gripping the

Down pull.

Undercling pull.

78

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

hold with the palms up (crimp or open hand) and
contracting the arm muscles with the arm bent in an
elbow-down or elbow-back position. In a fashion
opposite to using a down-pull movement, the undercling pull is, in fact, usually released slowly in an
eccentric contraction as you move up the rock.
Though many of the muscles used seem the same as
in the down-pull movement, your level of strength in
the undercling position is not directly related to your
proficiency in the down-pull position. You must train
both positions to be proficient in both.

Side pull.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

SIDE PULL AND REVERSE SIDE PULL
(AKA GASTON)
The more difficult a climb is, the more likely you'll
need to use side pulls. As the name implies, these
positions and movements are used to leverage off
holds that face primarily to the side, not up or down.
Most people are naturally stronger and more comfortable using a standard side pull: Grab a hold off to
your left or right and pull inward toward your body.
Still, the more difficult reverse side pull must be used
on many side-facing edges that are located in front of
your body. For instance, imagine a left-facing vertical
edge in front of your face. The best use of this hold
would often be to grab it with your right hand
(thumbs down) and pull outward to the right. This is
the classic Gaston move.

Gaston/reverse side pull (right hand].

79

Finger and Forearm Training
Climbing is obviously very stressful on the joints and
tendons of the fingers, so efforts put into training the
fingers outside of climbing itself should be designed
to limit the additional stress. While effective, low-stress
finger training could be viewed as an oxymoron, a prudent approach to finger training would incorporate
the following strategies.
• Perform a progressive warm-up that gradually
builds from easy full-body activity to difficult,
sport-specific exercises.
• Make a conscious effort to avoid the most painful
and stressfuf holds (such as sharp, small-radius
edges and pockets that feel tweaky).
• Eliminate redundancy by using a few different
exercises each session. Don't just train for an hour
on a single apparatus (like a fingerboard or campus
board) or on one type of problem (such as an overhanging crimp ladder).
• Immediately stop training at the first sign you may
be injuring yourself.
• Avoid overtraining and overuse injuries by getting
plenty of rest between sessions. A high-intensity
workout may require seventy-two hours (or more)
of recovery time.
A comprehensive warm-up of the fingers and
arms is paramount prior to beginning any serious finger training. A cold muscle, tendon, or ligament can
be easily injured, whether training or climbing.
Conversely, well-warmed-up tissues are stronger,
more flexible, and less inhibited. Begin your warm-up
with twenty finger flexion/extensions and some gentle forearm stretching (see "Flexibility Training"). Now
perform a couple of minutes of massage on each hand
and forearm—this is excellent for increasing circulation in even the most catatonic hands, like mine.
Rest and recovery time is ultimately as important
as training time. A full day off is the minimum requirement between intense finger workouts, and as a general rule the fingers should not be seriously weighted

80

more than four days a week. Some elite climbers train
fingers on two consecutive days, though this strategy is
not recommended for recreational climbers.
As a final note, many of the following exercises
involve the use of straight-arm hangs or one-arm
lock-offs. Add these exercises gradually, decreasing
the number of sets at the first sign of pain in the
elbows or shoulders. Beginners should stand in loops
of bungee cord or on the edge of a chair (displaced forward) to reduce resistance, whiie overweight climbers
should avoid these exercises entirely. Conversely,
advanced climbers may need to progressively add
weight to their body (hypergravity training) in order
to maintain the proper resistance needed to trigger
further strength gains.

Straight-Arm Hangs (A)
Though it's a very basic exercise, novice climbers can find
it quite challenging to attempt to hang from a pull-up bar
for a minute or two. An untrained forearm muscle will
typically begin to burn from lactic acid accumulation
after the first minute, making the second minute an
exercise in stretching both the physical and mental
boundaries. While you would rarely have to hang out on
a single hold this long on a route, this exercise does seem
to benefit beginner climbers by increasing forearm
endurance and through the developed sense of just how
long the forearm will perform while in the burning
mode. Remember to cease doing these straight-arm
hangs at the first sign of any shoulder pain. Persistent
hanging in a single position can cause injury in a small
number of individuals with loose shoulders as well as in
those who are significantly overweight.
There are two possible training strategies for
straight-arm hangs performed on a pull-up bar (or the
bucket hold of a fingerboard). Many people simply
time how long they can hang until muscular failure,
then rest for five minutes and repeat for a total of five
sets. A better approach would be to employ an intervaltraining strategy in which you end each interval
before reaching muscular failure while decreasing the
rest interval. In effect, this will increase the total
amount of time you will be hanging and likely produce a better training effect. A true novice would

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Fingertip Pull-Ups [A+]
When I first began climbing in the mid-1970s, fingertip pull-ups on a doorjamb were the main form of
home training for climbers! All these years later, performing these crimpy pull-ups on lA- to 3/4-inch-deep
edge is still good for a quick training fix if you have no
access to a climbing gym or other equipment. Perform
two to three sets of pull-ups using each of the three
primary grip positions: full crimp, half crimp, and
open hand. You could also perform some straight-arm
hangs and Frenchies (as described below). For a rude
awakening, attempt a few one-arm fingertip pull-ups
a la John Gill!
Training Maximum Grip Strength
Using a Fingerboard

Straight-arm hang.
want to do brief intervals—say, hang for twenty seconds then rest for forty seconds, and repeat ten to
twenty times. As endurance improves, increase the
hanging time to approximately one minute, with a
one-minute rest. Again, strive for ten to twenty sets.
Finally, maintain tension in your shoulders by consciously contracting the muscles surrounding the
joint—this will help protect the shoulder from injury.
In the end, this exercise has many limitations as a
sport-specific exercise. Beyond the initial months of
training, it would be best to progress to some of the
more specific exercises described below, such as fingerboard training and bouldering.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

Since its advent in the mid-1980s, the fingerboard has
become the standard apparatus for performing pullups and straight-arm hangs. What's more, the fingerboard is economical (less than $80) and can mount in
just about any apartment or home. So if you don't
have the space or resources for a home climbing wall,
consider a fingerboard mandatory. In fact, even those
with home walls find the fingerboard an excellent tool
for warm-ups and the many pull-muscle exercises to
be discussed later.
The obvious strengths of fingerboard training are
its ease of access and the ability to isolate a wide variety
of grip positions. Its limitations relate to lack of specificity—other than the way you grip the board, hanging
on the board isn't very similar to the way you climb
(body position, movement, and the way your forearms
and arms contract when climbing). Therefore, the best
strategy is to circulate your grip around the board in a
manner as similar to climbing as possible. There are a
couple of different methods of doing this.
The more fundamental is what I call the grip-relax
repeating sequence (GRRS). Consider that it's a good
climbing tactic to move quickly through cruxes and to
get on and off difficult holds (the grip-relax) as fast as
possible. This conserves energy reserves and even
allows for brief, but invaluable steps in recovery
between each grip. The physiology behind this process

81

relates to the fact that blood flow is occluded (closed
off) in a hardworking muscle (that is, during periods of
high-intensity contraction) arid resumes only when
the muscle relaxes. Inevitably, if you have to grip a
hold maximally to stick it, then the blood flow in your
forearms is occluded and your grip will ultimately fail
in a matter of fifteen seconds or less. With brief relax
periods between each maximum grip (the few seconds
while your other hand grips), however, you can climb
on for a surprisingly long time. Top climbers use the
GRRS to keep them going and going up the most
improbable-looking routes. It's also the secret to effective, low-risk fingerboard training.
Of course, a complete warm-up is imperative.
Ideally, perform some light general exercise to elevate
your heart rate and muscle temperature. Proceed to
crank out a few sets of pull-ups along with gentle
stretching of your fingers and upper body. Complete
your warm-up with some self-massage of the fingers,
forearms, and arms. Finally, consider reinforcing the
tendons at the base of your fingers with a few tight
turns of tape (especially if you plan to train with
added weight), arid stop training at the first sign of
pain in the joints or tendons.
The best strength-training routine is a series of
brief, high-intensity hangs on small- to medium-sized
holds. Use one of the two protocols outlined below:
repeaters and pyramids.
REPEATERS (B)
Perform five maximum-intensity hangs on the same
pair of holds. Each hang should last just three to ten
seconds, with just a five-second rest between each
hang (hence, the GRRS). Take a one- to two-minute
rest upon completing the set of five hangs, then begin
another set of five repeaters on a different pair of
holds. Train your most problematic grips first, then
work successive sets on gradually larger and easier
holds as you tire. Also, attempt to order the grip positions trained for maximum variety: for instance, shallow two-finger pocket, small crimp, narrow pinch,
small sloper, shallow three-finger pocket, medium
crimp, deep two-finger pocket, medium sloper, medi-

82

um crimp, and large sloper. Working a set of repeaters
(five repetitions each) for each of these ten grips
would result in a total of fifty near-maximum contractions—a pretty good finger workout! A more
advanced climber could take a fifteen-minute rest and
then do a second and third series of repeaters.
In training repeaters, it's obviously fundamental
that each grip is trained at high intensity. Intermediate
to advanced climbers will need to add weight in order
to work the muscle at near-maximum intensity. (As a
gauge, you need to add weight if you could have
maintained a grip on the holds used for more than ten
to fifteen seconds.) Start with a five-pound weight
belt or a similar amount of weight clipped onto your
harness or in a backpack and build toward 20 percent
of your body weight over the course of years.
Conversely, less experienced climbers may need to
train at body weight or less for the first year or two.
Standing in a few loops of thick bungee cord is a popular means of lowering resistance, though "standing"
(actually, just weighting a bit with your toes) on the
edge of a chair placed a foot or two behind the fingerboard is equally effective. Using the latter method, you
can easily vary the resistance by shifting your body
weight forward (more on the chair and less on the fingers) or back to a position directly below the board.
PYRAMIDS (B)
Per the Principle of Variation, it's beneficial to vary
your fingerboard-training protocol. The pyramid
method is one such alternative method of training
maximum grip strength. Progress through the full
seven-step pyramid using a single set of holds (see
Figure 6.2). After a one-minute rest, perform another pyramid on a different set of holds. Ideally, you
want to work all the primary grip positions (as in
doing repeaters) over the course of seven to fifteen
full pyramid sets. Limit yourself to only a one-minute
rest between sets. Use smaller holds or add weight to
your body if this regimen seems less than maximum
(the last few steps of each pyramid should be difficult
to execute).

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 6.2 Fingerboard Pyramid Training

en

/

2,1
£
°
n <u

1 =1
= u
ffi Q
£ VI

v^SO

"O
c
o

c
o

o
0)

V
en
o

c
ra
re

D3
C
n

(A
CO

£

•C

enX.
T3
>
C
o
o

"1

(A
CO

en
c
ta
.c

v

= o
re o
.= tn

c U
J= 3>

Using the same pair of holds, follow each step
precisely with just a five-second rest between each
step. That is, hang four seconds, rest five seconds,
hang six seconds, rest five seconds, hang eight
seconds, and so on.
Endurance Training Using a

Fingerboard

There are two main methods of training endurance on
a fingerboard: straight-arm hangs and what I call
moving hangs. Using comfortable holds, execute the
straight-arm hangs exactly as outlined earlier in this
chapter. Moving hangs are more effective and certainly less boring, however, so make these the method of
choice given your fingerboard setup allows it.
MOVING HANGS ( B )

This protocol allows you to work the board continuously for several minutes, much like climbing a long
sustained sequence on the rock. Doing this requires
somewhere to place your feet while your hands circulate around the board using the grip-relax repeating
sequence (GRRS). One possible setup would be to
mount your fingerboard so it's set out a foot or two
from a wall onto which you mount numerous small
footholds. If your fingerboard is mounted above a
doorway (quite common), simply place a chair or
stool a couple of feet behind the board. "Resting" your
feet (actually, use only your toes) on the edge of the
chair will simulate the body position of a steep route
and allow you to move your hands from hold to hold
on the fingerboard.
Either way, develop long sequences of ten to

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

twenty hand movements on difficult holds, then
move on to a bucket for a brief shakeout. After a tento twenty-second rest, continue moving around the
board for another ten to twenty hand movements
before taking to another large hold for a rest.
Continue in this fashion for a total of three to ten minutes, then take about a ten-minute rest. Repeat the
process for a total of three to six sets.
Bouldering

(A)

Bouldering is arguably the best all-around training
method for climbers, since it can produce improvement in all three areas of the performance triad: physical, technical, and mental. Without the constraints of
belaying and placing gear, bouldering allows you to
narrow your focus onto the mission of climbing the
hardest moves you are capable of doing. Add the
camaraderie of a few friends and bouldering becomes
one of the most gratifying training and climbing experiences around.
On the flip side, bouldering as training does have
some limitations. Obviously, it's difficult to train
endurance unless you have a cliff base that you can
traverse for long periods. Effective training of maximum finger strength is also quite difficult since the
technical difficulties of a given problem may prevent
you from pushing your muscles in the way best for
developing strength. Finally, the wide range of different finger positions you might use in cranking a boulder problem means it's unlikely you will ever train a
single grip position to failure. Of course, most of these
flaws can be corrected for when bouldering on an
indoor wall. Designing routes to isolate a specific arm
position, move, or grip position is the most effective
training strategy. This flexibility of being able to set
isolation problems is one of the many good reasons for
building a home wall.
Clearly, steep boulder problems are excellent for
developing upper-body power as well as strengthening the full chain of stabilizing core muscles that translate leverage and force between the hands and feet.
For this reason alone, every serious climber should
partake in some bouldering on overhanging terrain.

83

OUTDOOR BOULDERING
As a rule of thumb, consider outdoor bouldering a
valid method for training upper-body power, technique, and a variety of mental attributes including
tenacity, focus, and the "killer instinct." Begin each
bouldering session with a purpose—whether it be to
work just a few hard routes (train power and maxim u m strength), to send a slew of more moderate
routes (anaerobic endurance), or to climb specific
routes that will train known technical and physical
weaknesses (skill practice). Each approach is equally
valid, though most climbers go bouldering with the
first purpose, of working maximum routes, in mind—
these individuals would definitely benefit from greater
diversity in their bouldering sessions.
Another key distinction for maximizing the training effect of time spent bouldering outside is to focus
on quality over quantity. Beating yourself up with a
rapid-fire succession of attempts on a probfem or
thrashing up a large number of known routes can be
counterproductive. With this approach, you won't
perform at your best on most routes, you'll tend to
hardwire inefficient moves, and you risk getting
injured. Instead, force yourself to rest more than you
think you need to, and attempt each problem with the
goal of putting out your best effort—physically, mentally, and technically. As a rough rule of thumb, rest
for three to five minutes between attempts of short
bouldering problems (six hand moves or less), five to
ten minutes for medium-length problems (seven to
fifteen hand movements), and about fifteen minutes
or more between attempts at long problems.
Finally, keep the session reasonable in length so as
to not dig yourself too deep a hole to recover from (or
risk injury). Two to four hours of bouldering (using the
above rest guidelines) is plenty, though advanced
climbers may benefit from a brief period of additional
strength training (heavy pulldowns, some lock-offs, or
a few sets on the campus board) afterward.
INDOOR BOULDERING
Bouldering on a home wall or at a commercial gym
can be great fun and is arguably more effective for
developing finger strength than bouldering outside. As

84

discussed above, it's ideal to design or set indoor routes
with a theme that trains a specific grip or arm position.
Furthermore, you can vary the length and intensity of
the indoor routes to train maximum strength and
power (ten to twelve total hand movements) or anaerobic endurance (twenty to forty total movements). In
doing so, it's best to set nontechnical routes so that the
problem tests mainly your limitations of strength.
Furthermore, select handholds that are void of razor
edges or other features that might cause injury.
Otherwise, apply the same training and rest guidelines
outlined above.

System Training (B)
System Training may be the single best nonrock systemic exercise available to climbers. While not quite
the best method of training absolute finger strength, it
does provide a highly specific workout of the entire
body—from the fingers to the toes—that will develop
functional strength in the crucial muscles of the arms,
upper body, and torso. The efficacy of System Training
results from the ability to fatigue a specific combination of grip and arm position while performing actual
climbing movements up a steep wall. For instance,
you can lap a system wall using only the undercling
arm position and the open-hand grip position, or you
could climb the wall using identical gaston arm positions and half-crimp grip positions. On a well-built
system wall, there are many other possibilities.
The base wall for System Training should be at
least 6 feet wide, 8 to 10 feet in length, and at angle of
between thirty and fifty degrees past vertical. Still, it's
the type and arrangement of holds that make System
Training work. You need to obtain (or make) a large
number of identical holds that can be mounted symmetrically to enable training of all the different finger
and arm positions (introduced earlier in this chapter).
The best bet would be to purchase eight to twelve system holds that can be mounted in pairs side by side
and at shoulder width going up the wall. You could
also use matching modular holds or cut different-sized
blocks of wood to create a variety of system routes up
your wall. Regardless of the hold type, space the identical pairs of holds about 15 to 20 inches apart so you

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

can move up them in a ladderlike sequence. Complete
the wall with a variety of small footholds scattered
about the wall—again, the ideal setup would possess
perfect symmetry of both hand- and footholds.
There are many creative ways to train on a system
wall, but the most fundamental is to climb the wall
while isolating a specific combination of grip and arm
positions. As shown in Figure 6.3, there are many
possible permutations of grip and arm positions to
train. One training strategy would be to do a single set
(one up-and-down lap) using each grip-arm couplet.
Another strategy would be to do several sets that train
a specific grip-arm pair that's either a known weakness
or common feature on some project you are working.

Hypergravity Isolation Training (B/C)
In the mid-1990s I set out to develop the most targeted training method for developing maximum finger
strength. Much experimentation with equipment
designs and training protocol led to what I call
Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT). While similar to
the System Training described above, HIT is more
highly refined and better targets the forearm muscles.
By removing the training of arm positions (as in
System Training) and through the progressive addition of weight, HIT provides the maximum training of
grip strength available to climbers.

In System Training it's important to leverage the
knowledge you gained in reading chapter 5. For
instance, if you lack anaerobic endurance use larger
hand- and footholds that will allow you to lap the system wall a few times (in other words, shoot for twenty to forty total hand movements). To train pure
strength, however, you would want to climb on smaller holds and with more difficult arm positions that
produce failure in ten to twenty hand moves (five to
ten reps with each arm). Rest between sets for at least
two to three minutes. Finally, keep a training log in
which you detail the exact positions and holds used,
the number of reps and sets, and the amount of rest
between sets. This will help maintain motivation as
well as quantify your strength gains.

F i g u r e 6.3 System Training Permutations

Grip Position
Full Crimp
Half Crim
Open Han
Pinch

A r m Position
Down Pull
Undercling
Side Pull
Reverse Side Pull/Gaston

Work up to sixteen permutations of grip and arm
positions.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

Hypergravity

Isolation Training (note weight

belt).

85

The effectiveness of HIT is a result of its fulfillment of the four fundamental requisites for training
maximum grip strength. While the other finger training exercises meet one, two, or three of these requirements, only HIT meets all four.
1. The exercise m u s t be high intensity throughout the entire set. In climbing, higher intensity is
created by increasing wall angle, decreasing hold
size, or increasing hold spacing. Unfortunately,
there's a definite limit to how far you can go with
each of these. Beyond a certain point, it's more
effective to increase intensity by adding weight to
your body. Adding just ten pounds can make a
huge difference in training intensity on overhanging walls and can yield a leap in finger strength in
just a couple of weeks. Interestingly, very few
climbers are aware of this fact!
2. The exercise m u s t produce rapid muscular
failure, not failure due to technique. In the
weight-lifting world, muscular failure in five to ten
reps is considered ideal (though various texts prescribe slightly different values). This is also valid for
climbing, but translates to strenuous climbing with
failure in ten to twenty total hand movements (five
to ten moves per hand). In climbing, however,
there's always the lingering question of whether
failure resulted from muscle failure or failure of
your technique—in other words, not being able to
do a move. Thus, the best exercise for training grip
strength would reduce the technical requirements
as much as possible and eliminate training of footwork or arm positions (as in System Training).
3. The exercise m u s t be specific to climbing
positions and m o v e m e n t s . The principle of
specificity instructs us that strength gains resulting
from a certain exercise will be specific to situations
involving similar position and movement. The
greater the difference between the exercise and
sport use, the less the strength will transfer. Thus,
the best strength-training exercise for climbing
would involve actual climbing movements, whereas an exercise performed while standing or hanging would transfer less.

86

4. The exercise m u s t focus o n a specific grip
position for an entire set. In climbing, the rock
dictates a random use of varying grip positions.
Since strength is specific to each grip position, such
cycling of grips allows you to climb much longer
than if you use the same grip repeated. That's great
if you are climbing for performance; for purposes of
training grip strength, however, it stinks. That's
why a full season of climbing will build endurance
but leave you with about the same maximum grip
strength as last year. Effective grip-strength training must hammer a specific grip position until failure. Due to the limited transfer of strength from
one grip to another, you'll need to train several different grip positions, including open hand, crimp,
pinch, and the three two-finger pocket combinations or teams.
To set up a wall for this type of training, use an
overhanging bouldering wall of M-inch plywood at
an angle of forty to fifty degrees past vertical. I prefer fifty degrees past vertical, though HIT can be
performed effectively on the common forty-fivedegree home wall. Sitting at the base of the wall,
mount the first of five HIT Strips at top-of-the-head
height. Mount four more strips at 20-inch intervals. Two pinch holds are mounted at shoulder
width above each HIT Strip. As an alternative to
purchasing HIT strips, you could use ten identical
crimper, bucket, pinch, and two-finger pocket
•holds (forty total holds), though use of HIT Strips
may be more economical and effective.
MAXIMUM STRENGTH PROTOCOL (fi+/C)
The HIT workout is best used as part of a training cycle
or off-season program in which you can dedicate yourself to performing the exact protocols described below.
It's vital that you be completely fresh (one to two days'
rest since last climbing) before performing the workout; likewise, you must commit to taking a minimum
of two days' rest after the workout for the neuromuscular system to recover. It's best to cycle on and off HIT
workouts every couple of weeks. For instance, as part
of an off-season (winter) program, you might do four
HIT workouts over the course of two weeks, then

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

spend two weeks training anaerobic endurance or
climbing lots of routes at an indoor facility.
Start with a tWrty-rninute warm-up comprised of
gentle stretching and bouldering of increasing difficulty.
The HIT workout trains seven basic grip positions: full
crimp, half crimp, pinch, open hand, and the three
teams of two-finger grips. Perform one or two sets for
each grip position—those new to the HIT workout
should begin with one set—beginning with the most difficult grip position for you. Most people work through
the grips in this order: pinch, two-finger third team
(pinkie and ring fingers), two-finger second team (index
and middle fingers), two-finger first team (middle and
ring fingers), and full crimp, half crimp, open hand. The
entire HIT workout is done with "open feet," meaning
that you can place your feet on any holds on the wall.
Sitting below the first HIT Strip, begin by gripping
the right-hand pinch hold, then pull up and grab the
next higher left-hand pinch hold. Continue climbing

with the next higher right-hand pinch hold and the
next higher left-hand pinch hold until both hands are
on the top two pinch holds. Begin descending immediately, alternating left and right pinch holds back
down until you are holding the bottom two pinch
holds—but keep going! Continue moving up and
down the wall using alternating pinch holds until the
grip fails. Upon stepping off the wall, use a stopwatch
to time a rest of exactly two minutes before beginning
the next set. Meanwhile, record the total number of
reps or hand movements in your training notebook.
If you did more than twenty reps, you must add
weight when training the pinch grip in the future. It's
important to remember that doing more than twenty reps
(ten hand movements per hand) will train anaerobic
endurance, while training maximum grip strength
requires adding weight to produce failure in ten or fewer
reps per hand. Add five pounds around your waist if you
failed at between twenty and twenty-five total reps.

S a m p l e HIT Workouts
Grip to Work

Weight Added*
—HIT Novice

Weight Added*
-HIT Advanced

Reps**/
Rest Interval

Pinch

None

20 lbs.

20/3 mins.

2-F 3rd team

None

20 lbs.

20/3 mins.

2-F 2nd team

6 lbs.

40 lbs.

20/3 mins.

2-F 1st team

8 lbs.

40 lbs.

20/3 mins.

Full crimp

10 lbs.

40 lbs.

20/3 mins.

Half crimp

10 lbs.

40 lbs.

20/3 mins.

Open hand

14 lbs.

40 lbs.

20/3 mins.

* Lower weight or stop training at the first sign of tendon or joint pain.
** End every set at twenty reps (twenty total hand movements) or failure—whichever comes first. If you reach
twenty reps, add weight for the next set and/or next workout. Keep a training log with the details of each HIT
workout.
N O T E : Advanced climbers may want to perform two sets of training with each grip position.
HIT Strips are available from Nicros (1-800-699-1975).

HIT Tips
•

Each s e t must be maximum intensity and produce failure in twenty hand movements or less. Add
weight if you achieve more than twenty reps.

•

No stopping or chalking during a set. Climb briskly and without hesitation. Consider using a spotter so you can keep moving confidently up to the point of failure.

•

Try to climb through the reps with normal foot movements and body turns. Smaller footholds are
better, but too much thought on footwork will slow you down. Most important, keep the footwork
simple—the goal is to train the fingers, not footwork and technique.

•

Rest breaks between sets must be exactly two minutes. Use a stopwatch and stick to the planned
order and schedule of exercises. This way you can quantify and track your finger strength! If you're
sloppy on the length of rests, the numbers become meaningless.

•

Keep a training book in which you log each set, weight added, and reps performed. This way you'll
always know what weight you need for a given set and you can easily track your gains (weight and
rep increases) from workout to workout.

•

Always do your HIT in the same order and never increase the number of sets! There will be no
added stimulus, and you'll only dig yourself a deeper hole to recover from.

•

Tape your fingers. This is imperative as the added weight begins to exceed twenty pounds. It will also
increase your skin comfort level, allowing you to push the envelope a bit farther. Sand down the HIT
Strips or holds if the texture causes pain that prevents you from completing each set to muscular failure.

Otherwise, add ten pounds around your waist for the
next set on the pinch grips. To add weight, buy a couple
of five- and ten-pound weight belts at your local sports
store or, alternatively, use a large fanny pack and add twopound diver's weights (available at most scuba stores).
After your two-minute rest, proceed immediately
with a second set of pinch grips. Climb up and down
on the pinch holds in the same fashion as the first set.
Upon failure, time another two-minute rest; then
move on to the next grip position—probably the twofinger pocket third team.
Begin the next set by using the two-finger third
team to grab the two pocket holds on the bottom HIT
Strip. As with the pinch grip, climb the pocket holds
up and down using exclusively this two-finger pocket
team on alternating HIT Strips (or on identically sized

88

and spaced two-finger pockets). Continue to failure,
then rest for exactly two minutes before performing
the second set with this grip. Record the total number
of hand movements as well as the amount of weight
added, if any.
After completing the second set of this two-finger
team, move on to the next grip position. Continue
executing the HIT workout through the remaining
grip positions while taking just a two-minute rest
between each set. It's vital that you limit the rest to
exactly two minutes, and record the number of hand
movements and the weight used (if any) for each grip
and set. This information will guide your next HIT
workout, and I guarantee the records will quantify
gains in your grip strength in the sessions that follow!
This completes your HIT workout, though you

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

may wish to do a few sets of weighted pull-ups or
some lock-off exercises to complete strength training
of your upper body. As a cool-down, do ten minutes
of light bouldering. You will likely need two or three
days of quality rest and sound nutrition in order to
supercompensate to a newfound level of maximum
grip strength.
ANAEROBIC ENDURANCE (A-E) PROTOCOL (B)
HIT Strips are equally effective as part of your anaerobic endurance training (endurance of grip strength),
though you will need to execute and track your workout according to a different protocol. This time, you
heighten the training load not by adding weight but
by increasing the number of reps (hand movements).
In doing an A-E HIT workout, the goal is to climb
up and down the HIT Strips using a single grip position for a total of thirty to fifty hand movements.
Once again, time a rest of exactly two minutes
between sets. Begin with the weakest grip (usually
pinch) and perform two sets of thirty to fifty reps for

each of the seven grip positions discussed above. In A-E
training the goal is not muscular failure, but instead to
take the muscles in and out of the anaerobic energy
mode in an interval-training fashion.
Again, it's fundamental that you track your A-E
HIT workout on paper. Record in a notebook the
number of reps (total hand movements) performed in
each of the fourteen sets. Upon completion of all the
grip positions, perform any supplemental training of
the larger pull muscles (pull-up and lock-off exercises), then wrap up your workout with a good cooldown of light bouldering and stretching.
One-Arm Lunging and
One-Arm Deadpoint Traversing [BJ
In Chapter 5, I explained that plyometric training
results in beneficial neural adaptations that don't
result from normal static (isometric) finger training or
climbing. Therefore, the inclusion of some form of
plyometric training would be beneficial for intermediate and advanced climbers. The three best methods of

One-Arm Lunging

/ •

i p i

/A

f
-

i

jB

7. Pull inward and lunge upward.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

2. Catch the high hold.

3. Drop back down to starting hold,
catching with elbow slightly bent

89

plyometric exercise for climbers are one-arm lunging,
one-arm deadpoint traversing, and campus training
(to be discussed later).
Controlled one-arm lunging and deadpointing
are ideal ice-breaker exercises for climbers wishing to
add some plyometric training to their routines. Both
exercises can be executed on a vertical to slightly
overhanging (harder) modular wall, as found in all
climbing gyms. In both cases one-arm movements end
with a dynamic catch that "shocks" the forearm muscles. Unlike campus training, which is commonly
done sans feet, this form of plyometric exercise is
more controlled and less stressful. The strength gains
you can achieve through this form of "plyometric
light" training are limited, however—beyond a certain
point you will need to graduate to campus training in
order to stimulate further gains.
ONE-ARM '"DEADPOINT" TRAVERSING (B)
This exercise requires a vertical indoor wall with
enough room available to traverse up to 20 feet using
medium- to large-sized holds. The goal here is to traverse the wall by lunging from hold to hold using only
one hand. It's important that you perform controlled,
low-stress lunges by using your arms and torso to initiate the dyno and then catching the next hold with a
slight bend in your elbow. This drawing in of the body
allows you to make a quick grab at the next hold
while upward momentum briefly reduces your load—
this is commonly called a deadpoint move. Attempt to
traverse for a total of eight to twelve deadpoint movements, then take a three-minute rest. Perform two to
four such traverses with each arm as a supplement to
your other grip-strength training.
A word of warning: Shoulder and elbow injuries
could result if you consistently catch the dynos with a
straight arm. You can vastly reduce the risk of injury by
making small lunges of about 1 foot, and by striving to
catch each lunge with a slight bend in your elbow.
ONE-ARM LUNGING ( B )
Once you are proficient at one-arm traverses on vertical walls, you can proceed to one-arm up-and-down
lunges on a slightly overhanging wall. This exercise is

90

also done feet-on, but the steeper angle creates greater
dynamic force, especially on the downward catch.
This extra stress is good if you are attempting to stimulate further neuromuscular adaptations. Still, this
strategy clearly increases the stress on all components
of the fingers and arms—proceed with caution.
Perform the one-arm lunges on a section of wall
that overhangs between five and fifteen degrees past
vertical. Arrange the modular holds so there are two
small footholds to stand on (just 1 foot or so off the
ground) and two nontweaky medium-sized holds,
one in front of your face and the other about 2 feet
above that. Execute the up-and-down lunges in a
manner similar to the one-arm traversing discussed
above. While standing on the two small footholds,
draw your body upward and inward and lunge up to
the top hold. Immediately drop back down to the
starting hold and, without pause, explode back up to
the top hold. Continue lunging one-armed and with
fixed feet for a total of eight to twelve reps. Rest for
three minutes, then proceed with the next set. Do just
two to four sets per arm.
Keep in mind that this plyometric training will
not result in the vicious forearm pump you are used
to getting from bouldering, System Training, and such.
Plyometric training stresses the nervous system and is
fueled by the ATP-CP energy system. Therefore, the
signs of fatigue are much less obvious. Don't make the
mistake of doing more sets because "it didn't feel like
the exercise was that fatiguing." The prescribed sets
provide plenty of stimulation, so move on to the next
portion of your workout.

Campus Board Training
Campus board training is fundamental for advanced
climbers specializing in bouldering or sport climbing.
No matter how naturally strong you are or how hard
or often you climb, I speculate that you can quickly
add another 10 percent (or more) to your contact
strength and power with just a few weeks of campus
training. Of course, such a gain is significant and may
equate to a one-time, one- or two-letter or V-grade
increase in climbing ability.
As explained in Chapter 5, the neurological adap-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

tations of such plyometric training result from the
explosive forces placed on the muscles. Unfortunately,
the explosive forces are also placed on the joints and
tendons, so too much campus training too soon can be
disastrous. Therefore, it's important that you abide by
the following guidelines.
• Engage in campus training only if you are an
advanced climber (able to lead 5.12 or boulder V7)
with at least two years of sport-specific training
under your belt, and no recent history of finger or
arm injuries.
• Warm up thoroughly; this should include about
thirty minutes of progressively more difficult bouldering. Consider reinforcing the base of your fingers with a few tight turns of '/-inch athletic tape.
• Emphasize quality over quantity. Five quality sets
on the campus board is better than ten sloppy,
poorly executed sets. Remember, campus training
is only a small portion of a good strength-training
workout—don't treat it like it's the only method of
training for climbing.
• Do not campus train while in a state of high
fatigue—it's vital to maintain good technique and
high-quality execution (for instance, not catching
with completely straight arms).
• End the training session immediately upon any
sign of joint or tendon pain.
• Rest a minimum of two days after a serious campus
training workout. Limit yourself to two modestlength sessions per week, and cycle two weeks on
and two weeks off.
You will need to build a campus board separate
from your home climbing wall, or talk the owner of
your local gym into building a campus board if there
isn't one already. At home you'll likely be able to only
build a modest-sized board if you have standard-height
ceilings. Since the bottom of the board needs to be
around 4 feet off the floor, you'll be limited as to the
number of rungs you can mount. The plywood board
onto which you mount the rungs should be angled at

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

precisely fifteen degrees past vertical. Make or purchase
rungs that range in depth from % inch to VA inches.
Mount small rungs about 6 to 8 inches apart; the largest
rungs are best spaced about 8 to 12 inches apart. I'd
advise you purchase campus rungs from one of the
indoor training companies—these rungs are quite
affordable, and most companies will provide you with
detailed construction plans.
The three primary campus training exercises are
laddering, lock-offs, and double dynos. Gradually introduce yourself to this new training method over the
course of a few months. Begin with laddering during
the initial session and progress to lock-offs and double
dynos as your strength, confidence, and comfort allows.
LADDERING (AKA CAMPUSING) (B+)
Just as the name implies, this most basic exercise
involves climbing no-feet up the board in a ladder
climbing motion—on the rocks, this no-feet lunging
from one hold to the next is often called campusing. If
you are strong enough, you can also descend the
board no-feet with controlled eccentric contractions.
The goal is to ladder up rungs spaced as far apart
as possible. To help quantify your training, it helps to
number the rungs from bottom to top. You might initially ladder up rungs 1-2-3-4-5, but progress to a more
powerful 1-3-5-7 sequence. Most campus boards feature separate numbering of three different-sized rungs:
small, medium, and large. As a rule, laddering on the
smallest rungs tends to train contact (finger) strength
more than upper-body power, whereas long lunges
between the deepest rungs isolate more on developing
upper-body power. Rest for three to five minutes
before performing your next set on the board.
As emphasized above, quality of training is more
important than quantity. A reasonable number of sets
is anywhere from five to fifteen, according to your
experience with campus training. As a final note, if
you have a steep home wall but no campus board, you
can campus up the home wall from hold to hold just
as you would on a campus board. This method of
campusing can be highly effective as long as you grab
well-rounded, nonpainful holds.

91

for up to twelve total touches. Ideal form would be a
solid static lock-off at the top positions but only an
instant of pause at the bottom position before launching back up with the next touch. Rest for three to five
minutes between sets.
As you become more advanced at campus training, progress to performing a few lock-off sets with
just two fingers of each hand. Eventually you may
even become strong enough to do this drill with one
finger of each hand—as did Wolfgang Gullich in training for Action Directe. Regardless of the grip used, limit
yourself to five to fifteen total sets.
DOUBLE DYNOS ( c )
This exercise is the highly impressive dynamic-up,
dynamic-down, double-hand campus training that's
been featured in numerous videos. While not quite as
difficult as it first appears, this explosive exercise is
extremely stressful and best left to elite climbers.
Begin by hanging straight-armed from rung number 3 or 4. Let go with both hands simultaneously,
dropping down to catch a lower rung and immediately explode back up to the starting rung. Without hesitation, drop down again, catch, and explode back up.
Continue in this fashion until you fail to make one of
the catches. Depending on the size of the rungs used,
you may achieve anywhere from one to ten dropdown-and-explode-up reps (one full cycle). Rest for
five minutes before considering another set.
Laddering.
LOCK-OFFS (AKA TOUCHES) (B+)
This exercise combines the training stress of the lockoff arm position with a dynamic catch of the fingers.
Begin by hanging on a lower rung of the board. Pull up
with both hands to the lock-off position, then with one
hand reach up as high as possible and touch (or grab)
a rung. Hold the lock-off for a few seconds, then drop
back down to the starting hold and return to a hanging position. Immediately pull back up to the lock-off
position and reach up with your opposite hand. Again,
hold the lock for a few seconds before dropping back
down to the hang. Continue in this alternating fashion

92

As you become competent at this double-dyno
campus training, you can move to the smaller rungs, or
increase the distance of flight between the top and bottom rung used. As with the previous methods, it's useful to record in a notebook the number of reps and sets
performed as well as the rung size and number used.
As a final note, the dynamic nature of this final
exercise dictates use of the open-hand grip. Therefore,
it would be best to do a few sets of lock-off campus
training with different grips combined with a few sets
of the double dynos. This will provide a more comprehensive upper-body workout.

Heavy Finger Rolls (B+)
Todd Skinner turned me on to this exercise back around

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Double Dynos

1. Drop down from high rung.

2. Catch a lower rung.

1990, and I've since become a true believer. Muscular
gains from this exercise are reasonably quick and obvious, and they seem to translate fairly well to climbing
despite the obvious lack of specificity to climbing. Todd
credits these finger rolls for some of his most significant
gains in finger strength since he first picked up on this
exercise from a couple of Soviet climbers he met on the
World Cup circuit in 1987. Interestingly, this exercise
has been performed and advocated by Gunks hardman
Dr. Mark Robinson since the early 1980s!
The Soviet climbers claimed that heavy finger
rolls produce measurable gains in forearm circumference (a sign of muscle hypertrophy), whereas strength
gains from fingerboard or campus training are prima-

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

3. Explode back up to starting
position.

rily the result of neurological adaptations. This statement seems reasonable, because the heavy finger rolls
cause repeated, high-intensity eccentric and concentric contractions of the forearm muscles. Therefore,
pairing up heavy finger rolls with plyometric training
(campus training) could produce the synergistic gains
that have been show to result from the complex training method discussed in Chapter 5.
Performing these heavy finger rolls is quite simple
and requires twenty to thirty minutes. You will need
access to a set of free weights and a bench-press bar
with ball-bearing sleeves—maybe the only good reason for a climber to join a health club. A squat rack is
also useful as a spotter.

93

The body position for this exercise is critical to
reduce strain on the lower back, elbows, and wrists.
Stand with good posture and hold the bar (palms
away) in front of your thighs. Focus on keeping a
slight bend at your knees, elbows, and waist. The
motion of the finger curl is only the few inches from
the open-hand position to the closed-hand position.
Ideally you want to lower the bar as far as possible
without it falling from your hand. I've found the squat
rack quite handy in acting as a catcher in case I drop
the bar; it's worth the effort to kick the muscleheads
off the rack so you can work the full range of motion.
As far as weight is concerned, it must be heavy!
Maximum strength training demands the use of an
appropriately heavy weight that only allows you three
to ten very intense repetitions. While finger rolls with a
"light" weight (such as thirty- or forty-pound dumbbells) may pump you up, they are ineffective for developing maximum finger strength. After a warm-up set
with the bar weighted to about 50 percent of your body
weight, the goal is six heavy sets with a good rest of
three to five minutes between sets. A weight about
equal to your body weight is a good first guess for a
working weight. Add more weight if you can do more
than six reps, or remove weight if you can't do six sets
of at least three repetitions. With practice, you should
be able to build to 150 percent of body weight.

diate level of difficulty, however, climbing requires
more specific forms of strength such as the ability to
lock off a handhold (to make a long reach) or make a
quick, powerful upward movement. The standard
pull-up falls far short of being able to build such specialized strength.
For example, we all know climbers who can
knock off a decent number of pull-ups (say, greater
than fifteen or twenty) but cannot regularly knock off
5.10s or 5.11s! Although poor technique may be part
of the problem, many lack static strength in a variety
of lock-off positions as well as the dynamic strength
needed to power up hard moves on steep terrain.
Consequently, if you can pass the "fifteen pull-up itest"
you will benefit little by drubbing yourself with more
pull-ups. Instead, you need to engage in more targeted training of the pull muscles.
Before we dive into the details of the pull-muscle
exercises, it important to reconsider what is, in fact,
your weakest link on the rock. Surely pull-up power
and lock-off strength are vital, but many climbers fail
due to poor technique and mental control or even
because their grip strength is below par. If any of this
sounds familiar, then your training time will be better
invested elsewhere.

Pull-Ups and Lat Pull-Downs (A/B)

A few other suggestions: Never train the heavy
finger rolls more than twice a week and, in accordance
with the Principle of Variation, cycle on and off this
exercise every few weeks. Also, tape the base of your
fingers and consider placing a few turns of Pi-inch
tape around your wrist when your working weight is
greater than your body weight. Focus on keeping your
wrists nearly straight throughout—you are not doing
wrist curls. Finally, take a week or two off at the first
sign of any pain in your finger tendons or wrist.

As alluded to above, this most obvious exercise for
climbers is very useful for beginners but next to worthless for enhancing the capabilities of an elite climber. If
you are unable to do a single set of fifteen pull-ups,
then you should continue training with them about
three days per week. Still, there are a few strategies
you can leverage to enhance the gains that result from
this training. In fact, I believe most novice climbers can
learn to do fifteen pull-ups in less than one year of
training, given they use the following techniques.

Pull-Up and Lock-Off Training

• Perform your pull-up training on a pull-up bar or
the bucket hold on a fingerboard. The initial goal is
to train the pull muscles, not the fingers. Train only
in the palms-away position (the way you usually
grip the rock) and with your hands initially at
shoulder width. Begin by doing five sets to failure,
with a three-minute rest between sets. Three days

The standard pull-up has long been a staple exercise
for climbers. Several sets of pull-ups performed a few
days a week will provide most climbers with a base
level of pull-muscle strength needed to learn all the
basic climbing techniques. Beyond a certain interme-

94

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

per week is optimal. If you are climbing during the
week, perform your pull-ups at the end of the
climbing day, not on a rest day.
• If you are unable to do five consecutive pull-ups,
employ one of these two powerful strategies. Place a
chair below the pull-up bar and step up into a lockoff position with the bar just below your chin.
Remove your feet from the chair and hold the lockoff for five seconds before lowering yourself down
(eccentric training) to a slow five-second count.
Immediately step back up on the chair to the top
lock-off position and repeat the process exactly. Do
five total repetitions, then rest for five minutes.
Perform two to three total sets. The second strategy is
to simply have a spotter hold you around the waist
and lift a portion of your body weight so that you can
do eight to ten repetitions. Do three sets in this manner with a five-minute rest in between. Dedicate' to
using these strategies three days per week, and you'll
be shocked at how fast your pull-up ability improves.

lar failure. Each pull-up interval is a minute long (use
a stopwatch to time exactly) and consists of a number
of pull-ups in a row to start the minute, followed by a
rest and shakeout for the remainder of that minute.
Start with a set of four pull-ups (this will take
about ten seconds), then jump down and rest for the
next fifty seconds. When that minute is up, start the
next set of four pull-ups, followed by a rest for the
remainder. Continue in this fashion until you can no
longer do the prescribed number of pull-ups. If you
make it to twenty minutes—eighty total pull-ups—
then increase the sets to five reps at your next workout.
THIRTY-SECOND PULL-UPS (A)
These are regular pull-ups performed in slow motion.
Take ten seconds to go up, and come down to a slow
count of twenty. Continue until you can't perform
the exercise according to these guidelines. Do one to
three sets.
POWER PULL-UPS (B)

Your long-term goal is to be able to crank out five
sets of ten to fifteen repetitions with three to five
minutes of rest in between. When you reach this goal,
you will need to begin adding weight around your
waist (begin with a ten-pound weight belt) or use a
lat-pulldown machine at a health club. In using a pulldown machine, use a weight heavy enough to produce failure in between six and twelve reps. Do five
total sets with three minutes' rest in between.
Eventually, you'll find that doing the same pullup training becomes monotonous and provides little
additional gain in climbing strength. At this point it's
best to employ one of the following variations to the
pull-up, or even cut back on pull-ups and replace the
pull-muscle training with other exercises described on
the pages that follow.

Execute a normal pull-up motion, but explode on the
up phase (pull up as fast as possible), then lower to a
slow three-second count. You do not want to perform
this exercise to failure. Instead, shoot for six to eight
quality repetitions. Do one to three sets.

PULL-UP INTERVALS ( A )

FRENCHIES (A+)

This exercise is designed to accustom the pull muscles
to working during periods of high blood acidity (low
pH). On long, sustained climbs, lactic acid buildup
increases blood acidity, partially contributing to the
burn and tightness you feel prior to complete muscu-

These babies are the single best anaerobic endurance
pull-muscle exercise on the planet! Not only will they
fry your muscles with a wicked lactic acid burn, but
you will notice a marked improvement in your pullup and lock-off ability after just a few weeks of doing

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

HEAVY PULL-DOWNS (A+)
Performing this exercise requires use of a standard
health club pull-down machine. It will take a little
experimentation at first, but the goal is to determine a
weight that limits you to a maximum of six repetitions. If you are in really good shape, this may require
loading approximately 150 percent of your body
weight. Execute the pulldowns palms-away and crank
out three to ten high-intensity reps. Rest for three
minutes and do three to five total sets.

95

them. The efficacy of this exercise results from the
unique combination of isometric contractions superimposed over the pull-up motion.
Begin with a single pull-up (palms away, hands
shoulder width apart) and lock off in the top position
for a five-second count. Now lower to the bottom and
pull up to the top again—but, this time immediately
lower halfway down to an arm angle of ninety degrees.
Hold a solid lock-off here for a five-count, then lower
to the bottom. Immediately crank another pull-up, but
this time lower to a lock-off with an arm angle of about
120 degrees. Again, hold for five seconds and lower to
the bottom position. This sequence of three lock-offs
constitutes a single cycle, but you should continue on
with another cycle (or more) until you reach complete
failure. Record the number of cycles (or partial cycles)
in your training notebook as you take a five-minute
rest. Do a total of two or three sets.
Use bungee cords or a spotter to remove some
body weight if you cannot do at least two full cycles
per set. Conversely, you should add a ten- or twentypound weight belt once you are able to do five full
cycles in any given set.

Uneven-Grip Pull-Ups (B)
This is an excellent exercise for developing vicious
one-arm strength and lock-off ability. Train with
uneven-grip pull-ups long enough and you'll eventually develop a solid one-arm pull-up.
Execute the pull-up motion with one hand on the
bar (or a fingerboard bucket hold) and the other holding on to a towel looped over the bar (or with two or
three fingers through a loop of webbing) anywhere
from 6 to 24 inches below your high hand. Of course,
both hands pull, but the upper hand is emphasized—
the greater the separation between hands, the more
the upper hand is emphasized. Rest for two minutes
after the first set, then switch hands to train the opposite side. Perform three sets on each side with the goal
of four to eight reps per set. Increase the vertical distance between your hands if you can do more than
ten reps; decrease the distance if you cannot do at
least four repetitions. Do this exercise twice per week
in place of other pull-up exercises.

96

Steep-Wall Lock-Off (B)
This exercise is highly functional in that the strength
gains will transfer completely to the rock. Although
you will perform this exercise on an overhanging bouldering wall, the goal is not to actually climb a problem.
Instead, you will be performing repeated one-arm
lock-offs while using the same hand- and footholds,.
This is very similar to the lock-off exercise described in
the "Campus Board" section, except that you are doing
it with your feet on the wall. This way, you can turn
and tense your body as needed to facilitate a solid, efficient lock-off position. Such extreme specificity is what
makes for the high level of transfer to the rock.
Execute this exercise on an overhanging wall
that's between thirty and fifty degrees past vertical.
Begin in a sitting position below the wall and grab on
to two similar starting holds. A well-rounded incut
edge or a deep two- or three-finger pocket will suffice,
though the holds on HIT Strips or system holds are
ideal. Place your feet on any two holds on the kickboard at the base of the wall. Pull up on the handholds
and lock off on, say, your right hand. Allow your body
to twist and tense as needed to make the lock-off most
solid. Reach up with your opposite hand and touch the
highest hold possible—do not grab the high hold, but
instead allow your lock-off hand to hold the position
alone for a five-second count. Lower down and grab
back on with your left hand, but immediately pull back
up and lock off again with the same hand for another
five-count. Strive for four to eight complete repetitions
before your muscles fail. If this is not possible, use larger hand- and footholds or a less steep wall.
Rest for one minute—just long enough to catch
your breath and chalk up—then repeat this lock-off
exercise with the other hand. Upon completing the
second set, rest for five minutes before repeating the
process with the first hand. The goal is three to five
sets on both sides. This is a strenuous exercise that is
best performed at the end of a bouldering session.

One-Arm Lock-Off (B+J
This is a popular advanced exercise that transfers quite
well to hard bouldering and sport climbing (especially
the static strength developed from one-arm lock-offs).

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

careful not to drop yourself rapidly into the straightarm position! Dismount and gather yourself briefly,
then do the other arm. Perform three to five sets for
each side with about two minutes of rest in between.
If you can't hold the lock-off for at least five seconds, aid yourself by holding on with one finger of the
other hand or by standing in a few loops of thick
bungee cord. In a short time you will be holding a true
one-arm lock-off for ten to fifteen seconds! Advanced
climbers may find it necessary to add weight around
the waist in order to produce failure in less than fifteen seconds.
PALMS AWAY (B+)
Perform these exactly as described above except with
your palms facing away (pull-up position). You will
find this to be harder, but it's more sport specific and
useful when climbing. Perform three to five sets for
each side with about two minutes of rest in between.
ARM ANGLES (B+)

One-aim lock-off.
As a general rule, however, you should not train the
one-arm lock-off exercise unless your one-set maximum number of pull-ups is at least twenty. These lockoffs can be performed on a pull-up bar, fingerboard (use
a bucket hold), or free-hanging rings or Pump Rocks.
The three variations described below are in order of difficulty. Cycle on and off these lock-off exercises every
few weeks. In the long term these exercises enable
many climbers to develop a solid one-arm pull-up.
PALMS INWARD (B+)
Begin with a regular chin-up (palms toward you). Lock
off completely at the top on one arm, and let go with
the other. Hold the lock-off with your chin above the
bar as long as you can, all the while focusing on
"pulling the bar to your armpit." The goal is to hold a
solid lock position for twenty seconds. When you begin
to lose the lock, either grab back on with your other
hand or lower slowly (tougher, but worthwhile). Be

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

This final variation involves performing the lock-offs
below the bar at arm angles of about 45, 90, and 120
degrees. Pull up with two arms until you reach the
desired angle. Let go with one hand and hold static as
long as possible. These are very difficult and should be
done only when you can perform a solid lock-off in
the top position. Do two to three lock-offs in each of
the three positions with a rest of two minutes between
each lock-off. Conclude with two lock-offs in the top
position (palms away).
Bachar Ladder and Rope Climbing (B+)
John Gill developed his awesome upper-body power
largely through training on a 114-inch gym climbing
rope. Years later John Bachar developed an overhanging
rope ladder that provided a similar workout, but its
palms-away hand position provided greater specificity to
climbing. For much of the 1970s and 1980s, the Bachar
Ladder was a backbone exercise for high-end climbers.
With the advent of the fingerboard and indoor climbing
gyms, however, the ladder has fallen somewhat out of
favor. Still, a well-conditioned climber can benefit from
an occasional session on a Bachar Ladder or gym rope.

97

The author on his Bachar Ladder, late 1980s.
Both apparatuses are climbed feet-off, so a high
level of fitness is needed to partake in these exercises.
After a lengthy warm-up of pull-ups and upper-body
stretching, the goal is to climb hand-over-hand up the
ladder or climbing rope. Upon reaching the top,
downclimb with slow, smooth eccentric contractions.
The training goal is five to ten full laps with a rest of
three to five minutes between each lap. As with all the
training described on the previous pages, emphasize
quality over quantity. Two good laps with solid lockoffs and slow eccentric contractions are better than
four laps done sloppily and with dangerous dynamic
drops during the down phase.
Only use Bachar Ladders constructed with static
line rope. The springy nature of a ladder made with
dynamic rope may lead to elbow tendonitis.

Training the Core Muscles
In climbing vertical to overhanging rock, the core mus-

98

cles of your torso play a key role in enabling your arms
and legs to maximize leverage and transfer torque from
hand to foot and vice versa. Many beginner and intermediate climbers making their initial forays on steep
terrain find good-looking holds more difficult and
pumpy to use and modest-length reaches feeling surprisingly long. The root of these difficulties is probably
a complex blend of poor technique and insufficient
strength in both the arms (obviously, they are the ones
getting pumped up!) and, less noticeably, the torso.
As you might expect, one good way to strengthen
these core stabilizer muscles is by climbing frequently
on steep terrain. If your specialty is climbing overhanging routes or if you regularly boulder on steep
cavelike routes, chances are you've already developed
a high degree of strength in these muscles (though you
could probably still benefit from additional conditioning). If you are new to climbing, however, or if you
have previously climbed mainly vertical to less-thanvertical routes, you would likely benefit significantly
from some targeted training of these core muscles.
Two "tricks" first popularized in climbing by John
Gill are the gold standard of core-muscle strength. The
front lever and straight-arm flag both require steely
muscles of the torso. If you can do these two tricks,
then your training time is better spent on areas other
than the stabilizing muscles of the torso. Otherwise,
employ a blend of bouldering and traversing on steep
walls and executing the five isolation exercises
described below.
To best target these muscles in bouldering, you
want to force these stabilizers to work extra hard by
purposefully eliminating certain body positions and
holds. For instance, when climbing straight out a cavelike overhang, use a straight-on neutral position that
disallows drop-knee and hip-turn moves. While this is
clearly a bad strategy for style points, it does a better job
of targeting the core muscles for the purpose of training. Upon reaching the top of the cave, downclimb the
wall in the same style—downclimbing steep terrain is
the single best method of bringing the core muscles into
serious play. A final wall-training strategy is to traverse
a slight overhanging wall with your hands high above
your head while keeping your feet low. You will quick -

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Side Hip Raise

7. Start in the straight-arm position.

2. Droop hip toward the floor.

Upper-Trunk Extension

1. Lie face-down on floor.

2. Raise chest and head.

ly feel the core muscles coming into play as you strain
to prevent your body from sagging away from the wall.
In addition to these on-the-wall training methods, you can perform the following exercises twice per
week at the conclusion of your climbing workout.

(hard). Perform two sets on each side with a rest of a
minute between sets.

Side Hip Raise (A)
Lie on your side on the floor and press up into a
straight-arm position until your body forms the
hypotenuse of a triangle with the floor. Keeping your
arm straight, droop your hip toward the floor until it
touches, then immediately straighten your body out
and return to the starting position. Repeat this process
of lowering and raising the hips ten to fifteen times

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

Back Extension

(A)

Some health clubs possess excellent back-extension
machines that allow safe, effective training of the
lower-back muscles. Otherwise, you can work all the
important muscles of the lower back by performing
two floor exercises known as the upper-trunk extension and aquaman.
UPPER-TRUNK EXTENSION (A)

Lie facedown on the floor with your legs spread about
shoulder width apart and your arms by your sides.

99

Aquaman

7. Lie face-down on floor with arms extended
overhead.

2. Raise one arm and opposite leg to provide tension.

Slowly raise your chest and head slightly off the floor,
pull your shoulder blades back, and continue to raise
your trunk up as far as possible without any spinal discomfort. Hold for a moment, then return to the starting position. Perform ten slow repetitions. Rest for a
minute or two, then do a second set. Be sure to keep
your neck relaxed and your pelvis pressed firmly
against the floor throughout the range of motion.

to maintain some tension in your shoulders and concentrate on the feeling of a stiff upper body while your
abs are contracting and lifting the knees to the chest.
To work the serratus muscles, lift your knees on the
right and left side every few reps. The goal is to build
up to two sets of twenty repetitions.

AQUAMAN (A)
Lie facedown on the floor with your arms extended
overhead. Begin with one arm and the opposite leg
raised slightly off the ground to provide tension.
Slowly raise the opposite arm and leg straight up while
keeping your chest and pelvis in firm contact with the
floor. Raise them upward as far as possible, hold for a
moment, and then return to the starting position.
Repeat with the other arm and leg, and continue for
five to eight repetitions on each side. Avoid rotating or
twisting your body throughout the range of motion.
Hanging Knee Lift (A)
This is a strenuous (but good!) exercise that works the
lower abdominals, hip flexors, and serratus muscles
on the side of your torso. Hang from a pull-up bar or
the bucket holds of a fingerboard and lift your knees
up to your chest. Lower them slowly until they return
to a slightly bent position (not straight) and immediately begin the next upward repetition. It's important

100

Abdominal Crunch (A)
These are best done lying on the floor with your feet
up on a chair and knees bent at ninety degrees. Cross
your arms over your upper chest or place your hands
on the sides of your head (harder). Now lift your
shoulders off the ground and exhale as you "crunch"
upward. The goal is to lift your upper back off the
floor but not to ascend the whole way (as you would
in an old-school sit-up). Continue for twenty-five to
fifty repetitions, then rest for approximately two minutes. Ultimately, the goal is three sets of fifty repetitions; beyond this point it's debatable whether or not
any additional crunches will benefit your climbing. As
mentioned repeatedly throughout this book, you
must constantly evaluate whether your training for
climbing time could be better spent elsewhere.
Front Lever (B/C)
Gripping a pull-up bar or a set of free-floating rings
(harder), simultaneously tense and raise your body to
a position parallel to the floor; hold for three to five
seconds. As you will see, this is an extremely difficult

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Hanging Knee Lift

1. Hang from a pull-up bar or fingerboard.

2. Lift your knees up to your chest

Abdominal Crunch

1. Lie on the floor with your feet on a chair and your
arms crossed over your upper chest

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

2. Lift your shoulders off the ground and crunch
upward.

101

Front Lever

Begin training the front lever with bent leg [slightly easier). Graduate to levers with both legs held straight
gymnastics move; you can make it somewhat easier,
however, by bending one leg and drawing it in toward
the center of your body. If you still can't hold the lever
for three seconds, have a spotter help out by lifting at
your heels. Perform a total of five levers with a rest of
a minute between each.
Training the Antagonist M u s c l e s
If you climb regularly, especially on the steep routes
that are in vogue today, it's essential to engage in modest training of the antagonist muscles. Consider that the
pull muscles—the prime movers when climbing—get a
good workout every time you touch the rock, while the
opposing push muscles perform much less work at only
a fraction of the intensity. In the long term a growing
muscular imbalance can lead to a variety of injuries,
particularly in the elbows and shoulders.
As common as injuries are in this sport, it surprises me that so few climbers commit to regular
training of the antagonist muscles of the shoulders,
chest, and back of the forearm (finger/hand extensors). The time commitment is minimal, and the exer-

102

cises themselves are not that difficult. Bottom line: It
takes only a little extra effort to maintain enough
muscle balance to help stave off some of the common
injuries that might otherwise be in your future.
There are some basic guidelines to follow in effectively training the push muscles for climbing, however. First, you only need to perform isolation exercises
of these muscles for fifteen to twenty minutes, twice
per week. Furthermore, you must avoid the tendency
to go overboard with your antagonist-muscle training—the goal is to tone the muscles with moderateintensity exercise, not to build large bulky muscles
with a bodybuilder's "workout from hell."
Hand and Forearm

Muscles

The musculature of the forearms is some of the most
complex in the body. Climbing works these muscles in
a very specific way that, over time, can result in tendonitis on either the inside or outside of your elbow
(more on these injuries in Chapter 10). While chronic under-resting or even working the same type of
move excessively may inevitably result in these

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Reverse Wrist Curl

1. Rest forearm on your knee with palm down,
wrist straight

2. Curl wrist upward.

injuries, the two exercises below are a pretty good
insurance policy.

form the forearm stretches described earlier in the
chapter before engaging in this exercise.

REVERSE WRIST CURL

FOREARM ROTATION (AKA HAND PRONATOR)

Using a five- to twenty-pound dumbbell, perform
these wrist curls palms-down and with your forearm
resting on your knee, a bench, or table. Do approximately twenty half repetitions; that is, beginning with
your hand in the neutral position (wrist straight), curl
the dumbbell upward to the top position, hold it there
for two seconds, and lower it back down to the starting position (wrist straight). Do two to three sets of
this exercise twice per week, preferably at the end of
your climbing or training for climbing. Always per-

There are numerous exercise machines and devices
that work hand pronation, though they are hard to
find. Do you belong to a gym or club that possesses
such a machine? If not, don't fret—you can make a
simple forearm trainer to leave lying around your
home gym for use as part of your warm-up and cooldown. Cut a 12-inch piece of 1-inch-diameter dowel,
or purchase a blank dumbbell bar. Mount a few onepound weights on one end (two or three 114-pound
York barbell weights are ideal), and you're in business.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

103

Forearm Rotation

1. Bend arm at a ninety-degree angle and prop elbow
against your leg.

2. Turn hand back and forth from the thumb-in
position to the thumb-out position.

Perform the exercise sitting down with your arm
bent at a ninety-degree angle and your elbow propped
against your leg. Hold the nonweighted end of the bar
in this hand and turn your hand back and forth from
the thumb-in position to the thumb-out position.
Continue twisting your wrist back and forth for twenty to twenty-five repetitions. Perform two sets twice
per workout; in fact, it may be best to perform two
sets at the beginning and end of every climbing workout. Vary the resistance by either adding weight or
moving your hand farther down the stick (away from
the weighted end).

an existing shoulder problem, these exercises may
help mitigate the pain and prevent further injury. Still,
it would be best to see a doctor or physical therapist
for guidance specific to your affliction.
While the following exercises can all be performed
on standard health equipment (Cybex, free weights,
and so forth), I would not advise that you buy a club
membership just to gain access to the necessary
machinery. Instead, a one-time investment in a few
dumbbells (less than $50) is all you need. Alternatively,
you might ask the climbing gym you patronize to purchase a few dumbbells for the purpose of training the
antagonist muscles of the forearms and upper torso.

Training the Large Push

Muscles

These exercises are equally vital for maintaining balance in the stabilizing muscles of the shoulders and
upper torso. The three exercises described below will
go a long way toward maintaining the necessary balance and, hopefully, the health of your shoulders
through many years of rigorous climbing. If you have

104

SHOULDER PRESS
Using two dumbbells or a health club machine, perform two to three sets of twenty to twenty-five reps,
twice per week. Total resistance should be limited to
between 20 and 40 percent of your body weight. If
you plan to purchase dumbbells, I'd suggest that

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

adding unnecessary muscle mass that will only weigh
you down on the rocks.
DIPS/CHAIR DIPS/STAIR DIPS

Dips are an excellent exercise for strengthening the
many muscles of the upper arm, shoulders, chest, and
back. Of course, the motion is somewhat similar to
that of pressing out a mantel on the rock, so you have

1. Holding on to the seat of a chair, extend legs.
Push-ups. Move hands closer together to increase
difficulty.
women purchase two ten- or fifteen-pounders and
men purchase twenty- or thirty-pounders—there is
no reason to go much heavier.
PUSH-UPS/BENCH PRESS

Perform two to three sets of standard push-ups, twice
per week. The goal is twenty to twenty-five push-ups
per set. If you can do more than twenty-five reps,
increase the difficulty by moving your hands closer
together. If you have access to a bench-press machine,
follow the same guidelines as in doing the shoulder
press. Keep the total weight below about 40 percent of
your body weight—go much heavier and you risk

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

2. Bend elbows and dip your body down below the
seat of the chair. Lower until upper arms are parallel with the floor.

105

double the reason to perform this exercise twice per
week. Most heaith clubs have a parallel-bar setup
ideal for performing dips. As a simiiar alternative, you
may be able to position two heavy chairs or even use
an incut ninety-degree corner of a kitchen counter to
perform your dips. A final option is simply to use a
chair or set of stairs positioned directly behind your
hips to press out a behind-the-back dip.
As in the previous exercise, strive for two to three
sets of about twenty repetitions, twice per week. This
amount may seem improbable if you haven't done
this exercise before. If you religiously train dips twice
per week, however, you will experience rapid
improvement. In the meantime, employ a spotter to
help lift around your waist (reduce body weight) so
you can achieve at least ten dips per set.

Aerobic Training
The most common forms of rock climbing require
only ordinary aerobic fitness; big walls and mountaineering, however, clearly demand higher aerobic
capacity. While detailing a complete training program
for mountaineers is beyond the scope of this book, I
will provide some basic guidelines for aerobic training.

Goals of Aerobic Training
As stated near the start of this chapter, optimizing
body composition is a first-tier issue for rock climbers.
Excessive body fat is a major liability for aspiring rock
jocks, and a moderate amount of aerobic training
along with improved dietary surveillance will produce
noticeable improvements in this area. Also, a modest
amount of aerobic training will enable you to climb
longer at low to medium intensity and enhance your
body's ability to remove lactic acid from the working
muscles. The result is faster recovery while shaking
out at a midclimb rest or between attempts.
Still, I do not advise a large volume of aerobic
training for most climbers. Consider that simply
climbing a lot produces some positive adaptations of
the cardiovascular system; in fact, it has been shown
that high-intensity anaerobic endurance exercise produces significant improvement in aerobic capacity.

106

Therefore, if you regularly climb to the point of being
winded, you are training in a way that has the secondary effect of strengthening the heart-lung system.
Obviously, this method of training will not produce the level of adaptations needed to excel in alpine
climbing. Chapter 1 introduced you to the SAID
Principle that compels you to target your training on
the type of climbing that is most important to you. If
that's bouldering or sport climbing, excessive aerobic
training will be counterproductive. If big walls or
alpine climbing is your focus, though, regular highvolume aerobic activity is highly beneficial. The cardiovascular system clearly plays a more primary role
when rock climbing at high altitude; thus, improving
aerobic capacity should be a top training goal.

Strategies for Boulder, Sport, and
Multipitch Climbers
Upon achieving optimal body composition, only limited aerobic exercise is suggested. The high levels of
strength and power required for these climbing activities demand targeted training of the most common
weakest link—the muscles of the forearms and upper
body.
Fundamentally, high-volume aerobic training
could be viewed as the enemy of strength and power
training of the upper body. Not only would it divert
time you could invest more effectively—say, in bouldering—but regular high-mileage aerobic activity
results in systemic fatigue that may prevent you from
training and climbing up to your potential. Furthermore, excessive aerobic training has a catabolic effect
on the muscles of the upper body: that is, the body
begins to metabolize muscle during long training sessions. For proof of this, you only need to look at the
upper bodies of long-distance runners—they typically
look like string beans (albeit string beans who could
kick my butt in a marathon!).
Bottom line: If your ultimate training goal is to
maximize upper-body strength and power, anything
more than about three, fifteen- to thirty-minute runs
(or other similar activity) per week would not be
advantageous.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Strategies for Big-wall and Alpine Climbers
Obviously, these activities demand all-day or multiday
endurance far more than they do fingers of steel. If
this type of climbing is your cup of tea, your training
should be specific to these demands. The two best
training strategies here are high-volume climbing and
high-volume aerobic exercise.
If you have the rock resources nearby, then no
training could be more specific than chalking up many
long days on the rock. You could do this in the form
of climbing as many routes as possible from sunrise to
sunset at a cragging area or by racing up a grade IV or
V big-wall route in a day.

Strength & Conditioning Exercises

Otherwise, you'll need to persevere through sixty
to ninety minutes of aerobic training, five days per
week. Running, mountain biking, and trail running
are the best activities, and you should strive for
mileage over speed. As your conditioning improves,
consider stepping up your workout to between fortyfive minutes and an hour, twice a day. This is clearly
an advanced aerobic training program, but it might be
just the ticket in the weeks leading up to a long wall
climb or high-altitude expedition.

107

Ian Spencer-Green
on Scarface (5.71c),
Indian Creek, Utah.
PHOTO.GRAP.H
STEWART

•<•! -Mr

BY

GREEN

H

A

V

N

Personal Training Programs
Action without thought is a form
of insanity; thought without action
is a crime.

F

or much of the twentieth century, the American
climbing scene was dominated by eccentric, alternative types who, as a rule, rejected conventional
styles of living and recreation. While this renegade
bunch pushed the limits of difficulty and boldness on
the rock, they were hardly of a mind-set that would
consider doing any supplemental training (other than
drinking!). In fact, the handful of individuals who did
train, outside of climbing itself, were viewed with
amusement and even called "cheaters" by a few traditionalists.
This all changed in the 1980s and 1990s as climbing went mainstream. Supplemental training just
seemed natural to the large number of individuals
entering climbing with backgrounds in other sports.
At the same time, a growing number of elite climbers
trained fervently while pushing the envelope of difficulty on the rocks. Suddenly the masses of climbers
"got it"—there was indeed a causal connection
between sport-specific training and climbing ability!
Of course, John Gill exemplified this way back in the
1950s.
Today most serious climbers perform supplemental training, and tens of thousands of beginner and
intermediate climbers are enamored of the idea of
training to climb harder. Commercial climbing gyms

have opened in almost every major city, and home
bouldering walls are the latest rage. Consequently,
there is a greater need than ever for average climbers
to follow a purposeful training program that will maximize their gains in ability while minimizing the
chance of injury. This, of course, is the purpose of this
chapter—to help you craft an effective training program given your current fitness level and climbing
ability.

Keys to an Effective Training Program
The premise of this book is that a well-informed, motivated, and mature individual can grow to climb at an
exceedingly high level in just a few years. The preceding chapters provided a comprehensive look at the
fundamental elements of climbing performance—
mental, technical, and physical—and you've also been
armed with the knowledge of an introspective selfassessment test. You are now in a position to design
and execute an uncommonly effective training program—one that will help you outperform the masses!

Premeditate Your Training
The mass of people who engage in some form of conditioning program do so in a haphazard, ad lib manner. There is little or no method to their madness
other than to "climb a lot" and "get pumped." This
unsystematic approach will produce mediocre results
and can often end in injury.
Conversely, well-informed climbers are proactive
in designing and modifying their training program for
maximum effectiveness. Wisely, the program targets
their weaknesses, is modified regularly to stave off

109

mental or physical stagnation, and is crafted in a way
to produce a peaking effect for an upcoming road trip
or competition.

week macrocycle to optimize the effectiveness of your
training for climbing program.
PRODUCE A PEAKING EFFECT FOR A
ROAD TRIP OR COMPETITION

TARGET YOUR WEAKNESSES
Several times throughout this book, I've highlighted
the importance of training the weakest link. For many
climbers this weakest link involves poor technique,
tactics, and mental control. While the unintelligent
climber trains only for more physical strength, you
know that it's paramount to train your weaknesses in
all aspects of the performance triad. The amount of
time you dedicate to training technique, the mind,
and physical strength depends on both the results of
your self-assessment and your current ability level.

Olympic and professional athletes design their training schedules to produce a peaking phase around the
time of a major event or competition. No doubt some
of the best competition climbers also use peaking
strategies; I sense, however, that the vast majority of
climbers do not deliberately plan their training in
order to produce a peaking effect.
Really, it's not that difficult to structure your
workout schedule to elevate yourself to peak form for
a personal-best (hardest-ever) route or annual road
trip. If you currently train and climb a few days per
week, you're already doing the hardest part. All that's
required now is to manipulate the intensity, volume,
and rest frequency according to certain guidelines,
and then track your progress in a training notebook.
Details on all the above are forthcoming.

As a rough rule of thumb, beginner and intermediate climbers should focus about 70 percent of their
training time on improving technique, tactics, and the
mental game. For these climbers, only 30 percent of
their training time should be invested in general and
sport-specific conditioning. Conversely, elite climbers
(who possess highly honed technical skills) would be
wise to invest much more training time in the pursuit
of maximum strength and power.

Structuring Your Workout Schedule
In this chapter you will learn to manipulate your
workout schedule over the time frame of several days,
a few weeks or months, and a full year in order to gain
optimal results. In the lexicon of sport scientists, these
crucial time frames are known as the microcycle,
mesocycle, and macrocycle, respectively.

MANIPULATE THE WORKOUT TO "CONFUSE"
THE BODY AND INCREASE MOTIVATION
Chapter 5 explained the importance of regularly modifying your training for climbing. Sadly, many individuals go through the same basic workout ritual week after
week and get frustrated with their lack of progress.
Furthermore, engaging the same weekday training or
weekend at the crags will slowly quell your motivation
to work hard and push beyond your current limits.
Clearly, an intelligently designed program must
regularly vary the focus of your training and climbing.
In the gym it's vital to vary the fundamental details of
workout intensity, volume, length, and the amount of
rest between sets (or climbs). On the rock motivation
and achievement often come in proportion to your
willingness to try new types of climbing, visit new
areas, and test the limits of what is possible (given
your current ability). Later in this chapter you will
learn how to use a ten-week mesocycle and fifty-two-

MICROCYCLE
The structure, content, and quality of your training
over the course of a given week is the most important
factor in determining the effectiveness of your program. Since it is in the microcycle where you choose
what to train and how much to train (or rest), this is
the most fundamentally important part of your workout schedule.
Many climbers' programs are flawed from the
get-go, because they incorrectly prioritize their training during the course of a single workout or week.
Maximizing effectiveness requires training the right
things in the right way and in the right order.
Hopefully, you gained a sense of the optimal workout

f
110

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

hierarchy in reading the previous chapters. After a
complete warm-up, the best order of training is:
1. Skill, strategy, and the mind
2. Maximum strength and power
3. Anaerobic endurance
4. Antagonist-muscle and general conditioning
5. Cardiovascular and general endurance
Certainly you can't effectively train all five of these
areas every day. Instead, you must develop a list of
short-term goals and an overall mission that narrows
the focus of your actions in the microcycle. Whether
you plan to train in two, three, or four of these areas,
it's vital that you execute the training in accordance to
this hierarchy. For instance, a beginner who plans to
work on skill and strategy training as well as perform
some general conditioning exercises would do so in that
order. Similarly, an advanced climber might boulder to
train skill and the mind, then proceed to training maximum strength and power via some targeted exercise.
Working out in conflict with this hierarchy will severely compromise the quality of your training and results.
• Planning Adequate Rest: There are two crucial
rest phases within the microcycle: rest between
exercises (or climbs) and rest between workouts. For
the enthusiastic climber, it's quite easy to fall into the
trap of under-resting—between climbs and between
workouts. Therefore, it would be prudent to rest
more than you want or think you need.
The length of rest taken between individual
exercises and sets plays a primary role in the training stimulus. Rest periods of less than a minute or
two (between climbs or exercises) result in high
blood lactate concentrations and thus train anaerobic endurance (that is, endurance of strength). This
mode is the hallmark of the highly effective intervaltraining strategy covered in Chapters 5 and 6.
Conversely, resting longer than two minutes
between sets allows for greater recovery and, therefore, higher quality and intensity of training. Longer
rests are best used when training technique (new
skills) or maximum strength.

Personal Training Programs

The optimal amount of rest between workouts
is more difficult to gauge. Depending on the intensity of training, it could take anywhere from twenty-four to seventy-two hours or more to fully
recover and benefit from the training stimulus.
Low-intensity general exercise or easy climbing
that produces little muscle soreness can be done up
to five or six days per week. The highest-intensity
training (complex or hypergravity training), however, might require up to ninety-six hours for full
supercompensation, limiting workouts to twice per
week. Chances are, you will be training somewhere in between these extremes, so three or four
days of training/climbing may be ideal for you.
MESOCYCLE

The Principle of Variation states that you must regularly vary your workouts in order to avoid long-term
training plateaus, and it's in the mesocycle that you
can best manipulate your schedule toward this end.
In terms of strength training, it's most effective to
change focus every one to, at most, four weeks. The
goal is to cycle the focus of your training from
endurance, to maximum strength and power, to anaerobic endurance, every few weeks. The 4-3-2-1 training
cycle is an ideal application of principle.
• The 4-3-2-1 Training Cycle: The 4-3-2-1 training
cycle is what I advise for most non-novice and
nonelite climbers. The phases of this cycle are: four
weeks of climbing-endurance training, three weeks
of maximum strength and power training, two
weeks of anaerobic endurance training, and one
week of rest (see Figure 7.1).
The four-week climbing-endurance phase
involves, well, climbing a lot! This climbing can be
done indoors, outdoors, or as a combination of both.
You must, however, faithfully obey a vital distinction of this phase—that is, not to climb maximally,
but instead log lots of mileage on a wide variety of
routes and at several different areas. The result of
this four-week phase will be improved technique
and tactics, acquisition of new schemas (climbing
skills), and the development of local endurance in

111

Figure 7.1 The 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 Training Cycle
4 weeks of
endurance
climbing
3 weeks of
maximum power
and strength

1 week
of rest

2 weeks of
anaerobic
endurance
the arms, upper body, and torso. Climbing four days
a week is ideal as long as you are not climbing at
your limit or to extreme levels of fatigue.
Three weeks of maximum strength and power
training is the next stop in the cycle, and Chapters
5 and 6 detail numerous methods you can employ.
Of course, hard bouldering, hypergravity training,
campus training, and complex training are excellent choices during this period, with maximum
intensity, maximum speed, and maximum effort
being the hallmark of this phase. Consequently,
you will want to take more rest between boulder
problems, exercises, and workout days. It would
also be best to not train on consecutive days. One
day on, one day off, or one day on, two days off, is
optimal during this training phase. Therefore, your
total commitment to training and climbing will be
just two or three days per week.
The two-week anaerobic endurance phase is
the most fatiguing and painful portion of the cycle.
Training at moderately high intensity and with
reduced rest between exercises or climbing sets will
result in a vicious pump and lactic acid burn that
tests the mettle of your mind and body. Interval
training is the cornerstone method of developing
anaerobic endurance (A-E). The common practice
of climbing as many hard routes as possible in, say,
a ninety-minute gym workout (essentially, ninetyminutes of interval training!) is, in fact, pure A-E
training. Unfortunately, many climbers overuse this
method and end up injured or on a training

112

plateau. The A-E training stimulus during this twoweek phase should be applied in a one-day-on,
two-days-off (accomplished climbers) or two-dayson, two-days-off (elite climbers) stratagem.
The final phase of the ten-week cycle is simply
seven days away from climbing or climbing-specific
training. Begin with a day or two of complete rest,
then add in some active-rest activities (see page
143) for the rest of the week, if you like. This week
off is as important as any other week in the cycle,
because it allows both your physical strength and
motivation to rebuild to new heights. It also allows
your technical climbing ability to reach a new peak
thanks to the proven phenomenon of reminiscence.
The Reminiscence Effect relates to the common
experience of skill-sport athletes when their intuitive feel and technical execution peak after a period
away from training or competition. A week or two
off every few months is all it takes to benefit from
this "less is more" effect. Upon returning to the rock,
you will feel more relaxed, automatic, and natural as
your body remembers (reminisces) the well-learned
motor skills. Of course, you will also be more physically and mentally fresh after a week off from training—this makes for the perfect time to begin a road
trip or launch into a new training cycle.
The 3-2-1 Training Cycle: Since the elite climber
possesses highly refined technical skills and a voluminous library of schemas, there is much less to be
gained during the four-week volume-climbing
phase of the 4-3-2-1 cycle. For these 5.12-andabove climbers, gaining the next higher level of
maximum strength, power, and anaerobic
endurance is key to unlocking the higher grades.
Of course, at these lofty levels tiny technical flaws
or even invisible cracks in mental focus can bring
you down in a nanosecond—no climber should
ever take on the closed-minded attitude that more
strength is the end-all answer to climbing harder.
Pursue your weakness (physical, mental, or technical) vigilantly.
With that said, the very best climbers need to
spend a disproportionate amount of time training
maximum strength and power over technique or

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

endurance. In using the 3-2-1 training cycle, you
simply follow the second, third, and fourth phases
of the 4-3-2-1 cycle: Train maximum strength for
three weeks, anaerobic endurance for two weeks,
followed by a week of rest (see Figure 7.2).

Figure 7.2 The 3 - 2 - 1 Training Cycle

1 week
of rest

3 weeks of
maximum power
and strength

MACROCYCLE (LARGE FIFTY-TWO-WEEK TABLE)
The macrocycle relates to your annual game plan of
off-season training, on-season training and climbing,
and off-season breaks away from climbing. In traditional sports the macrocycle is planned around the
competitive calendar, with the goal of peaking for a
major competition. In our sport, however, the idea is
to plan your training to produce a peaking effect for a
major road trip or the best climbing season (weatherwise) in your region.
You can loosely map the macrocycle on a calendar by identifying the months of your on-season road
trips or competitions, the months you expect to perform off-season training, and any downtime you plan
to take during the year. Note that downtime is vital for
recharging your motivation and healing any known

\
2 weeks of
anaerobic
exercise

S

(or unknown) injuries that have likely developed during the course of a long climbing season. For many
climbers, taking the month of December off makes the
most sense and offers the nice reward of holiday parties after a year of dedicated training and tight dietary
surveillance.
Figure 7.3 depicts a typical macrocycle. Note that
a few 4-3-2-1 training cycles are fit into the off-season
training period, along with a couple more during the

Figure 7.3 Sample Macrocycle
Name/Year

Training Objectives a n d S e a s o n a l C l i m b i n g Goals

2002
<°Jbri- a, 5.12a-.
Month
Feb
Jan
Week
1 2 3 4 Ji
Climbing/endurance
Max. strength and power
%1L1L
Anaerobic endurance

Mar

Apr

May

Jul

Aug

Sep

27 28 29 30 31

%%

%%

1L

%TK

%%%

%% mm%
Z
%.

Total number of days
per week of finger
training or climbing

X

Jun

-

a
i

Oct
40 41 42 43 45

Nov
A- A-- A-

Z ^ 2 ^ Z ^ A-

%%

Dec

x%%. ym

£

W5XR

§

-

fc-l-^M-a-J *

j^—i

J-1
Benchmark achievements
and notes

f

ST

Personal Training Programs

?2

* <*

^

113

midseason. The fall months are targeted as the peaking period, followed by a month off to conclude the
year. A blank fifty-two-week macrocycle is contained
in Appendix A for your use.

Targeting Training on Your Preferred
Subdiscipline
In Chapter 1 you learned the importance of obeying
the SAID Principle (specific adaptation to imposed
demands) in optimizing your training for your
favorite subdiscipline of climbing. Figure 1.7 on page
11 depicts how the demands of these subdisciplines
vary over a continuum from bouldering to alpine
climbing. Maximizing the effectiveness of your training requires targeting your workouts accordingly.
The vast majority of climbers reading this book
participate in the three subdisciplines of bouldering,
sport climbing, and multipitch climbing, and this text is
obviously focused on helping these climbers improve
their performance. Still, big-wall and alpine climbers
should be able to glean plenty of useful information.
For instance, in accordance with the SAID Principle, a
serious alpine climber would benefit much more from
high-volume endurance StairMaster training and trail
running than from bouldering on a home wall or
hanging on a fingerboard. Of course, the most specific
and effective training for big-wall and alpine climbers
is simply doing lots of submaximum climbing.
Conversely, building a home wall or joining an
indoor gym is the single biggest advantage that boulder,
sport, or multipitch climbers could give themselves.
Beyond this investment, the time these climbers spend
training or on the rock should mimic the performance
demands of their preferred focus. Boulderers should
dedicate more of their mesocycle to maximum strength
and power training, while multi-pitch climbers would
want to spend many more weeks of the mesocycle on
training anaerobic endurance and local endurance (as
in the 4-3-2-1 training cycle). Sport climbers possessing
a high degree of technical skill, however, would do best
to cycle their focus back and forth between maximum
strength/power and anaerobic endurance. As they
become more advanced, the 3-2-1 training cycle described above would be ideal.

114

Clearly, the best training program for you will
change over time as your technical ability and your
physical strengths and weaknesses change. For this
reason, active self-coaching, with regular self-assessments and goal setting, is critical in maintaining a successful training program. The time invested in plotting
your program intelligently (copy the blank macrocycle
chart in Appendix A) and striving to stay on course
over the long term will pay huge dividends in how far
and how fast you progress in this sport. Furthermore,
if you sense you lack the self-analysis skills and intuition needed to effectively modify your program over
time, I strongly suggest you employ a personal climbing coach to help guide your training.
IMPORTANCE OF A HOME WALL
OR GYM MEMBERSHIP

Regardless of your ability, nothing beats indoor climbing for year-round and tirn,e-efficient sport-specific
training. Therefore, having access to an indoor climbing wall is paramount for rock climbers serious about
improving their ability.
Hopefully, there is a good commercial facility
within a reasonable distance of your home or workplace. If so, join the gym and use it at least twice per
week—this is the number one thing you can do to
improve your climbing ability and climbing-specific
fitness. Many of us, however, are not so fortunate (the
nearest good climbing gym to my home is almost an
hour away), so it's vital to invest in a home wall in
place of that gym membership.
If your space is tight, simply build an 8-foot by 8foot forty-five-degree overhanging wall. While this
setup has obvious limitations (physical and mental), it
will enable you to get an excellent upper-body workout as well as help improve your sense of climbing
movement and body position. If a larger space is available, it would be wise to construct a roof section and
a slightly overhanging (ten to twenty-five degrees past
vertical) traverse wall in addition to the forty-fivedegree wall. A garage with a high ceiling is ideal, especially if there is a way to control the climate in the
summer and winter.
Another excellent strategy is organizing a com-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Steep home walls rule for time-efficient, sport-specific training.
munity wall. Recruit five or ten energetic climbers to
pitch in a couple hundred dollars each. Rent a garage
or some similar structure that has room to build several hundred square feet of climbing surface with a
variety of angles, and then complete your facility with

Personal Training Programs

a campus board and fingerboard. Put your creative
mind to work and get proactive at pulling the
resources together—no doubt you can build one
wickedly fun and highly effective training facility, and
you will emerge a much better climber next season.

115

Crafting an Effective Personal
Training Program

mental training to improve thought and emotional
control before, during, and after a climb or workout.

Obviously, there is a limit to how precisely I can prescribe an optimal training program for you via the
static format of a book. On the pages that follow, however, I lay out the basic, fundamentally important
guidelines that you should follow in developing your
training program. Do so, and you will be far better off
than the typical climber who trains in a haphazard,
trial-and-error manner.
Most important, you must adopt the appropriate
training outline for your current ability level. Over
time you can tweak this program according to the
results you experience and in line with the good training sense you've developed from reading this book. As
long as you act in ways consistent with the principles
and concepts described throughout this text, you will
remain on course toward your goals.
One of the most basic and powerful concepts in
this book states that you must train in the manner
best suited to you and not do as others do. Remember,
to outperform the masses, you must do things they
aren't doing! Toward this end, you will find training
guidelines for three basic groups of climbers—beginners, accomplished, and elite—described below. These
categories are defined in Figure 7.4.

Beginner-Level Workout
PRIMARY MISSION
Maximize learning of climbing skills and optimize
body composition and general conditioning. Engage in

WORKOUT GUIDELINES
Climb up to four days per week (ideally climbing outdoors two of the days) and visit at least one new climbing area per month. Reduce body fat with improved
dietary surveillance and up to four days of aerobic training per week. Train the antagonist muscles twice per
week using the exercises described in Chapter 6. If you
cannot climb during the workweek, you should instead
engage in some pull-muscle training (use only the A
exercises in Chapter 6). Time spent training and climbing should break down according to Figure 7.5.
SAMPLE MICROCYCLES
Two slightly different microcycles are shown in Figure
7.6—one for those able to climb during the workweek
(home or commercial gym, or outdoors) and the other
for those unable to climb except on weekends.
SAMPLE MESOCYCLE
I do not advise the use of a formal strength-training
mesocycle (such as the 4-3-2-1 cycle); nor do I suggest
you attempt to climb at maximum difficulty or push
excessively hard on the rock. Instead, your mediumterm goals should be to increase your volume of
climbing as well as the diversity of techniques used.
For beginners it's prudent to regularly take a week off
from climbing to allow for systemic consolidation of
skills and supercompensation. I propose roughly a 4-1
cycle in which you perform the above microcycles for

re 1A Climber Classifications for Training Programs
Beginner

Accomplished

Elite

< 1 year climbing

actively climbing > 1 year

• minimum 3 years of active climbing

toprope ability < 5.9

toprope > 5.9

little/no lead climbing experience

lead climbing up to 5.10 trad
or 5.11 sport

• on-sight lead ability at 5.11 trad
and/or 5.12 sport

boulder < V3

• boulder > V 6

boulder V3 to V6

116

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

SAMPLE MACROCYCLE
Executing a "perfect" macrocycle is less important for
beginners than it is for accomplished and elite
climbers, though you can still benefit from some longterm planning relating to possible road trips and when
you might take your annual month off. You might
simply repeat the 4-1 cycle throughout the year,
except for when on an extended climbing trip or during your month off. Use the blank macrocycle in
Appendix A to plot your training.

F i g u r e 7.5 W o r k o u t T i m e — B e g i n n e r

SUMMARY OF TRAINING
FOR A BEGINNING CLIMBER
•

Climb up to four days per week and at as many
areas as possible. Climb for volume over difficulty—maximum learning of a wide range of skills
and tactics is far more important than the grade of
routes ascended.

5%
sport-specific
strength
training
activities

actual
climbing

general
conditioning

Beginners should invest the majority of the training
time in actual climbing. Any fitness training should
mostly focus on general conditioning.

four weeks, then take a week off from climbing and
training (except for general conditioning and dietary
surveillance).

• Engage in conditioning exercises that focus on
optimizing body composition, improving flexibility,
and toning the antagonist muscles. Improved
dietary surveillance is crucial for improving body
composition.
•

Sport-specific strength training should be limited to
the A exercises, and actual climbing should be
given preference over doing these exercises.

•

Strive for awareness of your thoughts and emotions
throughout the day and while climbing. Mental
training is vital for all climbers, even beginners!

F i g u r e 7.6 B e g i n n e r S a m p l e M i c r o c y c l e s
(weekday climbing available)

CL-climb

Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

GC

CL/A

GC

CL/A

R

CL

GCorCL

GC-general conditioning [aerobics,
stretching, and so on]
A-antagonist-muscle training

(no weekday climbing possible)
Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

GC

SS/A

GC

SS/A

R

CL

CL

Personal Training Programs

SS-sport-specific strength training
R-rest

117

Accomplished

Climber

Workout

PRIMARY MISSION
Maximize economy of climbing movement with constant focus on refining mental and technical skills.
Expand motor skill schemas and experience by avoiding specialization as long as possible. Minimize time
spent on general conditioning and increase the volume of sport-specific strength training that targets
improving maximum grip strength, lock-off ability,
pulling power, and anaerobic endurance.
WORKOUT GUIDELINES
Climb three to four days per week (indoors and/or
outdoors). Strive to climb at as many areas as possible
and with a diverse range of techniques and styles.
Serious strength training should be executed according to the 4-3-2-1 cycle with a strong focus on Blevel exercises. Any climbing should be done before
your strength training, and never climb or work out
more than a total of four days per week. Train the
antagonist and core muscles twice per week.
Maintain close dietary surveillance during the latter
portion of off-season training and during on-season
training/climbing. Err on the side of over-resting, not
overtraining! Breakdown of time spent training
should be roughly as shown in Figure 7.7.

efit more by using the 3-2-1 mesocycle as shown in
Figure 7.2.
SAMPLE MACROCYCLE
The average accomplished climber gets outdoors
twenty or more weekends per year and may go on as
many as two to four extended road trips per year.
Therefore, careful macrocycle planning is vital to
maximize conditioning for these trips and to help produce peaking for an extreme project or personal-best
ascent. Use the blank macrocycle in Appendix A to
structure an effective long-term training plan that
accounts for your travel plans, the best outdoor climbing season, and when you choose to take your month
off from climbing.

F i g u r e ?•? W o r k o u t T i m e — A c c o m p l i s h e d

SAMPLE MICROCYCLES
Detailed here are four possible microcycles—two for
those who are able to climb during the workweek
and two for those who cannot (see Figure 7.8). Use
these microcycles when you are not using the 4-3-21 mesocycle. Otherwise, train according to the 4-3-21 mesocycle described in Figure 7.1.

35%

,.-

SAMPLE MESOCYCLE
Dedicated periods of serious strength training for
gains (not on-season maintenance training) are best
scheduled according to the 4-3-2-1 cycle. Figure 7.1
shows a highly effective ten-week program that
allows for adequate rest and thus produces maximum strength gains without the risk of overtraining
or injury. High-end accomplished climbers may ben-

118

actual
climbing

sport-specific
strength
training
activities

general
conditioning

Accomplished climbers need to spend about onethird of total training time on sport-specific strength
training activities.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 7.8 Accomplished Climber Sample Microcycles
(weekday climbing available)
Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

R

CL/SS/A

R

CL/SS/A

R

CL

CL or GC
CL-climb

or
Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

R

CL/SS/A

CL/SS

A

R

CL

CL or GC

GC-general conditioning (aerobics,
stretching, and so on]
A-antagonist-muscle training

(no weekday climbing possible)
Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

R

SS/A

GC

SS/A

R

CL

CL or GC

SS-sport-specific strength training
R-rest

or
Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

R

SS/A

SS

A/GC

R

CL

CL or GC

SUMMARY OF TRAINING FOR AN
ACCOMPLISHED CLIMBER

•

Climb up to four days per week and gain exposure
to as many different types and styles of climbing as
possible. Refine mental and technical skills to maximize economy of movement—the fastest way to
becoming a stronger climber.

• Engage in regular, scheduled sport-specific strength
training to increase maximum grip strength,
upper-body power, and anaerobic endurance.
Focus primarily on the B exercises, and always perform any planned climbing before doing the
strength training.
•

Commit to training the antagonist muscles twice
per week. These are critical for maintaining muscle
balance and preventing injury.

• Work on becoming a more mental climber. Practice
mental-training strategies throughout the week,

Personal Training Programs

and strive to leverage all your mental tools when
you step onto the rock.

Elite Climber Workout
PRIMARY MISSION

Identify and correct any technical weak spots or energy leaks (no matter how small) that compromise
climbing performance. Constantly evaluate and refine
mental skills—eliminate subtle forms of self-sabotage
with renewed focus on the process, not outcome, of
climbing. Perform the optimal amount of targeted
strength training to increase maximum strength and
power in the fingers, arms, and upper body.
WORKOUT GUIDELINES

Unlike the mass of climbers, the elite performer needs
to spend a disproportionate amount of training time on
sport-specific strength training (see Figure 7.9).

119

F i g u r e 7.9 W o r k o u t T i m e — E l i t e

cles are depicted in Figure 7.10, though you can also
employ the schedule shown in the 3-2-1 mesocycle.
SAMPLE MESOCYCLE
Many elite-level climbers train intuitively using their
acute physical self-awareness as the training guide.
Some of these high-end climbers also get injured, sick,
and experience long-term plateaus in performance.
While it's possible that you can avoid these pitfalls,
following a predetermined training schedule is the
best safeguard against overtraining. Toward this end,
it may be advantageous to adopt a schedule along the
lines of the 3-2-1 mesocycle (see Figure 7.2).
SAMPLE MACROCYCLE

actual
climbing

strength
training
activities

conditioning

Only elite climbers need to focus extensively on
sport-specific strength training activities—up to sixty
percent Design workouts to target a preferred
subdiscipline or "project route."

Several weeks or even a month or two at a time may
be dedicated to strength training and hard bouldering
with little or no actual roped climbing. Access to an
indoor climbing wall is absolutely necessary for this
highly targeted training. Use of the 3-2-1 cycle and a
heavy focus on B and C exercises and complex training is required to squeeze out additional gains in
strength, power, and anaerobic endurance. Sound performance nutrition is critical for accelerating recovery
from severe workouts and to ensure maximum supercompensation. Brief bouts of antagonist-muscle training and copious rest are vital to help stave off injury
and overtraining.
SAMPLE MICROCYCLES
There are numerous possible microcycles, though
intensity of training and your personal recovery ability
are fundamental to determining the appropriate
amount of training stimulus. Several possible microcy-

120

Elite climbers tend to be very goal oriented and compulsive long-term planners. It's in the macrocycle that
you need to book road trips, competitions, and the
month off from climbing, so you can plan the most
effective training schedule to produce a physical peaking for key events. You can plot your own macrocycle
using the blank chart found in Appendix A.
SUMMARY OF TRAINING FOR AN
ELITE CLIMBER
• Plan and execute an optimal—not maximum—
strength-training program that targets your personal
weakest link. The goal is to maximize grip strength,
upper-body power, and anaerobic endurance.
• Keep a vigilant watch out for any chinks in your
technical and mental armor. Economy of effort
while climbing is paramount, and it's your mental,
technical, and tactical skills that determine your
fuel efficiency. Use your Mental Wings 24/7; only
then will you be absolutely sure they are helping
elevate you toward your life goals.
• Err on the side of over-resting instead of overtraining. Use performance nutrition and generous
amounts of sleep and rest to enhance recovery and
maximize gains from training.
• Be a compulsive planner of training, travel, and
rest. Try to leave nothing to chance, and avoid

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 7.10 Elite Climber Sample Microcycles

Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

R

A/GC

CL/SS

A

R

CL

CL

CL-climb
GC-general conditioning [aerobics,

or

stretching, and so on]
Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

R

CL/SS/A

R

CL/SS/A

R

CL

CL

or

A-antagonist-muscle training
SS-sport-specific strength training

Mon

Tue

Wed

Thur

Fri

Sat

Sun

R

CL/SS/A

CL/SS

A/GC

R

CL

CL

R-rest

trial-and-error training or getting drawn into some
else's (flawed) training routine.

Training Considerations for
Females and "Juniors"
This final section takes a look at special considerations
for female or junior climbers. I've intentionally keep
this section brief, because I feel that female and junior
climbers are particularly gifted for climbing; there are
only a few things they need to consider or do differently compared to the typical male climber.

Unique Issues for Female Climbers
Female climbers differ from males both physiologically
and psychologically. While the psychological differences
are more difficult to measure, there are clear physiological differences that may be an asset or liability in terms
of climbing performance. The average female is about 5
inches shorter, thirty-five pounds lighter in total body
mass, and forty-five pounds lighter in lean body mass
(due to a higher percentage of body fat) than the average male. This large difference in lean body mass (muscle) is largely attributed to greater levels of the hormone
testosterone in males (Broomfield 1994).
Consequently, the average femafe possesses

Personal Training Programs

approximately 40 percent of the upper-body strength
and 70 percent of the lower-body strength when compared to men. In terms of strength-to-lean-bodymass, however, the ratio is notably less—females possess about 55 percent of the upper-body strength and
about the same in lower-body strength as men
(Wilmore 1974). Thus, it's clear that the greater level
of adipose tissue in females has a negative effective on
physical performance, especially in sports requiring a
high strength-to-weight ratio. The female climber,
therefore, will benefit much more from regular aerobic training (to lower her percentage of body fat) than
her male counterpart—running for twenty to forty
minutes several days per week will effectively increase
strength-to-weight ratio in many females (due to
changes in body composition).
Though females are naturally weaker than males
(less testosterone and lean mass), they do respond to
strength training in the same ways as men.
Consequently, the serious female climber should not
hesitate to engage in sport-specific strength-training
exercises described in Chapter 6. In particular, the
focus should be on increasing maximum strength in
the pull muscles and the general condition of the core
and antagonist push muscles.

121

The first few weeks or months of training will
produce marked improvement thanks to neural adaptations. Beyond that, strength gains will come more
slowly as hypertrophy (muscle growth) becomes a
more significant player in producing strength gains.
For this reason it's vital that strength training for the
female climber be just as focused as for the male
climber. The typical health club workout is no more
appropriate for female climbers than for males, and in
the long run could have a negative effect on climbing
performance.
Technically and mentally, the beginning female
climber is often a better performer than the male
climber, and this is something that every femafe
climber should recognize and leverage to the greatest
possible extent. More flexibility, a lower center of
gravity, less body weight, shorter fingers, and a more
measured approach to climbing can all help a female
climber outperform her male counterpart despite possessing less strength. So while sport-specific strength
training is a must for any serious female climber, she
should not overlook her gifts of style, strategy, creativity, and finesse.
As a final note, the belief that physical performance tends to be worse during menstruation is not
absolute. While the menstrual cycle's affect on performance varies widely among individuals and from
sport to sport, at least one study has shown that grip
strength was greater during the actual menstrual
phase (Davies 1991). Ultimately, you need to develop
an awareness of just when is your best performance
time of the month. You can then pfan your training
and climbing to exploit this period, whether it's for a
few high-intensity workouts or making a personalbest ascent!

Training for Junior Climbers
Kids can unquestionably learn complex sports skills
more rapidly than adults, and in recent years we've
seen numerous "wonder kids" take the sport-climbing
world by storm. Clearly, these young, generally prepubescent climbers possess the slight physique ideal for
difficult climbing. There are numerous other physiological traits that work in their favor to enhance func-

122

tion and rate of recovery. Unfortunatefy, these young
climbers often lack the maturity, self-awareness, and
life experience to transfer their sport-climbing prowess
to a wide range of climbing pursuits. They are also not
prepared for the rigors of serious sport-specific training
as outlined in this text. Therefore, I do not advocate
any sport-specific training for climbers under the age
of thirteen, and only limited strength training for
teenagers between the ages of thirteen and seventeen.
TRAINING FOR PRETEENAGE YOUTHS
(UNDER AGE THIRTEEN)

Preteens are much better off simply climbing for fun
over performance. Climbing indoors or outdoors up to
four days per week will allow their natural ability and
strength to surface. The coaching emphasis should be
on skill training and the fundamentaf aspects of the
mental game. No strength training is advised other
than basic body weight exercises such as pull-ups,
push-ups, dips, abdominal crunches, and the like.
With this approach most preteens will progress rapidly in bouldering, indoor climbing, and sport climbing,
developing the foundation for becoming successfuf
aff-around climbers in the future if they choose to do
so. Some preteens—most likely those with the best
coaching or natural ability—will experience a meteoric rise in ability and apparent strength, all without
any training outside of climbing.
The thirteen-year-old phenom Tori Allen is a classic example. She began climbing at age ten and has progressed to redpointing 5.13 sport routes in just over
three years. Her "training program" is simply climbing
indoors a few days per week and getting out on real
rock during the weekend. Otherwise, Tori is a normal
teenage girl who excels in school and a number of other
pursuits outside of climbing. She is a perfect modef
whom I feef all young climbers should follow.
TRAINING FOR TEENAGE CLIMBERS
(AGES THIRTEEN THROUGH SEVENTEEN)
The greatest gains in strength and power come during
the period of the adolescent growth spurt—around
thirteen for girls and fourteen for boys (Bfoomfield
1994). Still, anthropometric changes may have a pos-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

itive or negative impact on performance. Teenagers lacking strength and
power can begin some sport-specific
strength training, including A- and Blevel pull-muscle, antagonist-muscle,
and core-muscle exercises. They
should not engage in the most stressful forms of training (campus training, hypergravity, HIT), however,
until age sixteen or seventeen, at the
earliest.
Still, the training emphasis
should remain focused on developing
good technical and mental skills.
Teenage climbers would benefit
tremendously from exposure to an
expanding range of climbing activities
such as traditional climbing and limited alpine and ice climbing. Some
individuals may naturally gravitate
toward competition climbing, though
this should be the youth's choice, not
the choice of an overbearing parent.
As teenage climbers transition
into young adulthood (age seventeen
or eighteen), they can begin a more
serious and formal training program
for climbing. Many of these late-teen
climbers will already be accomplished
or elite, and they can now engage in
the appropriate training program as
outlined earlier in the chapter.

Twelve-year old Laura Griffiths,
a top juniors climber, training at
Rockreation in Costa Mesa,
California.

Personal Training Programs

123

Mis:i Ann
SlASf/IH'/l.

Lnncasteik
PHOTOGRAPH
E RI C

J .

BY

HORST

H

H

Performance Nutrition
Judge your success by what you had
to give up in order to get it.

T

he foods and beverages you consume play a primary role in determining your mental acuity,
physical performance output, and recovery ability
from vigorous training or climbing. Therefore, a
thoughtfully designed diet will provide a noticeable
edge in performance, whereas engaging in a "see-food
diet"—you see food and you eat it!—will continue to
hamper your performance in a covert way that you
may never recognize.
Clearly, it's impossible to say exactly how big a
part diet plays in climbing performance, but I estimate
that average climbers can realize a 10 to 20 percent
improvement in their training, recovery, concentration, energy, and overall climbing performance if they
dedicate themselves to improved dietary surveillance
As a serious athlete and performance coach, I follow the changing trends in nutrition with great interest. In the late 1980s high-carbohydrate diets were the
rage; in the early 1990s high-protein diets were in
vogue; and most recently the high-fat, low-carbohydrate diets are what seem to sell the most books.
Interestingly, all these diets are backed by scientific
studies that show they work (in producing weight loss)_
to some degree given that you execute them exactly
and presuming you are faced with one or more of the
health issues common to obese Americans. For a reasonably fit athlete, however, there is no need to engage

in one of the fad diet regimens—nor any benefit.
Proper performance nutrition is not that complex a
subject; in the pages that follow, I will provide you
with basic guidelines that will make eating right easy.
I was fortunate to realize the causal connection
between nutrition and performance many years ago.
Though I occasionally fall from the wagon, I credit
sound nutrition—about forty-eight weeks per year—
for my ability to train exceedingly hard, avoid injury,
recover quickly, and still climb at a high level after
twenty-five years and despite my aging and abused
joints, tendons, and muscles. I hope I can help you do
the same, too!

Macroimtrients
There is no single perfect diet for climbers, just as
there is no single perfect training program. To some
extent, the amount and best type of foods for you
depend on your climbing preference. For instance,
alpine climbers have significantly different nutritional
needs and energy requirements than those of folks
who partake in cragging or bouldering.
Our study of performance nutrition begins with a
look at the three macronutrients: protein, fat, and
carbohydrate. As in the prior chapters, the focus will
remain on the best strategies for rock climbers, with
only general information for alpine climbers.

Protein
Protein has many functions in the body, including
building and repairing of tissue, acting as a major
component of the immune system, and making up

125

enzymes, which facilitate every reaction that goes on
in the body.
According to Registered Dietitian and Nutritionist
Barb Branda Turner, growing individuals need more
protein than adults do simply because they are actually laying down large amounts of new tissue. Healthy
adults have a fairly extensive protein pool to draw on;
that is, the proteins we consume are recycled several
times for different functions in the body. For this reason daily protein requirements for adults are modest,
even if they are training to increase muscle mass.
Successful training is much less a factor of consuming
a lot of protein than of using the appropriate training
strategy and eating enough carbohydrates to fuel your
training.
DAILY REQUIREMENTS

Between 1.2 and 1.5 grams of protein per kilogram of
body weight per day is adequate for most climbers.
For a 72-kilogram (160-pound) individual, this translates to 86 to 108 grams per day. This is higher than
the 0.8 to 1.0 gram per kilogram recommended for
sedentary individuals by the FDA. Some studies have
shown a slightly higher need in athletes, not just to
increase muscle mass, but also to facilitate recovery
from exercise and compensate for the catabolic
(tissue-consuming) effects of long, intense exercise.
Still, I (and most scientific nutritionists) do not buy in
to the massive protein-intake guidelines (as much as
1.7 to 3.0 grams per kilogram per day) prescribed in
some fitness magazines.
BEST PROTEIN SOURCES
Low-fat dairy products such as skim milk and yogurt,
plus lean chicken, fish, or lean red meats, provide you
with the best protein value for your calorie. For example, a three-ounce piece of lean red meat such as tenderloin contains only 180 calories and twenty-five
grams of high-quality, complete protein. A glass of
skim milk contains about ten grams of complete protein and almost zero fat. If you prefer not to eat much
meat (like me) or dairy products, whey protein powder mixed into skim milk, 100 percent pure fruit juice,
or water is an excellent source of high-quality protein.

126

Incomplete proteins—these sources that do not contain all twenty amino acids—are also useful when
eaten in combination. This is of particular importance
to vegetarian athletes, who, by the way, are more likely to be protein deficient.

Fat
It's true that most Americans eat far too much fat,
which contributes to our high incidence of heart disease, cancer, hypertension, and obesity. Still, getting
too little fat has serious implications as well. Dietary fat
is necessary as a source of essential fatty acids, which
are involved in critical physiological processes such as
the functions of the immune system and hormone production. Furthermore, our cell membranes consist
largely of phospholipids (fatty acid derivatives), without which we would not be able to make healthy new
cells, including muscle cells. A dietary fat deficiency in
female athletes has been shown to cause amenorrhea
(menstrual cycle irregularities), which may affect the
development and maintenance of bone tissue.
DAILY REQUIREMENTS
On average the body's minimum fat requirement is fifteen to twenty-five grams per day. Usually fat-intake
recommendations are expressed in terms of percentage
of total calories consumed daily. For climbers, 15 to 30
percent of total calories should come from fat, depending on your climbing preference.
For cragging and bouldering, where a low percentage of body fat is desirable and the energy
demands are largely anaerobic, fat intake should be
restricted to 15 to 20 percent of total calories consumed. Alpine climbers, however, may be better off
consuming up to 30 percent of daily calories from fat.
These endurance climbers place great demands on the
larger muscles of the body (especially the legs) and
expend much more energy per day than, say, sport
climbers. Fat is more calorie dense than carbohydrate
and protein (see Figure 8.1), and it's a good fuel for
long, slow aerobic activities. Both these attributes
make foods with a higher fat content more advantageous for alpine climbers than for crag climbers.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 8.1 Caloric Content of Macronutrients

Macronutrient

Calories/gram

Carbohydrate

4

Protein

4

Fat

9

FOUR TYPES OF FATS

In consuming your daily requirement of fat, it's
important to know which of the four types of fat—saturated, monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, and trans
fatty acids—are "good" and "bad." Although each contains the same nine calories per gram consumed, they
are not all created equal in terms of their role in performance nutrition. Consequently, it's important not
only to eat the optimal amount of fat but also to have
the best ratio of the different types of fatty acids.
•

Saturated fats are most common in animal products such as milk and dairy products, meats, and
poultry. They are also present in significant
amounts in some nuts, including Brazil and
macadamia. Although excessive saturated fat
intake does increase serum cholesterol, in particular the LDL or "bad" cholesterol, a certain amount
is needed by our bodies to be made into fatty-acidcontaining compounds such as hormones and
phospholipids.

• Monounsaturated fatty acids are found in vegetables and oils including canola, olive, peanut,
and avocado. These "monos" are thought to be the
most beneficial in protecting against heart disease
because of their ability to lower LDL without
reducing HDL (the "good" cholesterol).
• Polyunsaturated fatty acids are common in
fish, especially tuna, mackerel, salmon, and trout,
and in corn, sunflower, and soybean oils. The
omega-3 "polys" found mainly in fish and flaxseeds
are currently being investigated for their roles in
fighting inflammatory diseases such as arthritis and

Performance

Nutrition

other illnesses, including migraine headaches and
heart disease.
• Trans fatty acids are found in trace amounts in
almost all sources of natural fats, but most of those
in our diet come from hydrogenated oils. During
the process of hydrogenation, liquid vegetable oils
are converted into solids by bombardment with
hydrogen atoms (as in the making of margarine and
shortening). Hydrogenation in effect converts
unsaturated fatty acids into saturated fatty acids
iargely through the formation of trans bonds.
Recent studies have raised concerns about these
bonds, because they produce effects similar to those
of saturated fats and may, in fact, be cancer causing.
While most well-trained athletes have a very
healthy cholesterol profile (unless they smoke or have
a genetic predisposition to problems), it would be very
wise to limit your intake of trans fatty acids.
Unfortunately, hydrogenated oils and partially hydrogenated oils are found in such a wide range of foods
that they are hard to avoid. For instance, almost all
the breads, cookies, and snack foods you buy off the
shelf at the grocery store contain high amounts of
these harmful oils. (Read the labels—you'll be surprised how many foods you eat daily contain them!)
Most commercial fried foods are cooked in oils that
contain trans fatty acids. Even some health foods like
MET-Rx bars contain partially hydrogenated oils.
Clearly, you can't avoid them completely, but it's
worth the effort to minimize your exposure to them.
Because of their diverse functions, it might be
best to consume about equai amounts of saturated,
monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids
and minimize intake of trans fatty acids. It's a good
strategy to try to eliminate hydrogenated oils from
your diet, and in doing so you will reduce your consumption of these unhealthy fats to acceptable levels.
(Unfortunately, you just can't escape them completely in this world of processed and fast foods.)
Examine the labels of the foods you eat most regularly and determine which items are doing you the
most nutritional damage. Chances are you can make
huge strides by eliminating just a handful of killer items

127

like french fries, fried meats, snack cakes and muffins,
salty snacks (buy baked chips and crackers instead), and
any highly processed food designed for maximum shelf
life (no doubt, high in hydrogenated oils).

Carbohydrates
Although fat and protein can also be used to provide
energy, carbohydrates are the most efficient and effective source of energy for the muscles and brain. A
high-carbohydrate diet is also important for athletes
due to its protein-sparing effect. If you do not consume enough carbohydrates to meet your energy
needs, muscle protein will be broken down for
energy—the last thing any strength or power athlete
would ever want! Consequently, the popular low-carbohydrate diets (Atkins, Zone, Ketogenic, and so
forth) are inappropriate for most active climbers.
Carbohydrates come in two forms: sugars and
starches. The sugar foods include fruit, sugar, soda
pop, jam, honey, and molasses, while common starches are breads, rice, cereals, and pasta. Because these
are the best sources of energy for high-intensity training and climbing, I'm sure you are already consuming
plentiful amounts of these foods. Not all carbohydrates are created equal, however: Different carbohydrates release sugar into the bloodstream at different
rates. The very best athletes know how to leverage
this information to maintain stable energy throughout
the day and to significantly increase the rate of recovery after a hard workout or day of climbing. If you are
serious about climbing better, this subject should be of
great interest to you. Enter the glycemic index.
GLYCEMIC INDEX

Until recently, nutritionists classified carbohydrates
only into the two basic groups of simple carbohydrates
(sugars) and complex carbohydrates (starches).
Simple sugars were said to produce a rapid rise in
blood sugar and quick energy, while complex carbohydrates were said to provide slow, steady energy.
Although this concept holds true in general, recent
studies have found that there is a large variability in
the rise in blood sugar following the ingestion of various foods from both the sugar and starch groups.

128

To investigate and more accurately classify the
metabolism of carbohydrates, researchers developed
the glycemic index (GI). This index determines how
the ingestion of a particular food affects blood sugar
levels in comparison to the ingestion of straight glucose. Consumption of high-GI foods causes a rapid
increase in blood sugar and a large insulin response.
Low-GI foods produce more subtle changes. Climbers
can use knowledge of the glycemic index to control
energy levels and to speed recovery after a workout.
Here's how.
Stable insulin levels are optimal for long-duration
stop-and-go activities such as all-day climbing and
long training sessions. Experts also agree that a steady
insulin curve promotes muscle growth and discourages fat storage. This makes low- to medium-GI foods
preferable for climbers in most situations.
High-GI foods produce large swings in blood
sugar and an insulin spike. One minute you are
jonesing to crank another hard route and the next
you're in the tank and ready to call it a day.
Figuring the glycemic index of certain foods is
more difficult than it might seem at first. For instance,
most foods classified as simple carbohydrates (cereal,
candy, some fruit juices) are high-GI foods. However,
so are potatoes, white rice, bread, and bagels—all considered complex carbohydrates. Low-GI foods include
vegetables, whole grains, brown rice, and milk (see
Figure 8.2).
• As a general rule, the more processed and easily
digestible a food, the higher its glycemic index (for
instance, liquids have higher index than similar food
solids). High-fiber foods tend to elicit a slow insulin
response and have a relatively low GI. Finally, foods
containing some protein and fat along with carbohydrates come in lower on the scale.
This last piece of information is useful if you don't
have the gumption to memorize and use this index.
Consuming some protein and fat during each of your
carbohydrate feedings serves to moderate the overall
glycemic response of the meal. So for a long day at the
crags, pack energy bars that contain several grams of
protein and fat in addition to the carbohydrates.
The one good time to consume high-GI foods

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

F i g u r e 8 . 2 G l y c e m i c Index of C o m m o n Foods
High (>70)

Medium (50-69)

Low (<50)

bagel

72

banana

55

bulgur

48

carrots

71

bran muffin

60

spaghetti

41

corn chips

73

oatmeal

61

whole wheat

37

corn flakes

77

raisins

64

All Bran

42

doughnut

76

rice

56

orange

43

honey

73

sweet potato

54

pear

36

jelly beans

80

wheat crackers

67

apple

38

potatoes

83

cookies

60

peas

48

rice [instant]

91

sucrose

65

baked beans

48

rice cakes

82

soft drinks

68

lentils

28

Rice Krispies

82

orange juice

57

milk [skim]

32

Grape Nut Flakes

80

granola bars

61

fructose

23

cracker [soda/water]

76

macaroni

64

grapefruit

23

glucose

100

Shredded Wheat

58

yogurt [w/fruit)

30

Gatorade

78

ice cream

60

peanuts

14

such as candy, juice, soda pop, and most sports drinks
(like Gatorade) is at the end of your workout or day of
climbing. Intense exercise primes the muscles to
immediately reload energy reserves in the form of
glycogen. High blood sugar and the insulin spike help
drive this repletion process. The optimal window for
these high-GI foods is the first two hours following
exercise. After that, favor low- to medium-index
foods for slow, steady refueling.
DAILY REQUIREMENTS

Carbohydrates should account for nearly two-thirds of
your daily caloric intake. This means that roughly
two-thirds of your plate should be covered with pasta,

Performance

Nutrition

rice, potatoes, and vegetables, with the other third
comprised of lean, protein-rich foods. Be sure to apply
the same rules when snacking. Try to pair up carbos
such as a bagel or fruit with some protein like skim
milk or yogurt. The protein helps slow down the
digestion of carbohydrates and results in longerlasting energy.
You can also calculate your approximate need for
carbohydrates according to your body weight.
Training for two hours per day, you would need
roughly seven grams of carbohydrate per kilogram of
body weight. For example, if you weigh seventy-two
kilograms (160 pounds), the requirement would be
for approximately 500 grams of carbohydrates; at four

129

calories per gram of carbohydrate, this would equal
2,000 calories. Engaging in a full day of climbing,
however—compared to two hours of training—may
demand as much as ten to fourteen grams per kilogram of body weight.

know of very many, if any, climbers who carry four
quarts of liquid to the crags—thus, the mass of
climbers are unknowingly detracting from their ability due to mild dehydration.

Optimal Macronutrient Ratio
Water
Water may be the most important nutrient to get right
when you are climbing, yet I sense that many climbers
are chronically dehydrated. Dr. Kristine Clark, director
of sports nutrition at Penn State's Center for Sports
Medicine, says that "even a 1 to 2 percent drop in
water will cause problems in performance." The earliest symptoms of mild dehydration are a loss of concentration and enhanced fatigue. Clark adds that "a 3
percent drop in water level can create headaches,
cramping, dizziness." Furthermore, a recent study has
shown that dehydration leading to just a 1.5 percent
drop in body weight resulted in a statistically significant drop in maximum strength (Schoffstall 2001).
In a sport as stressful as climbing, dehydration
also increases your chance of a joint or tendon injury.
Consider that proper hydration facilitates transport of
nutrients to the cells, helps protect tissues from injury,
and maintains joint lubrication. Therefore, for the
purpose of injury prevention, maintaining proper
hydration as you train or climb is as important as a
proper warm-up.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREVENTING
DEHYDRATION

As a rule of thumb, it's a good idea to prehydrate
before you go to the gym or head out climbing by
drinking two tall glasses of water. Follow this with a
minimum of an eight-ounce glass every hour
throughout the day. This would total two quarts of
water consumed over an eight-hour period on the
rocks. This is a bare minimum amount—what you
might drink, say, on a cold day when you perspire
very little. Climbing on a humid, eighty-degree day,
however, would roughly double this requirement.
That means carrying four quarts of water with you for
an eight-hour day of climbing. Of course, I doubt you

130

As you may have gleaned from the previous sections,
the optimal macronutrient ratio for a climber depends
on the type of climbing activity. High-intensity, stopand-go climbing like bouldering or cragging is best
fueled with a 65/15/20 ratio of carbohydrates, protein,
and fat, respectively. The long, slow distance training
and climbing of an alpine climber would demand a
higher total calorie count per day than the typical rock
climber, and this need would be more easily met with
a higher-fat diet (though adequate carbohydrates are
still necessary). Consequently, a macronutrient ratio of
55/15/30 would be more suitable. See Figure 8.3 for
sample calorie counts for a typical male and female
rock climber, though you personally could have significantly different requirements.

Micronutrients and Sports Supplements
The subject of micronutrients and sports supplements
is so broad that it's impossible to discuss in a comprehensive manner in an instructional text like this. Still,
the use of vitamin supplements and functional foods
is so common in sports that the subject is worthy of at
least a primer.
Sales of vitamin and sports supplements is a
multibillion-dollar industry that bombards us with
multilateral, never-ending advertising. Some of the
weight-loss and strength-gain claims are remarkable,
but very few of these claims are backed by reliable scientific studies. Many products are promoted with
strong anecdotal claims and well-paid pitchmen, but
very few actually do what the advertisers claim.
It's my belief that up to 90 percent of the sports
supplements on the market are nothing other than
modern-day snake oil, yet a serious athlete looking to
maximize performance must be careful not to throw
the baby out with the bathwater. On the pages that
follow, we'll sort out the handful of products that

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 8.3 Estimated Nutrient and Calorie Needs

Climber
Male
Active Day
[160 Ib/72kg3
Male
Rest Day
CI 60 lb/72kg}
Female
Active Day
C110 lb/50kg)

VITAL VITAMINS

Macronutrient

Grams
Needed

Calories

Carbohydrate

520g

2,080

Protein

115g

460

Fat

70g

630

Carbohydrate

360g

1,140

Protein

85g

340

Fat

50g

450

Carbohydrate

350g

1,400

Protein

80g

320

Fat

50g

450

Female

Carbohydrate

250g

1,000

Rest Day

Protein

60g

240

Fat

38g

342 •

C110 lb/50kg)

Estimated nutrient and calorie needs for rock climbers
(active versus rest day).

could potentially enhance your training response and
climbing performance.
Micronutrients
Vitamins and minerals are the essential dietary
micronutrients. Although the body needs only very
small amounts of these nutrients (compared to protein, fat, or carbohydrate), they do play a vital role in
almost every bodily function—from muscular growth
and energy metabolism to neural conduction and
memory. Consequently, your health and athletic performance can suffer in a number of ways if you are
not consuming enough of these micronutrients.
Studies have shown that as much as two-thirds of
self-selected diets contain less than the recommended
daily allowances (RDA) of certain vital vitamins and
minerals. Furthermore, despite being updated in recent
years, RDAs are still believed by many experts to rep-

Performance

Nutrition

resent low-end requirements for a serious
athlete.

High-intensity and high-volume exercise
(as in bouldering and alpine climbing,
respectively) both place great metabolic
3,170
demands on the body and generate elevated levels of free radicals, which may slow
recovery and increase your chance of ill2,230
ness. The antioxidants that combat these
free radicals, like vitamin C and vitamin E,
are crucial micronutrients you would be
wise to consume in greater than the RDA2,170
suggested amounts.
One study showed that supplementing
with 1,200 IU of vitamin E modulated free1,582
radical production and reduced the
amount of muscfe damage following heavy
weight training, in comparison to a placebo group (McBride 1998). Vitamin C has
also been shown to help reduce muscle
damage, in addition to being necessary for
the formation of collagen (the substance
that forms connective tissue in the skin
and muscles) and supporting the immune
system. Therefore, it would be wise to consume extra
vitamin C and vitamin E, above and beyond what you
can acquire through your diet or from a daily multivitamin. Consider taking one to two grams of vitamin C
and 400 to 800 IU of vitamin E daily, split into two
doses (morning and evening).
Certainly, there are a host of other vitamins that
you might benefit from consuming in amounts higher
than the RDA guidelines. Still, eating a decent wellrounded diet and taking a generic daily multivitamin
supplement should adequately meet your needs for
these other vitamins.

Total

PRECIOUS MINERALS

Magnesium and zinc are two minerals shown to be
consumed in less than recommended amounts by a
majority of the population. For athletes, a deficiency in
these minerals could mean you're getting short-

131

changed on training response. Several recent studies
have shown a statistically significant increase in muscular strength in a group of athletes taking supplemental magnesium and zinc (in the form of a patented
supplement known as ZMA) versus a control group of
athletes taking a placebo (Brilla 1998). Clearly, any
climber engaging in serious strength training could
benefit from taking this ZMA supplement (available
from several different companies).
Another important mineral is selenium, known
primarily for its function as an antioxidant. If you are
consuming extra vitamin C and vitamin E, you might
want to add 100 to 200 micrograms of selenium
(taken in split doses with meals) to your supplement
regimen.
Calcium and iron are two other minerals that
some climbers may be lacking. Vegetarians often fall
short on iron consumption, and some women may
not get enough iron and calcium in their diets. A multivitamin is the best way to obtain extra iron, especially since its absorption is enhanced in the presence
of vitamin C (also in a multivitamin). Females wanting to get extra calcium in their diets could take a calcium supplement (Turns are cheap and taste good!) or
simply drink a few glasses of skim milk each day.

Sports Supplements
The most effective way to increase climbing performance is through a long-term, dedicated effort to
improve your technique, mental control, and upperbody strength. Unless you are working to dial in on
each of these areas, the few sports supplements that
do work are probably a waste of money. If you are
actively honing your technical skills and training to
increase your physical and mental fitness, however,
you may be able to further improve your performance
through use of a handful of ergogenic (performanceenhancing) supplements.
PROTEIN POWDERS
As discussed earlier, athletes have a greater daily protein requirement than sedentary people, since strenuous exercise results in a higher protein turnover.

132

While mega amounts are not necessary (as some supplement companies and fitness magazines suggest), a
160-pound climber does need to consume between 86
and 108 grams of protein per day. This modest
amount can be met through a well-rounded diet; it
may be tough to consume adequate protein, however,
if you do not eat meat such as chicken, fish, and lean
red meats. There is also the limiting factor relating to
the biological value of the protein source consumed.
Not all protein sources are equal when it comes to
providing your body with the necessary building
blocks.
Consequently, scientists have developed a number of ways to measure the quality of protein sources.
The biological value (BV) is one of the most commonly used; it's based on how much of the protein consumed is actually absorbed and utilized by the body.
The higher the BV, the greater the amount of protein
that is actually available to be used by the body to
strengthen muscles and connective tissues, and to
support enzyme formation, among other things.
When the BV scale was originally developed, the
egg was considered the perfect protein source
(remember Rocky?) and sat alone atop the chart with
a value of one hundred. Since then, new technologies
have enabled the creation of superproteins that are
equally valuable to the body but without the fat found
in many high-protein foods. Whey is the current
superstar of proteins with a BV of one hundred
(though for some reason a few companies inflate this
number). Therefore, whey protein could be viewed as
superior to the lower-BV foods such as fish, beef,
chicken, or soy in helping meet the protein needs of
an athlete.
While whey protein costs approximately $0.50 to
$1.00 per twenty-gram serving, the investment is a
good one considering its ease of use and high BV.
Many brands are available from health food stores,
supplement catalogs, and online merchants, so shop
around for the best deal. Designer Whey Protein by
Next Proteins is one excellent brand with several good
flavors that mix easily in milk, juice, or water. Such
liquid protein is ideal first thing in the morning, and it

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

can increase your rate of recovery when consumed
immediately following your workout or a day of
climbing (more on this in the next chapter).
One of the highest-quality and most affordable
protein sources is milk (see Figure 8.4). Since each
glass contains ten grams of protein, consuming a quart
or two of milk per day would provide forty to eighty
grams toward your total protein requirement. As someone who only occasionally eats meat, I have relied on
skim milk as my primary source of protein for the last
twenty-five years (since I first read that John Gill
slammed back milk protein after climbing). At 2lA gallons of milk per week for twenty-five years, I've somehow consumed about 3,250 gallons of skim milk since
I started climbing. All I can say is, "Got milk?"
Even those who are lactose intolerant can consume milk without any nasty side effects by purchasing acidophilus milk. Regardless, be sure to always
select 1 percent or skim milk, since whole milk contains a significant amount of saturated fat.
Figure 8.4 Biological Values
of Protein Sources

Food

BV

Whey

100

Whole egg

100

Milk

91

Egg white

88

Fish

83

Beef

80

Chicken

79

Soy

74

Beans

49

Peanuts

43

Not all protein sources are equal when it comes to
providing your body with the necessary building
blocks. Select mostly high-BV foods from the top half
of the list

Performance

Nutrition

SPORTS DRINKS
Since the invention of Gatorade in the early 1970s,
sports drinks have grown into a massive industry. It's
now hard to find a serious athlete who does not consume sports drinks to help replenish energy. Dozens of
different sports drinks are available in bottled form,
including Gatorade and All Sport, the two most popular drinks on the market right now. Many others are
sold in a bulk powdered form ideal for mixing up at
home before a workout or day at the crags.
As you might expect, not all sports drinks are the
same. Some are merely glorified sugar water, while
others include electrolytes or any number of vitamins,
minerals, herbs, or other nutrients said to increase
athletic performance. Clearly, many of the claims are
unsubstantiated—and at two bucks a bottle some are
just a big rip-off.
The active ingredients in these products fall into
two main categories: electrolytes and fuel replacements. A simple understanding of both will help you
understand how these drinks might be of benefit to
you.
• Electrolytes such as potassium, magnesium, calcium, sodium, and chloride are critical for concentration, energy production, nerve transmission, and
muscle contraction. Fortunately, electrolyte loss during exercise is quite slow, so even a full day of climbing won't cause significant depletion. A reasonable
diet and multivitamin provide you with all the electrolytes you need for ordinary training or a day of
climbing. Still, a sports drink with electrolytes may
be beneficial if your food supply will be limited for a
few days, as in big-wall or alpine climbing.
• Fuel sources in the sports drinks are mainly carbohydrates, including glucose, sucrose, fructose, maltodextrin, and lactates. Glucose and sucrose (table
sugar) are the fuel sources in the original sports
drink Gatorade and have since been adopted by
many other companies. Ironically, some athletes
now shun drinks with large amounts of glucose and
sucrose to avoid a blood sugar spike. Unless you are
engaged in an activity that continues steadily for a

133

couple of hours (such as long-distance biking, running, or hiking), this quick increase in blood sugar
may be followed by an energy crash as insulin kicks
in to reduce the elevated blood sugar level. In a
stop-and-go sport like climbing, this pull-back on
blood sugar can leave you feeling more fatigued and
tired than before you consumed the drink!
Consequently, you should avoid any drink
whose the first ingredient (after water) is glucose or
high-fructose corn syrup—both are signs the drink
has a high glycemic index and will release sugar
rapidly into the blood. Instead, shop around for
powdered sports drink mixes that list fructose (not
the same as high-fructose corn syrup) as the first or
second ingredient. These have a lower glycemic
index and hence provide a slower, more sustained
release of carbohydrate ideal for climbers.
Carbohydrate (glycogen) depletion in the muscles
and liver is a primary cause of fatigue when performing
long-duration activities of more than ninety minutes.
The traditional use of sports drinks is for situations
when additional fuel is needed for prolonged activity
lasting more than ninety minutes. Therefore, consuming a fructose-based sports drink during the course of a
day at the crags will help maintain energy levels
throughout the day, though consuming some food
would be beneficial as well. Conversely, an hour or two
of bouldering or a short gym workout will not benefit
from the added fuel of a sports drink.
While a slow-release, fructose-based sports drink
is ideal for when you are climbing, it might be better
to consume a high-GI drink upon completion of your
workout or day of climbing. Numerous studies have
shown that elevating blood sugar as soon as possible
after exercise provides the substrate for synthesis of
muscle glycogen (Robergs 1991). This is especially
important if you plan to climb the very next day—
replenishing glycogen stores takes up to twenty-four
hours, so you need to get the process started immediately and at high speed (see Chapter 9 for more recovery tips).

134

ENERGY BARS
Energy bars have been a dietary mainstay of many
climbers since PowerBar hit the scene back in the late
1980s. Originally intended for endurance athletes like
bikers and runners, many of the energy bars are
designed to deliver a rapid release of sugar into the
bloodstream. Therefore, many energy bars possess a
moderately high glycemic index (greater than sixty);
these are easily identified by their first ingredient,
high-fructose corn syrup. While a food with a
glycemic index in the sixties is better in comparison to
a bagel (seventy-two) or Gatorade (seventy-eight),
climbers in search of sustained energy are better off
sticking to foods with a GI of less than sixty.
The numerous balanced-style bars that have
entered the market in recent years typically possess a
glycemic index in the forty to sixty range. The higher
amount of protein and fat contained in these bars
helps slow the release of sugar into the bloodstream.
The balanced 40/30/30 macronutrient ratio also helps
conserve glycogen and may even help spare muscle
protein from being used for energy during a long day
of climbing. Consequently, consuming a couple of
Balance Bars (Fig Newtons are also good) and drinking lots of water may be the single best combination to
maintain energy, spare muscle protein, and prevent
dehydration.
MUSCLE AND STRENGTH BUILDERS

There are dozens of sports supplements that claim to
help build muscle and increase strength. While most
are, in fact, worthless, both creatine and HMB have
been shown to produce increases in muscular
strength. If so, then both are surely must-use supplements for climbers, right? Not so fast, my friend—let's
look at both of these a little closer before we jump to
any conclusions.
•

Creatine is by far the most effective sports supplement on the market. Not only has it been shown to
enhance explosive strength in numerous wellcontrolled studies (Toler 1997; Kreider 1998), but
when it's consumed in large doses, users actually see
their muscles get larger and harder, and they gain

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

lean muscle mass (that is, weight). Consequently,
creatine has become the biggest-selling sports supplement in the country, and it's widely used by football
and baseball players, weight lifters, bodybuilders, and
millions of fitness buffs. But is it a good supplement
for climbers? Let's take a look at how creatine works.
Creatine is a compound that's natural to our
body, and it's used in the muscles to help create
ATP (the energy source for brief, explosive movements). Creatine is also present in animal foods
such as red meat, but the amount consumed in a
normal diet is quite small (a couple of grams per
day). Studies have shown that taking twenty grams
per day of supplemental creatine for five or six days
will enhance performance in short-duration, highintensity exercise such as sprinting or weight lifting. This creatine-loading protocol is the method
used by most athletes—but it's the wrong protocol
for climbers!
Two side effects of creatine loading are weight
gain and what's known as cell volumizing. Both
these effects occur because creatine associates with
water as it is stored in the muscles. Over the sixday loading phase, more and more creatine is
stored and an increasing amount of water is drawn
into the muscle cell. This gives muscles a fuller,
"pumped" feel and look—just what bodybuilders
and fitness buffs want. This loading process, therefore, results in a water weight gain of severaf
pounds or more in most individuals. This is a good
thing for athletes in sports where increased weight
and speed (inertia) can be used to your advantage
(football, swinging a bat, or swinging your fist). In
a sport that requires a high strength-to-weight
ratio, however, it can have a negative impact on
performance.
Some climbers have argued that stronger muscles (due to creatine loading) can easily lift the
extra weight gained in the growing process. The
problem, however, is that creatine loads in all muscles of the body, not just the climbing muscles, and
will load proportionately more in the largest muscles of the body—the legs! Of course, increasing leg

Performance

Nutrition

strength and weight is a bad thing for climbers,
since they are never the limiting factor. There's just
no way around it: Creatine loading is not a good
thing for climbers.
If you are still not convinced, let's consider the
cell-volumizing effect of creatine loading. Bodybuilders love the fact that their muscles pump up
more easily when they are loaded with creatine. I
quickly noticed this same effect when I experimented with creatine after it first appeared on the
market in 1993. It seemed strange at the time, but
I pumped out faster when I was on creatine—this
despite the fact that I felt like I had a little more zip
in my muscles. What I quickly concluded was that
the cell volumizing partially occluded capillaries
that intervene in muscle, thus slowing blood flow
and causing the rapid pump. In climbing, the goal
is obviously to avoid the dreaded full-on pump as
long as possible.
That said, I do believe that well-timed, small
doses of creatine can help climbers recover more
quickly and without the nasty side effects of loading. The protocol I've developed and used for several years now is to add just five grams of creatine
to a quart of sports drink that I sip throughout the
day when climbing. This provides a slow trickle of
creatine into the blood and muscles to aid recovery
between routes. For training, I wait until the end of
the workout; then I initiate the recovery cycle by
consuming five grams of creatine mixed into a
sports drink.
Bottom line: Use creatine in small doses and it
may enhance your recovery with no noticeable
weight gain or other negative side effects. If you
decide to supplement with creatine, follow the
above guidelines closely and never consume more
than five grams per day.
Beta hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) is
a metaboiite of the essential amino acid leucine. As
with other amino acids, HMB appears to play a role
in the synthesis of protein that builds new muscle
tissue, and it may help slow muscle protein break-

135

down that results from long, intense training or
exercise. Research has shown that taking three
grams of HMB per day for several weeks in conjunction with a strength-training program increases lean body mass (Nissen, Panton 1996) and
strength (Nissen, Sharp 1996) more than in a
placebo group. Another study found that two
weeks of HMB supplementation in cyclists helped
increase both VO2 max and lactate threshold
(Vukovich 1997).
Manufacturers suggest taking one gram of
HMB, three times per day. Considering the proposed protein-sparing effect of HMB, however, it
may be more effective to take one gram in the
morning and two grams just before training or
midway through a day of climbing. Furthermore,
since HMB is a relatively expensive supplement,
you might want to limit its use t a the most highintensity weeks of your training schedule and
when you are climbing on consecutive days or on
a long road trip (in other words, experiencing a
higher volume of climbing than usual).

136

SPORTS SUPPLEMENTS THAT DON'T WORK
The list of sports supplements that don't work is too
long to completely cover in this text. I can, however,
list a few of the most popular, most hyped supplements that have little or no reliable research to back
up the big claims.
First and foremost is androstenedione (aka
andro) and other testosterone boosters. The research
on these substances is largely contradictory and somewhat scary. One study showed that andro increased
testosterone in women, while another showed it
increased estrogen in men! Several other studies
showed absolutely no effect to taking these supplements. Stay away from this stuff.
Without getting long-winded, here's a list of other
supplements that will only piss your money away (no
proven ergogenic effect): vanadyl sulfate, pyruvate,
OKG, gamma oryzanol, inosine, chitosan (and other
"fat whackers"), algae (of all colors), GHB, MCTs,
shark cartilage, and many homeopathic supplements.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

H

N

Kl

Accelerating Recovery
Knowing is not enough;
we must apply. Willing is not
enough; we must do.

I

f you are serious about climbing performance, then
you must be serious about accelerating recovery.
Knowing how to limit fatigue and speed recovery is as
important as knowing how to perform a drop-knee,
lock a finger jam, or float a deadpoint. Bottom line: If
you are not playing a proactive role in the recovery
process, you are definitely not training optimally or
climbing up to your capability.

We all know, firsthand, that physical fatigue is a
primary limiting factor whether pulling down at the
crags or training in the gym. Therefore, it stands to
reason that being able to accelerate recovery means
you will get more back during a midclimb shakeout
and while resting between climbs and days of climbing. As a result, you will perform better on the rocks
today, tomorrow, and on all your future outings.
Similarly, more rapid recovery between training sessions can translate into more long-term strength
gains, since you can work out more often while still
getting adequate rest and without risk of overtraining.
While many of today's enthusiastic climbers are
keen on staying current on the latest climbing and
training techniques, surprisingly few individuals are
aware of the numerous strategies for accelerating
recovery. Recovery from exercise has been the subject

of dozens of recent research studies, and any serious
climber would be wise to heed the findings of these
sports scientists. On the pages that follow, I will present the leading-edge recovery strategies used in these
studies, as well as provide instruction on specific techniques that will help you slow fatigue and speed
recovery while on the rock.
Clearly, recovery ability is a function of several
factors, including age, sex, and level of conditioning.
Regardless of these factors, however, I guarantee that
you can recover more quickly by playing a proactive
role in the recovery process—instead of just letting it
happen, as many climbers do. By placing the same
importance on optimal recovery as you do on training
optimally, you will enhance your training response as
well as your overall climbing performance!

The Basics off Fatigue and Recovery
Proactively managing fatigue and taking the steps to
accelerate recovery require an understanding of the
basic physiology processes involved in energy production, fatigue, and recovery. We'll begin our primer on
this subject with a look at what causes fatigue, and
then look at three recovery time frames.

Causes of fatigue
Several factors contribute to the fatigue you experience while training or climbing. These factors include
the depletion of muscle fuels, the accumulation of
metabolic by-products, low blood glucose, muscular
cramps and microtraumas, and finally, central fatigue.

137

M

:

.

DEPLETION OF ATP-CP

Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and creatine phosphate
(CP) are energy-rich phosphate compounds stored within the muscle cells in small amounts. Brief, maximumintensity activities (such as a short, vicious boulder
problem, a one-arm pull-up, or a i00-meter sprint)
are fueled by ATP and CP; the supply of these fuels,
however, limits this action to between five and fifteen
seconds.
This limitation on maximum energy output
explains why it's next to impossible to perform no-feet
campus boarding for more than fifteen seconds, or
why you have less than fifteen seconds to pull a maximum move (for you) on a route before your muscles
give out. Continued exercise beyond this threshold is
only possible by lowering the intensity of the activity,
so that the lactic acid energy system can contribute to
energy production.
Fortunately, ATP is continually synthesized within the muscles (by little ATP factories called mitochondria), and ATP stores become fully replenished in
just three to five minutes of complete rest (Bloomfield
1994).
ACCUMULATION OF METABOLIC BY-PRODUCTS

Constant, moderately high-intensity activity that lasts
between fifteen seconds and three minutes is fueled
primary by anaerobic metabolism of glycogen fuel
(see Figure 5.4, page 58). Unfortunately, metabolic
by-products of this energy production—chiefly, lactic
acid—result in muscular discomfort and, eventually,
muscular failure. How long you can exercise during
periods of rising lactic acid concentration depends on
your lactate threshold—that is, how high in intensity
can you exercise before blood lactate levels grow
greater than your body's ability to metabolize it.
Anaerobic endurance training will increase your
tolerance to lactic acid as well as elevate your anaerobic threshold. Furthermore, anything you do to
enhance blood flow through the working muscles will
help disperse lactic acid to your liver and nonworking
muscles, where it's converted back to glucose.
Continued high-intensity exercise (with no rest), however, will cause lactic acid levels to skyrocket and mus-

Accelerating Recovery

cular failure to occur in less than three minutes. This
explains why the "pump clock" runs out in less than
three minutes on long, near-maximum (for you) crux
sequences. You must get to a rest in less than three
minutes or you'll end up taking a lactic acid bath!
During rest periods, the clearance time of lactic
acid can be anywhere from ten to thirty minutes,
depending on the initial level of the lactic acid accumulation and whether the rest is active or passive
(more on this later).
DEPLETION OF GLYCOGEN

Steady, long-term exercise typically depletes glycogen
stores in ninety minutes to two hours. Running out of
glycogen causes the infamous hitting-the-wall phenomenon in marathon running, and is a contributing
factor to your inability to climb hard toward the end
of a long day on the rock.
Fortunately, climbing is a stop-and-go activity, so
a full two-hour supply of glycogen can be stretched
out to last nearly all day. You can also spare your
glycogen supplies through regular consumption of
additional fuel (sports drinks and foodstuffs) throughout the day. Research implies that carbohydrate feeding during exercise can help extend your glycogen
supply by 25 to 50 percent (Coyle 1984).
Your starting level of glycogen is also a crucial factor in determining how long and hard you will be able
to climb. If you are climbing for a second or third
straight day, you will certainly have less than the full
ninety-minute to two-hour supply of glycogen. This is
because complete replenishment of glycogen stores
takes twenty-four hours—a good dinner and a full
night's sleep is not enough to restock the supply completely. When climbing on successive days, it's therefore vital to consume more calories throughout the day
(to spare glycogen)—though you will still likely hit the
wall sooner on day two than you did on day one.
LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE

Blood glucose (sugar) is but one of the possible fuel
sources for working muscles, but it's the only fuel
source available to the brain and nervous system. As
glycogen supplies dwindle during long-duration

139

activity, the working muscles become increasingly
reliant on blood glucose for fuel. As a result, blood
glucose levels drop and increasing levels of exhaustion
and mental fatigue set in.
As mentioned above, ingestion of carbohydrates
will help delay this fatigue by helping to maintain an
adequate level of blood glucose.
MUSCLE CRAMPS AND MICROTRAUMAS
Muscle cramps and microtraumas can contribute to
the sense of muscular fatigue, though in somewhat
different time frames. Muscle cramps typically occur
near the end of an exhausting period of muscle
action—for instance, when some of the muscles in
your back or arms lock up after a long, strenuous section of jamming or upon reaching complete exhaustion in the midst of a long sport climb. In such an
instance, twenty to thirty minutes of rest, gentle
stretching and massage, as well as consuming some
fluids will help alleviate the cramping and restore normal muscular function.
Microtraumas are a primary cause of the all-toocommon delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS).
This muscle soreness, which becomes evident from
twenty-four to forty-eight hours after strenuous exercise, is a result of microscopic muscle tissue tears and
the accompanying tightness and swelling (edema).
Strength will be diminished for as long as pain persists, possibly as long as two to five days.

fatigue. Consider that recovery of a nerve cell takes up
to seven times longer than a muscle cell (Bompa
1983). Of course, this level of fatigue may never be
experienced by the typical recreational climber; still,
elite climbers who push the envelope both in the gym
and on the rock are likely to experience central
fatigue. If you still feel "off" after a few successive rest
days, you may be experiencing central fatigue. It may
take another five to ten days away from training and
climbing to recuperate completely, but you will find
yourself performing better than ever after this break
away from climbing (per the Reminiscence Effect
described in Chapter 7).
Three Recovery

Periods

Recovery is not linear, but instead exponential (see
Figure 9.1). For example, recovery from an exhaustive crux sequence, climb, workout, or day of climbing
will initially be rapid, with about 70 percent of complete recovery taking place in the first one-third of the
recovery period (Bompa 1983). Recovery improves to
90 percent after two-thirds of the time needed for
complete recovery.
Figure 9.1 Recovery Curve

CENTRAL FATIGUE
In addition to muscular fatigue, strenuous exercise
can have adverse affects on the central nervous system (CNS). This so-called central fatigue can impair
coordination, concentration, and your ability to perform difficult motor skills. Repeated high-intensity
movements such as lunging and campus training are
the hardest on the CNS. However, excessive amounts
of any specific training stimulus—pull-ups, fingerboard, HIT—or performing the same type of bouldering movement over and over can also produce central
fatigue.
Unfortunately, severe central fatigue can take
longer to recover from than any of the other causes of

140

V3T

T

2/3T

recovery period
Recovery to 90 percent of baseline levels occurs in
about two-thirds of the time needed for complete
recovery.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Knowing that recovery is an exponential process
is powerful information that can be applied to the
three crucial recovery periods that I've defined as
recharge, refuel, and rebuild.
RECHARGE (SHORT-TERM RECOVERY)

This first recovery period takes place from ten seconds
to thirty minutes following the completion of muscular action. For example, this recharge period includes
the ten-second shakeout you take in the midst of a
crux sequence as well as the midclimb rest you milk
for five, ten, or even thirty minutes, if possible.
The two metabolic processes at work during this
recovery period are resynthesis of ATP and the
removal of lactic acid from the working muscles. As
stated earlier, ATP resynthesis takes less than five minutes, and complete lactic acid removal occurs in less
than thirty minutes. As depicted in Figure 9.1, however, recovery to 90 percent of baseline levels occurs
in about two-thirds of the time needed for complete
recovery. Therefore, you can assume that the majority of ATP resynthesis has occurred in just over three
minutes and about 90 percent of the lactic acid has
been removed in about twenty minutes. Strategies to
further hasten recovery during the recharge period
will be detailed later in this chapter.
It should be noted that nothing you consume
during this initial recovery period has any impact on
exercise resumed immediately after this brief rest.
Water takes at least fifteen minutes to empty from the
stomach, and sports drinks or foodstuffs take even
longer. If you have concluded your climbing or training for the day, however, this initial thirty-minute
period is vital for enhancing long-term recovery
(more on this in a bit).
REFUEL (MEDIUM-TERM RECOVERY)

The refuel recovery period occurs from thirty minutes
to twenty-four hours following cessation of exercise.
Therefore, this phase of recovery takes place during
the two-hour break between climbs that you might
take during the hottest part of the day and, of course,
during the overnight period following a training or
climbing day.

Accelerating Recovery

With ATP resynthesis and lactic acid removal
completed in the first thirty minutes, the refuel stage
is defined by the replenishment of blood glucose and
glycogen stores (in muscles and the liver), and some
minor repair of tissue microtraumas. Since refueling is
the hallmark of this period, consuming a large amount
of the right type of carbohydrates is necessary to facilitate the process.
Numerous strategies for enhancing this replenishment process will be described later in the chapter,
but—as mentioned earlier—you can assume that
about 90 percent of this refueling has taken place in
about sixteen hours (two-thirds of the total recovery
period). Thus, the typical twelve-hour break between
consecutive days of climbing will result only in
approximately 80 percent replenishment of glycogen
stores (assuming you begin refueling immediately
upon finishing up the first day on the rocks).
REBUILD (LONG-TERM RECOVERY)

Muscle growth and neuromuscular adaptation typically take place from one to four days following strenuous exercise. The degree of delayed-onset muscle
soreness experienced is proportionate to the amount
of microscopic damage inflicted on muscle fibers during exercise. Minor DOMS may subside in forty-eight
hours, while severe soreness signals a greater degree
of damage that may take four or more days to rebuild.
You can now see that a single rest day is enough to
allow the muscles to recharge and refuel, yet complete
supercompensation—that is, rebuilding the muscle to a
stronger level than before the exercise stimulus—
requires additional rest for the neuromuscular system
to recuperate. Therefore, while you may be able to perform at a reasonably high level after just one day of rest,
truncating the rebuilding process negates the supercompensation period (per Chapter 5) and will inhibit
gains in strength. In the long term, chronic underresting can result in decreased performance, injury, and
even risk of illness.
Whether you are training indoors or climbing a
personal-best route outside, the ability to accelerate
recovery is tantamount to elevating your absolute
level of performance. In the gym faster recovery

141

between exercises or climbs translates to higherintensity stimuli or faster learning, respectively. On the
rock hastened recovery at a marginal rest may make
the difference between a brilliant on-sight or hardestever flash and dangling on the rope in frustration.
On the pages that follow, you will learn thirteen
powerful techniques for accelerating recovery and,
thus, improving the quality of your training and
climbing. But knowing is not enough—you must
apply these strategies with the same dedication and
resolve as when pursuing your endeavors in the gym
or at the crag.

Clearly, experience and technical ability are the limiting factors, but your slow climbing and hesitation will
lead you to believe that a lack of strength is the primary problem.
Chapter 4 contains numerous drills for improving
climbing technique and strategy. Through regular
practice of these drills, you will naturally climb more
efficiently, and you will be surprised to find yourself
blowing through hard terrain more quickly and with
less total fatigue. And, of course, you'll recover from
this lower level of fatigue more rapidly and ultimately discover a whole new level of ability!

Accelerating Short-Term
or Intraclimb Recovery

Enhance Forearm Recovery with the G-Tox

Your capacity to perform difficult moves or exercises
repeatedly, with only short rest breaks, is directly proportionate to your recovery ability in the short term.
Described as the recharge period above, only certain
recovery mechanisms come into play during the first
ten seconds to thirty minutes following strenuous
activity. The goal during this time is to help expedite
the recharge process. This is done by minimizing the
magnitude of fatigue (in the first place), enhancing
forearm recovery with the G-Tox and active rest, and
proper prehydration and consumption of lactic acid
buffers.

Limiting Fatigue by Climbing More Efficiently
Let's start off with the most simple, yet powerful
method to enhance short-term recovery—limit the
magnitude of fatigue, as much as possible, through
economy of movement and optimal climbing technique. Obviously, you will use less ATP and CP, as well
as producing less lactic acid, if you can lower the
intensity of muscular contraction and the total time
under load. In this way you immediately reduce the
magnitude of the fatigue you must recover from, and
you will return to baseline strength more quickly.
It's in this area that the average climber can realize a windfall of unknown capability. The fact is, most
climbers move too slowly, possess less-than-ideal
technique, and hesitate (or stop) to place gear or think
when they should really push on to the next rest.

142

The dangling-arm shakeout is the technique universally used to aid recovery in commonly fatigued
forearm muscles. A few seconds or, hopefully, a few
minutes of shaking out provides some recovery, but
often not enough. The effects of a full-on pump can
take frustratingly long to subside, and when hanging
out at a marginal rest, it's possible to expend as much
energy in one arm as is being recouped in the other.
Such a zero-net gain in recovery does nothing to
enhance performance—in such a situation you would
likely have fared better by blowing off the so-called
rest and climbing onward.
Luckily, there is a more effective method of
refreshing your forearms that the majority of climbers
ignore or are not aware of. For more than a decade, I
have been promoting the benefits of alternating the
position of your resting arm between the normal dangling position and an above-your-head raised-hand
position. This simple practice provides a marked
increase in recovery rate. I call this accelerated recovery technique the G-Tox, because it uses gravity (as an
ally, for once) to help detoxify the fatigued muscle and
speed recovery.
The discomfort and pump that develop in the
forearms while climbing are largely the result of accumulating lactic acid (LA) and restricted blood flow. As
described in Chapter 5, LA is a by-product of the
anaerobic metabolism of glycogen, an energy pathway
that comes into use during extended contractions of
greater than about 50 percent of maximum intensity.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Worse yet, contractions of as little as 20 percent of
maximum intensity begins to hamper capillary blood
flow, and at 50 percent contraction blood flow may be
completely occluded (closed off). As a result, LA concentrations skyrocket until blood flow can resume
during periods of low-intensity contraction or complete rest.
What's more, when dangling your arm in the
shakeout technique, it's common to experience an initial increase in the sensation of being pumped. This is
because, as the muscle relaxes, blood flow resumes
into the muscle—but the venous return of the "old
blood" out of the muscle is more sluggish. This traffic
jam perpetuates the pump and slows recovery, yet
many climbers continue to dangle their arms and
complain about how sickening a pump they have.
The G-Tox technique puts gravity to work by aiding venous return of blood toward the heart. By helping get blood out of the arm more quickly, this practice
enhances the removal of lactic acid and, therefore,
returns you to a baseline level of blood lactate more
quickly. The effects of this technique are unmistakable—you will literally see your pump drained as you
elevate your arm due to the interesting fact that arterial flow into the arm is less affected by gravity than is
venous return flow.
So why not just use the raised-arm position for
the full duration of the rest instead of using the alternating technique as described above? Since the raisedarm position requires some muscular contraction in
the upper arm, shoulder, and chest, these muscles
would fatigue and possibly hamper climbing performance if you held the raised-arm position for a long
time. Consequently, the best protocol for recovery is
alternating between the two arm positions every five
to ten seconds. Do so, and you will definitely feel the
difference the G-Tox makes!

Engage in Active Rest
Along with the G-Tox, active rest is another underused yet highly effective strategy for accelerating
recovery. While the G-Tox shines in its effectiveness to
enhance recovery at a midclimb rest, use of active rest
between climbs is an equally effective strategy for

Accelerating Recovery

increasing the rate of lactic acid removal from the
working muscles and bloodstream.
Several recent studies, including one excellent
study on climbers (Watts 2000), have shown that
active rest significantly reduces blood lactate compared to the more common practice of passive rest. In
the Watts study fifteen expert climbers attempt to redpoint a 20-meter, 5.12b gym route, with eight of them
engaging in active rest (recumbent cycling) and the
others assigned to passive rest immediately following
completion of the route. Periodic measurements of
blood lactate revealed that the active-rest group
returned to preclimb levels within twenty minutes,
while the passive group took thirty minutes to return
to baseline levels. Therefore, low-intensity active rest
accelerated the clearing of lactic acid from the blood
by almost 35 percent.
Applying this research finding at the crag is simple. Upon completing a pumpy route or redpoint
attempt, instead of sitting down and having a smoke,
grab your water bottle and go for a casual twentyminute hike. This will help clear lactic acid more
quickly as well as provide a mental break from the
action. Both these factors will enhance your performance on the next route!
Another recent study compared the recovery
after maximum exercise in four groups: passive rest,
active rest, massage, and combined massage and active
rest (Monedero 2000). After fifteen minutes of rest,
blood lactate removal was greatest in the group performing combined active rest and massage. Therefore,
you may be able to further improve the Watts strategy of active rest by performing some self-massage on
the muscles of your forearm and upper arm.

Prehydration and Lactic Acid Buffers
While consuming food before or during exercise will
have little or no effect on short-term recharge recovery, being fully hydrated and taking lactic acid buffering supplements may enhance the process.
Muscle is comprised of more than 70 percent
water, and it plays a vital role in cellular function and
the transport of nutrients and metabolic waste. If you
are dehydrated, you may be hurting your perform-

143

ance and slowing recovery. Therefore, it's prudent to
prehydrate by consuming two or three eight-ounce
glasses of water in the two hours preceding a workout
or climbing. Continue sipping water throughout the
duration of activity at a minimum rate of an eightounce glass every hour (twice this, if it's hot).
Since the 1950s sports scientists have known that
they might be able to enhance performance through
ingestion of certain bicarbonate and phosphate compounds. Many studies have since shown that sodium
bicarbonate has an alkalinizing effect on the blood
that helps blunt the lactic acid response during intense
exercise (Rupp 1983). Similarly, sodium phosphate
has been shown to be performance enhancing; in fact,
one study found that it increased the anaerobic
threshold (Kreider 1992).
The protocol used in most of the studies involves
a loading of the bicarbonate and phosphate compounds at a total of four grams per day for three days
leading up to a performance. This amount, though not
large or dangerous, can cause some gastrointestinal
discomfort. The best supplement on the market may
be Twinlab's Phos Fuel, which advises taking four capsules per day during the days leading up to performance. I would suggest beginning with two capsules per
day, then increasing the dosage as long as you don't
experience stomach upset.
In summary, lactic acid buffers do work, and they
may provide as much as a 5 to 10 percent edge in performance. Whether you want to spend the money and
risk an upset stomach is another matter.

Accelerating Medium-Term
or Intraday Recovery
Intraday recovery is the medium-term recuperation
that occurs throughout the day and up to twenty-four
hours following exercise. What you do (or don't do)
during this recovery period plays a direct role in how
much energy you will have during the latter part of a
long day of climbing; it's also the primary factor in
how much recovery you acquire in a single night of
rest. Of course, this is of big-time importance if you
are in the midst of a long, all-day route or when you
plan to climb two days in a row.

144

Earlier I referred to this medium-term recovery
phase as the refuel period, since restoring a normal
blood glucose level and replenishing glycogen is the
basis for most recovery gained from thirty minutes to
twenty-four hours following exercise. Consequently,
consuming the right carbohydrates at the right time is
the single most vital action to accelerate recovery.
Still, stretching, massage, and the use of relaxation
exercises will also increase your rate of recuperation.
Let's delve deeper into each of these areas.

Refuel Early and Often
The single biggest error in recovery strategy by most
climbers is delayed consumption of calories during
and after a day of climbing. The natural tendency is to
become so engaged in the activity of climbing that you
forget to eat and drink. This is compounded by the fact
that strenuous exercise naturally suppresses hunger.
REFUELING WHILE YOU CLIMB
Earlier it was explained that consuming calories
throughout the day would help maintain blood glucose and, thus, help slow the use of your limited supply of glycogen. Toward this end, you should consume
your first dose of calories between one to two hours
after beginning your climb. If you are cragging, this
might mean eating a piece of fruit, a Balance Bar, or a
cup of sports drink after completing the first strenuous
climb of the day. Continue eating a small serving of
food every two hours throughout the day; in the case
of all-day climbing, this means eating two pieces of
fruit, two energy bars, and a few quarts of water (or
something equivalent).
This may seem like an awful lot of food, and it is
if you are only climbing for half a day or going bouldering (halve these amounts in these situations). To
keep climbing hard throughout the day and to speed
recovery for a second day of climbing, however, you
should consume a minimum of 600 to 800 calories
during the course of the day.
Selecting the right kinds of food at the right time
is a matter of the glycemic index (GI). As introduced
in Chapter 8, high-GI foods elicit a rapid rise (then
drop) in blood sugar, while medium- and low-GI

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

ioods release fuel into the bloodstream more slowly.
In a stop-and-go sport like climbing, steady blood
sugar is vital for maintaining steady concentration and
steady energy. Therefore, consume only low- and
medium-GI foods while you are still engaged in physical activity (see the GI list of foods in Chapter 8).
However, upon completing your day on the rocks or
reaching the end of your workout, it's best to consume
higher-GI foods and beverages. This latter distinction
is powerful—there is a growing body of research indicating that what you eat in the first thirty minutes
after exercise is the single largest determining factor in
how fast you recover.
KICK-STARTING GLYCOGEN REPLENISHMENT
AFTER CLIMBING OR TRAINING
As incredible as it may seem, recent research has shown
that waiting two hours after exercise to consume carbohydrates will reduce your glycogen replenishment by
50 percent compared to eating immediately upon cessation of the activity (Burke 1999). Therefore, when
planning to climb a second day, you significantly handicap your next day's performance by delaying refueling.
Similarly, delayed refueling after training slows the
recovery and rebuilding processes and, possibly, delays
complete recovery by as much as a full day.
Let's take a closer look at the best refueling strategies in the hours following climbing or a vigorous
workout.
• First thirty minutes after climbing: Ingestion of
high-GI foods immediately after exercise substantially increases the rate of muscle glycogen replacement (Richter 1984). More recent studies have
shown that glycogen synthesis may take place
another 40 percent faster if protein and carbohydrate are consumed together, due to a greater
insulin response (Niles 1997). Consequently, the
best protocol for accelerating glycogen replenishment appears to be a four-to-one ratio of carbohydrate and protein consumption (Burke 1999).
Since solid foods enter the bloodstream more
slowly than liquids, it's best to drink this carbohydrate-protein blend as soon after exercises as pos-

Accelerating Recovery

sible. For example, a 160-pound climber would
want to consume approximately one hundred
grams of carbohydrate and twenty-five grams of
protein. Drinking a quart of Gatorade, All Sport, or
another glucose- or high-fructose-corn-syrupbased sports drink would provide nearly a hundred
grams of high-GI carbohydrate. Two glasses of skim
milk, a high-protein energy bar, or a whey protein
shake would provide roughly twenty-five grams of
protein. Take these actions immediately after your
workout or climbing and you will jump-start
recovery, big time!
• Two hours after climbing: Assuming you consumed the initial feeding of carbohydrates and protein within the thirty-minute time frame, you can
wait until about two hours postactivity to eat a
complete meal. Ideally, the meal should be comprised of foods providing a macronutrient ratio of
about 65/15/20 (carbohydrate/protein/fat), as
explained in Chapter 8. Such a meal might include
a large serving of pasta, a chicken breast, and a
salad or some vegetables. Whereas high-GI foods
are best eaten immediately after exercise, mediumand low-GI foods are more advantageous in the
two to twenty-four hours after exercise. They will
provide a slower, longer-lasting trickle of glucose
into the bloodstream that will support steady
glycogen resynthesis.
• Before going to sleep: A small meal of carbohydrate and protein within thirty minutes of going to
sleep will further support glycogen resynthesis and
tissue rebuilding overnight. Skim milk may be the
perfect before-bedtime food—it possesses iow-GI
carbohydrate, high-quality protein, and the amino
acid tryptophan, a precursor to serotonin, which
slows down brain activity. Drink a tall glass of skim
milk or have some milk on a small bowl of wholegrain cereal before bedtime. It'll do your body good!

Stretch and Massage the Working Muscles
Earlier, you learned about an impressive research
study showing that combining active rest and massage
accelerated recovery by enhancing the removal of

145

lactic acid from the blood. Sports massage is also an
effective practice to enhance medium- and long-term
recovery as well as an excellent complement to preclimbing warm-up activities.
The guy who literally wrote the book on the subject is Jack Meagher. In his text Sports Massage, he
explains how the use of a specific form of sports massage can provide up to a 20 percent increase in performance, in addition to reducing the risk of injury
and accelerating recovery.

technique that produces hyperemia (a dilation of the
blood vessels) through the full depth of the muscle.
Furthermore, the state of hyperemia lasts long after
the procedure has ended, so the enhanced blood flow
can benefit muscular activity and performance.
Sports massage also helps reduce the number of
small and generally unf elt spasms that regularly occur
in the muscle. These spasms may go unchallenged by
conventional stretching and warm-up exercises and,
left unchecked, may rob you of coordination and
induce mechanical resistance and premature fatigue.

HOW IT WORKS
Traditional massage has long been used to increase
blood flow and oxygen transport in the muscles. The
benefits of this superficial "rubbing" are brief, however, and have little residual effect on performance.
Sports massage utilizes a deep-fiber-spreading

HOW TO DO IT
There are several strokes you may want to learn, but
the most effective is called cross-fiber friction. This
stroke is best executed with a braced finger. The
motion is a simple push in followed by a short push

Cross-fiber friction self-massage is an excellent way to increase bloodflow and warm-up the forearm muscles
prior to training.

146

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

back and forth across the muscle fiber. Keep the stroke
short and rhythmic; only gradually increase the pressure to penetrate deeper into the muscle.
Although sports massage can be used on all muscles, focus your efforts on the upper body and, in particular, the finger flexors and extensors (the forearm
muscles) and the biceps and triceps (muscles of the
upper arm). Incorporate five to ten minutes of massage
into your regular warm-up routine. This, along with
the stretches detailed in Chapter 6, will better prepare
you for an excellent workout or day on the rocks.

before a workout or climb helps warm even the least
used fibers, and enables maximum efforts with minimal resistance and risk of injury.
Address these pressure points with what is called
the direct-pressure stroke. Simply push straight in
with a braced finger and hold for fifteen to sixty seconds. Direct pressure is especially useful when applied
to the pressure points near the base of the muscles.
This will not only relieve any unknown tiny spasms,
but also help warm up those hard-to-recruit end
fibers. Be sure never to appiy sports massage tactics to
tendons, joints, or injured tissues, however.

SPORTS MASSAGE TO ACCELERATE RECOVERY
Your body has inherent mechanical weaknesses
where sport-specific movements can trigger stress
overload. In climbing, these overload areas are the
forearms, upper arms, and back. These muscles are
the first to tire, and they are typically the slowest to
recover. Fortunately, you can modulate fatigue and
hasten recovery through application of sport massage
to the specific stress points inherent to climbing movements.
To become familiar with these stress points, it's best
to have some understanding of how a muscle works.
First, voluntary muscles have two ends, each of which
is attached to a bone via a tendon. One end is a fixed
attachment called the origin, and the other is a movable
attachment called the insertion. For example, the origin
of the bicep muscle is at the shoulder, and the insertion
is just below the elbow. The motor nerve enters the
muscle in the thick muscle belly between the origin and
insertion. It is here that all contractions begin, and they
spread toward the ends of the muscle as more forceful
contractions are needed. Consequently, only a maximum effort will recruit the high-threshold fibers situated near the ends of the muscle.
For this reason a proper (submaximum) warm-up
does not work the whole muscle. The end fibers (near
the origin and insertion) largely miss out on the
warm-up process, and thus they are more likely to
underperform when called into action for highintensity movements. These locations are also more
likely to harbor stress and become cramped.
Fortunately, sports massage applied to these points

Accelerating Recovery

Use Relaxation Techniques
The "Mental Training" chapter described an excellent
relaxation technique called the Progressive Relaxation
Sequence. Though commonly used before going to
sleep, progressive relaxation is also highly effective for
relaxing the muscles and quieting the mind during a
midday break from climbing. When resting between
climbs or taking a break before returning to work on
a project, find a quiet spot, lie down, and spend ten to
twenty minutes performing progressive relaxation.
Upon completing this process, sit up for a few minutes
and enjoy the day before proceeding to the next
climb.
Make a midday relaxation break a regular part of
your climbing ritual and you'll find yourself climbing
better, and with less fatigue, late into the day.

Accelerating Long-Term
or Interday Recovery
The interday recovery period involves the long-term
recuperation from a severe workout or a couple of
hard days of climbing. Depending on the intensity and
volume of the activity, full recovery could take anywhere from one to four days.
When you wake up in the morning with sore
muscles (delayed-onset muscle soreness), it's a sign
that you incurred microtraumas and that a recovery
period of at least another twenty-four hours is needed. Of course, you have two choices in this situation.
The first is to go climbing (or workout) for a second
straight day, despite the soreness, realizing that your

147

performance will be less than ideal and your risk of
injury is increased. Or you could take a day or two off
and allow your neuromuscular system to recuperate
to a level of capability higher than before the workout
(supercompensation).
Certainly, there are times when you will select
the first option of climbing a second day straight, but
there should be an equal number of instances when
you decide that "less will be more." Weekend climbing
trips are the classic situation in which you'd want to
climb two days in a row, regardless of sore muscles.
Given proper nutrition, a good warm-up, and a prudent approach to pushing yourself on the second day,
you will usually get away with climbing sore.
Choosing to take a day or two of rest, however, is
clearly the intelligent decision when climbing indoors
or during an off-season training cycle. Hopefully, you
gleaned from Chapter 5 that proper rest is as important as training stimulus in becoming a stronger
climber, and that under-resting is a primary cause of
injury. Enthusiastic indoor and sport climbers are
most commonly guilty of under-resting, but regardless
of your preference, it's important that you distinguish
yourself from the mass of climbers who overtrain. If
you find yourself drawn to overtrain with the crowd,
remember that in order to outperform the masses, you
cannot do what they are doing!

Eat Frequent, Small Meals
Instead of eating the typical three meals per day, you
can accelerate recovery by consuming six smaller meals
or snacks spaced evenly throughout the day. Avoid
high-GI foods; they are less effective for recovery after
the first two hours postexercise. Instead, select lowand medium-GI foods for all your meals and drink at
least ten glasses of water throughout the day.
At least three of your meals should contain a significant portion of protein. For instance, breakfast
could include a couple of eggs, skim milk, or whey
protein; lunch might include some yogurt, skim milk,
or a can of tuna; and for dinner it might be good to eat
a piece of lean red meat, chicken, or fish. Each of
these meals should also include some carbohydrate,
and at all costs avoid fat-laden fried foods and any

148

snack foods containing hydrogenated oils. Strive for a
macronutrient profile of roughly 65/15/20 (carbohydrate/protein/fat) for each major meal.
While the other three feedings need be only a
couple hundred calories, they are vital for maintaining
steady blood glucose and continuing the recovery
processes throughout the day. Low- and medium-GI
foods are the best choice, with a piece of fruit, a balanced-type energy bar, and a glass of skim milk being
ideal selections.

Take a Multivitamin and Antioxidants
In today's world of highly processed foods, it's often
difficult to consume enough of the vitamins and minerals that athletes need by simply eating a well-rounded
diet. Chapter 8 set forth a basic supplement program
that I feel all serious climbers should abide by. It's
most important to consume extra vitamin C, vitamin
E, and selenium; taking a daily multivitamin would
also be wise.

Stretch and Massage Sore Muscles
Gentle stretching and sports massage are widely
accepted as effective means to enhance recovery from
strenuous exercise. Professional athletes have fulltime trainers who help with stretching and postexercise and off-day massage (must be nice!). Though I
won't pay for you to add a masseur to your climbingsupport staff, I do suggest that you stretch for five to
fifteen minutes per day and partake in some sports
massage of sore muscles. Follow the stretching procedures outlined in Chapter 6 and, of course, the primer
on sports massage provided earlier in this chapter.

Get Plenty of Sleep
Here's an important recovery technique that this fulltime working, two-day-a-week-training, weekendclimbing, book-writing, twenty-five-year veteran of
the rocks wishes he could get more of! Although most
neuromuscular regeneration occurs during sleep, I
always fall back on the fact that nothing is produced
and no action taken during sleep.
Seriously, sleep is vital for any climber serious
about training and passionate about maximizing abil-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

ity. The bare minimum amount of sleep per night is
seven to eight hours, though nine to ten hours is ideal
following strenuous training or a long day of climbing.
No doubt, it's a busy world—and sleep often seems like
the only activity that's expendable. If you discipline
yourself never to give up sleep for low-importance
tasks like watching TV or surfing the Net, however, it
will pay big dividends in the long run.

Engage in Light Activities
Earlier you learned of a couple of great research studies that showed the value of active rest in accelerating
recovery from strenuous exercise (by enhancing
removal of lactic acid). In the context of long-term
recovery, active rest is also beneficial because it
enhances circulation to the damaged muscles and produces a general loosening effect on stiff muscles.
The best active-rest activities for climbers are hiking, jogging, light mountain biking, and even some
limited less-than-vertical climbing. Still, it's crucial
that each of these activities be performed at a low
enough intensity that you never get winded and only
break a light sweat. Limit yourself to thirty to sixty
minutes of active rest, and be sure to exercise discipline in not letting yourself escalate the activity into
anything more than active rest.

Possess a Positive, Calm Personality 24/7
This last recovery tip is subtle, yet very powerful.
Possessing a positive, relaxed, and easygoing attitude
not only puts you in a better performance state, but
has been proven to increase recovery and maybe even
encourage muscular growth.
Strenuous exercise and stressful situations cause a
drugstore's worth of chemicals and hormones to be
released into the bloodstream. Some of these hormones have long-term positive effects, such as growth
hormone, which is anabolic. The "fight-or-flight" hormones like epinephrine and Cortisol, however, can
have a long-term negative effect when released chronically. In particular, Cortisol has been shown to be catabolic, meaning it results in breakdown of muscle.

Accelerating Recovery

In light of the above factors, elite athletes have
long been interested in enhancing the release of
growth hormone and preventing high levels of Cortisol. This is the very reason some athletes take anabolic steroids.
Fortunately, you can modulate levels of growth
hormone and Cortisol with proper training and adequate rest as well as through adjustments in your
lifestyle. For instance, individuals with Type A, aggressive behavior naturally exhibit higher levels of Cortisol
(Williams 1982) and reduced levels of growth hormone. It's also been shown, however, that behavior
modification and reduction of the stressors in life can
reverse this effect and provide more beneficial training (Dinan 1994). Therefore, possessing a relaxed
approach to climbing and a humorous attitude about
life in general will play an underlying but very positive role in enhancing the quality of your training
adaptations and climbing performance.

Conclusion
It's important to recognize that training (climbing)
and recovery are opposite sides of the same coin. You
must place equal importance on doing both optimally
and to the best of your ability. Clearly, it requires a
shift in perspective to actually plan and engage in the
process of recovery in the same way you plan and
engage in the process of training. But in doing so, you
will distinguish yourself from the masses by producing
uncommonly good results, and by avoiding downtime
due to injury and illness.

149

>?i-6J.

Omaha Beach, the Motherlode, Red River
Gorge, Kentucky.
iRAPH

BY

MICHAEL

LANDKROON

c

N

H

Injury Treatment & Prevention
Our greatest glory is not in never
failing, but in rising up every time
we fail.

T

his last chapter might not be necessary if this was
a book on training for curling or training for badminton. Despite what we tell our parents, however,
climbing is a sport with an unusually high incidence of
injury. Several studies report that up to three-quarters
of all recreational and elite climbers have suffered a
climbing injury. Fortunately, only a small number of
injuries are acute traumas produced by falls—the rest
are overuse injuries that most commonly occur in the
fingers, elbows, and shoulders. These insidious overuse injuries, while far from life threatening, can
become chronic and debilitating, and they are
extremely frustrating for an otherwise healthy individual passionate about climbing.
The goal of this chapter is to increase your awareness of the causes and symptoms of the most common
overuse injuries. Early identification is the best way to
mitigate an overuse injury, whereas ignoring the early
pangs and hoping that it will go away is almost always
a recipe for a chronic injury that could sideline you for
months. Ultimately, learning to recognize at-risk situations both when training and climbing, and embracing a prudent approach to these activities that errs on
the side of caution, is the best medicine for preventing
injury.

Over the last decade numerous relevant studies
have been presented by British, French, German, and
American researchers, and several excellent articles
were published in climbing magazines by physicians
experienced in treating injured climbers. Based on this
growing body of knowledge, I will present what seems
to be the current treatment protocol for the most
prevalent injuries; still, I urge you to seek professional
treatment from a physician familiar with climbing
injuries (call around and ask this question straight
out). Countless climbers have fallen into the trap of
self-treatment and trying to climb through an injury—
these approaches often make matters worse and can
lead to unnecessarily long-term downtime. Bottom
line: Read this chapter as an injury primer that encourages proactive, professional treatment of all injuries,
and not as an absolute guide to the subject.

Overview off Climbing Injuries
A wide variety of injuries can result from climbing and
sport-specific training activities, and a survey of available literature yields a broad range of pathologies from
tendonitis to broken bones. While acute trauma resulting from falls is a very real issue, this overview of
climbing injuries focuses on the chronic overuse
injuries that typically result from the process of climbing and training, instead of falling.

Types of Injuries
Injury surveillance data from several recent studies
confirms that the majority of climbing injuries are not
the result of falls. A well-designed British study

151

revealed that three-quarters of climbing injuries were
of the chronic overuse variety (Doran 1999). In this
study 111 active climbers of all ages and abilities were
questioned with regard to injuries incurred over the
two previous years. One hundred forty overuse
injuries from forty-nine climbers were reported—
obviously some climbers in this sample experienced
multiple or recurrent injuries during the twenty-four
months of the study.
A breakdown of these overuse injuries confirms
what experienced climbers have known anecdotally
for years—the fingers, shoulders, and elbows are the
three most common sites of nonfall injuries (see
Figure 10.1). Of all the injuries revealed in the British
study, 40 percent occurred in the fingers, 16 percent
in the shoulders, and 12 percent in the elbows. Other
common sites for injury, though much less prevalent,
were the knees (5 percent), back (5 percent), and
wrists (4 percent). These findings agree surprisingly
well with a German study (Stelzle 2000) of 314
climbers of both sexes and all degrees of climbing ability, which identified the most common injuries as finger tendon (39 percent), elbow (11 percent), and knee
(about 5 percent).
Contributing

16"/o
shoulders

12"/o
elbows

Figure 10.2 Overuse Injuries

Factors

An almost unanimous conclusion of the many injury
studies is that occurrence of overuse injuries is directly proportionate to climbing ability and the perceived
importance of climbing to the individual. Other cofactors contributing to increased risk of overuse injury
include use of indoor climbing walls and use of campus boards and fingerboards in training for climbing.
The British study depicts a dramatic increase in
injury rate in 5.11 climbers versus 5.10 climbers (see
Figure 10.2). At the 5.12 level, nearly 88 percent of
climbers surveyed had experienced overuse injuries in
the prior two years. By comparison, only 20 percent of
individuals climbing at levels below 5.9 incurred overuse injuries, the lowest relative frequency of all categories (Doran 1999).
At least two studies show a statistically significant
relationship between perceived importance of climbing and incidence of injury. Doran (1999) says, "The

152

F i g u r e 1 0 . 1 S i t e s off N o n f a l l I n j u r i e s

580/b
33°/t>
<5.9

-5.10

~5.11

-5.12

technical climbing level

Occurrence
to climbing

of overuse injuries is directly
ability.

proportional

frequency of injury occurrence was significantly higher in those who perceived climbing to be very important to those who rated it as not so important." An
important corollary to this relationship is that enthusiastic climbers are more likely to return to climbing
before full rehabilitation has occurred, thus leading to
a pattern of recurrence.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Another British study of 295 climbers at a recent
World Cup event found that those most at risk for
overuse injuries were climbers with "the most ability
and dedication to climbing." The analysis showed a
linear relation between lead climbing grade and overuse injuries (Wright 2001).
A number of other variables have been identified
as cofactors in contributing to overuse injuries, including climbing preference and training practices.
Consensus among experts in the field is that incidence of overuse injuries has increased since the advent
of indoor walls and sport-climbing tactics. An article in
Sports Medicine proposes that the preponderance of
overhanging terrain at indoor climbing facilities is a
contributing factor to the increase in upper-body
injuries (Rooks 1997). At the least, indoor walls do
enable year-round cfimbing and make it oh so easy to
test your absolute limit, thanks to toprope belays .or
well-bolted leads. Clearly, this is an environment that
can lend itself to overtraining and a general lack of rest
time away from the stresses and strains of climbing. I
know of a few individuals who climbed indoors five or
six days per week—and all, sooner or later, suffered significant finger, elbow, or shoulder injuries.
Training practices have also been implicated as a
contributing factor in overuse injuries of climbers at
all ability levels. One study found that 37 percent of
individuals engaging in sport-specific training used a
fingerboard or some other similar setup to perform
one- and two-finger pull-ups. Of this group of lowand high-end cfimbers, 72 percent reported at least
one injury of the hands or arms (Bannister 1986).
Doran (1996) reports that most of the climbers in
his study performed some form of supplementary
training; in particular, fingerboards and dynamic upand-down campus training were popular among the
injured climbers. The obvious implication is that these
high-stress, ultraspecific forms of training may be
injurious or at least exacerbate low-grade preexisting
injuries. These conclusions all make good sense and,
therefore, underscore the importance of a prudent,
mature approach to sport-specific training that knows
when to say enough and errs on the side of over-resting rather than overtraining.

Injury Treatment & Prevention

One puzzling part of the Doran (1996) study is
the finding that climbers who conducted a regular
warm-up had an increased frequency of injury in
comparison to those who did not warm up. Not only
is this idea counterintuitive, but it is contradictory to a
large body of literature claiming that a proper warmup is vital for preventing injury. Toward this end,
another British researcher had previously found that
increased frequency of injury was partially attributable to an absence of (or too brief) a warm-up regimen
(Bollen 1988).
It's my sense that it would be best to not abandon
your warm-up activities based on a single study. There
are several possible explanations for the unlikely findings of the Doran study. First, one of the hallmark
findings of this study was that ability level was proportionate to frequency of overuse injury. Therefore,
high-end climbers were far more likely to experience
overuse injuries than low-end climbers. I wonder,
however, if high-end climbers are more likely to
engage in warm-up activities (since they take climbing
and training so seriously), while low-end climbers are
more likely to "just go climbing" and skip the warmup regimen. Could this explain the unusual findings
that warm-up activities increase the risk of injury?
Another possible explanation of this finding could
be that climbers who regularly warm up before training and climbing do so too quickiy, severely, or excessively. For instance, it's widely accepted that stretching cold can injure connective tissues and muscles.
Furthermore, excessive amounts of stretching can
lead to loose joints and aggravate existing injuries. In
the final analysis, I suspect that we will find that a
slow, incremental warm-up does not increase the risk
of overuse injuries and is, in fact, a worthwhile and
beneficial activity prior to training or performance
climbing.

Common Injuries and Treatment
Based on the research outlined above, we know that
about 75 percent of all climbers have had or will experience an overuse injury. Furthermore, it's well documented that the four most common sites of injury are
the fingers, elbows, shoulders, and knees. In this

153

Figure 10.3 Finger Anatomy
Bones: Proximal Phalanx, Middle Phalanx, Distal

Collateral

Ligament

Annular Pulleys: A J, A2, A3, A4, A5

FDP Tendoi
Tendon

section we'll take a closer look at each of these problem spots. Hopefully, this information will empower
you to recognize symptoms early on and thus modify
your activity or seek medical attention before the
injury becomes more severe or chronic. One caveat
that all climbers should recognize straight up is that
you must seek medical attention for any condition that
gets worse after withdrawal from climbing and training. This could indicate a tumor, infection, or other
disease that needs immediate medical attention.
Finger

Injuries

Considering the incredible mechanical loading we
place on our fingers when climbing, it's no surprise
that they are the most common site of injury.
Unfortunately, these pesky finger injuries are often
hard to diagnose precisely and, worse yet, in the early
stages tend to be ignored. Many climbers rationalize
that they can climb through one injured finger, since
they have nine healthy fingers and can still manage to
crank at a near-maximum level. Continued climbing
on an injured finger may increase the severity of the
injury, however, and thus double or triple (or more)

154

Phalanx

Cruciform Pulleys: CO, CI, C2, C3

the downtime needed to recover.
Understanding the most common injuries requires
some knowledge of hand anatomy (see Figure 10.3).
To begin with, there are no muscles in the fingers.
Flexion of the fingers and wrist is produced by the
muscles of the forearm that originate from the medial
(inside) elbow and terminate via long tendons that
attach to the middle phalanx (MP) and distal phalanx
(DP) of each finger. The flexor digitorum superficialis
(FDS) muscle inserts into the palm side of the MP and
produces flexion of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP)
joint. The long tendon of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) muscle passes through a split in the FDS and
then inserts on the palm side of the DP. The FDP controls flexion of the distal interphalangeal joint (DIP).
Both flexor tendons (FDS and FDP) pass through a
tunnel-like, synovia-lined tendon sheath that provides
nourishment and lubrication. The flexor tendon and
sheath are held close to the bone by five annular pulleys (Al, A2, and so forth) and three (sometimes four)
cruciform pulleys that prevent tendon "bowstringing"
during flexion. Biomechanical studies have shown that
the A2 and A4 pulleys are the most important (Lin

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Figure 10.4 Annular Pulley Injuries

A2 pulley injury—partial tear (left) versus complete tear (right).

1989). As a conceptual model, visualize the whole system ol the flexor tendon, sheath, and annular pulley as
functioning like a brake cable on a bike.
TENDON PULLEY INJURIES
The most common finger injuries experienced by
climbers involve partial tears or complete ruptures of
one or more of the flexor tendon annular pulleys. In
many cases only a partial tear of a single pulley occurs;
in more serious incidences, however, one or more
pulleys may rupture entirely, resulting in palpable or
visible bowstringing, respectively. The exact nature
and extent of the injury is difficult to diagnose without use of magnetic resonance imaging (Gabl 1996),
though a recent Austrian study has shown Dynamic
Ultrasonography to be highly effective at depicting
finger pulley injuries in rock climbers as well
(Klauswer 2002).
The A2 pulley is the most commonly injured of
the five annular pulleys, and you can blame the common crimp grip as the main culprit. In using the crimp
grip, near ninety-degree flexion of the PIP joint produces tremendous force load on the A2 pulley, in

Injury Treatment & Prevention

addition to forceful hyperextension of the DIP joint.
Injuries to the A2 pulley can range from microscopic
to partial tears and, in the worst case, a complete rupture (see Figure 10.4). Small partial tears are generally insidious, because they develop over the course of a
few climbs, a few days of climbing, or even gradually
during the course of seasons of climbing. Less frequent
are acute ruptures that result during a maximum
move on a tiny crimp hold or one-finger pocket. Some
climbers report feeling or hearing a "pop"—a likely
sign of a significant partial tear or complete rupture—
though other injuries could also produce this effect.
Depending on the severity of an A2 pulley injury,
pain and swelling at the base of the finger can range
from slight to so debilitating that you can't perform
everyday tasks like picking up a jug of milk. Swelling
may limit the range of motion during flexion, and bowstringing may be felt or seen (Marco 1998) if one or two
additional pulleys (usually A3 and A4) are ruptured,
respectively. Slight tears may be asymptomatic when
the finger is at rest, but become painful during isometric contraction (as in gripping a hold) or when pressing
on the base of the finger near the top of the palm.

155

"Buddy taping" or splinting can be beneficial during
the first week or two after injury, especially if you find
it hard to limit your use of the injured finger.
Treatment of an A2 pulley injury must begin with
completed cessation of climbing and discontinuation
of any other activity that requires forceful flexion of
the injured finger. Doing anything that causes pain
will slow or prevent healing of the injured tissue and,
more likely than not, make the injury worse.
Therefore, the intelligent climber will cease climbing
on the very day of the injury so that the healing
process may begin and the time frame for healing be
most brief. By contrast, the immature climber may try
to climb through the injury, which all but guarantees
a worse tear and an even longer, eventually forced,
exit from climbing.
The goal during the first few days following injury
is to control inflammation with ice (several times a
day) and anti-inflammatory medicines like ibuprofen
or Naprosyn. Cease these treatments after five days—

156

long-term use of ice and anti-inflammatory medicines
can interfere with the healing process. "Buddy taping"
or splinting of the injured finger can be beneficial during the first week or two after injury, especially if you
find it hard to limit use of your injured finger.
Depending on the severity of the tear, pain typically subsides in two to ten weeks. Becoming pain-free,
however is not the go-ahead to resume climbing! This
is where many climbers go wrong—they return to
climbing too soon and reinjure the partially healed tissue. As a general rule, wait an additional two weeks
beyond becoming pain-free, then slowly return to
climbing. In the case of a modest A2 pulley injury, this
may mean a total of about forty-five days of downtime.
A French study of twelve elite climbers with A2
pulley injuries found that eight subjects were able to
successfully return to climbing after forty-five days of
rest (Moutet 1993). More severe pulley tears, however, may require as much as two or three months of
rest before progressively returning to climbing. The
bottom line on these frustrating pulley injuries is to
nip them in the bud by immediately initiating a rest
and healing period away from climbing. Each successive day you continue to climb on the injured finger
may effectively multiply the length of the healing
process (and your eventual time away from climbing).
In the case of a complete or multiple annular pulley rupture, surgical reconstruction is possible. Hand
surgeons have long performed reconstruction of annular pulleys in nonclimbing cases where a deep laceration had damaged the flexor tendon and tendon pulleys. Free tendon grafts are the most common method
of pulley reconstruction (Seiler 2000). The grafts can
be harvested from the flexor digitorum longus of the
second toe, the dorsal wrist retinaculum, or a resected
portion of an injured FDS tendon (Seiler 1995; Lister
1979), and loops of the tendon are sewn in place of the
damaged pulley. It has been shown that reconstruction
with three loops can withstand as much force load to
failure as a normal annular pulley (Lin 1989).
An Austrian study reveals that annular pulley
reconstruction has produced good functional and subjective results in climbers after eighteen to forty-three
months of recovery time (Gabl 1998). Still, American

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

physician Joel Rohrbough has examined numerous
climbers who exhibit chronic bowstringing and continue to climb hard without disability. Based on this, he
recommends against surgery, though he does encourage individuals to make an educated choice after discussion with a qualified surgeon (Rohrbough 2000).
So how can one protect injured fingers from further damage? Reinforcing flexor tendon pulleys with
cloth athletic tape is a popular method—but is this prac-

tice really effective? Several physicians are on record
stating that firm circumferential taping is beneficial.
Rohrbough (2000) notes that "tape is a tremendous
help, giving support to a weak or healing pulley, helping to hold the tendon against the bone." Robinson
(1988) says, "Use of tape around the fingers between
joints is helpful," because it acts to reinforce the flexor
tendon pulleys, protect the joint from extreme positions
by limiting range of motion, and helps protect the skin.

Prophylactic Taping Methods

The A2 ring is the most common
method of prophylactic finger taping. Use the widest piece of tape
possible without interfering with
PIP flexion (anywhere from 'A to a
full 7 inch, depending on the
length of your fingers] and wrap
three firm turns of tape around
the base of the finger, directly
supporting the A2 pulley. Apply
the tape as tightly as possible
without restricting blood flow.
This may take a bit of experimentation, but remember that loose
taping serves no function other
than protecting the skin.

Injury Treatment & Prevention

The Swiss method (as used in the
Swiss study mentioned above]
involves firm circumferential taping at the distal end of the proximal phalanx—mat is, just above
the A2 pulley and immediately
below the PIP joint Use a narrower strip of tape, approximately
% inch in width, and wrap as tightly
and as close to the PIPjoint as
possible without restricting blood
flow or flexion.

The X method may provide additional tendon support to the A3,
A4, and cruciform pulleys, and it's
very effective at preventing skin
wear (and pain] when climbing on
sharp pockets or rough indoor
holds. Tear a long strip of tape,
approximately 16 inches in length
by % inch in width. With a slight
bend in the finger, begin with two
turns of tape over the proximal
phalanx (on top of the A2 pulley],
then cross under the PIP joint and
take two turns around the middle
phalanx. Cross back under the PIP
joint and conclude with another
turn or two around the base of the
finger.

157

Jebson (1997) advises using protective taping for two to
three months, upon returning to climbing after an A2
pulley injury.
Despite these endorsements of prophylactic taping, a recent article in Rock & Ice states that taping
"doesn't make the tendon any stronger—in fact, it
may restrict blood flow to the repairing tendon and
weaken it" (Crouch 1998). Furthermore, a study done
in Texas found "no statistically significant difference in
load to A2 pulley failure between taped and untaped
fingers" and concluded that "we do not support taping
the base of fingers as a prophylactic measure" (Warme
2000). Let's sort things out.
Based on an objective analysis of all available
studies, it seems that the above statements about the
ineffectiveness or even harmful effects of taping are
flawed. First, the statement about taping "restricting
blood and weakening the tendon" might be true if
tape was worn all day and night. It's hard to imagine
that taping for a few hours while training or climbing
could have such a negative effect, however; after all,
athletes in a wide range of sports tape everything from
feet and ankles to wrists and fingers while in training
or competing. Why would climbers' intermittent use
of supportive taping be uniquely dangerous?
What about the recent study that found no difference in A2 pulley strength between taped and
untaped fingers? Well, that study was done using
fresh-frozen cadaveric hands that were rigidly mounted in a specialized jig to maintain a crimp grip position. One has to wonder if the warm hands of a living
climber might exhibit different properties with regard
to tendon strength and might even use a subtly different grip than our "climbing cadaver."
Interestingly, a Swiss researcher has apparently
answered this question for us (Schweizer 2000). He
built a device to measure tendon and tendon pulley
forces in vivo—that is, live climbers' hands—and
determined the force of bowstringing as well as the
force applied to the pulley tape. Two slightly different
taping methods were used—over the A2 pulley at the
base of the finger and over the distal end of proximai
phalanx near the PIP joint—as he tested sixteen fingers in the typical crimp grip position. This study

158

revealed that taping over the A2 pulley decreased
bowstringing by 2.8 percent and absorbed 11 percent
of the force, while taping just below the PIP joint (just
beyond the A2 pulley) decreased bowstringing by 22
percent and absorbed 12 percent of total force. The
obvious conclusion is that circular taping does provide
a small reduction in total force on the tendon pulley
system, though the author does not feel it would be
enough to prevent a pulley rupture.
Therefore, it seems that taping should have a
small positive effect in reinforcing the A2 pulley, and
you should consider this practice for providing some
protection of a previously injured tendon. Three different taping techniques are shown on page 157.
FLEXOR TENDONITIS, AND
TENDON RUPTURE AND AVULSION
Several other injuries can produce pain and diminished function in ways similar to an injured annular
pulley. (As stated earlier, diagnosis can be difficult—
see a physician to be comptetely sure what you are
dealing with.) Tendonitis can develop in the FDS or
FDP tendon as a result of repetitive stress. In this case
pain may be limited to the palm side of the finger or
extend into the palm or forearm (Jebson 1997).
Extended rest is the primary treatment, followed by a
gradual return to climbing a few weeks after cessation
of pain (as described for tendon pulley injuries).
In rare cases a flexor tendon may rupture or avulse
(pull out at the point of insertion). Jebson (1997) states
that an FDS tendon rupture may occur with the crimp
grip, while an FDP tendon rupture is more likely with a
pocket grip. Either rupture or avulsion would occur
acutely with immediate onset of pain. Jebson states that
symptoms include pain at the FDS or FDP tendon insertion, finger swelling, and an absence of active flexion of
the PIP joint (FDS rupture) or DIP joint (FDP rupture).
Surgical reattachment may be required.
You may be surprised to learn that flexor tendon
ruptures, avulsions, and to a lesser extent annular
pulley injuries occur occasionally among football players. These acute injuries, commonly called "jersey finger," occur when a tackier with an outstretched arm
catches a finger on the jersey of the ball carrier sprint-

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

ing past him. It is interesting to observe that many
linemen and linebackers use prophylactic taping to
support the flexor tendon and the A2 and A4 pulleys—it would seem that professional football players
have also concluded that prophylactic taping works!
COLLATERAL LIGAMENT INJURIES
Ligaments connect bone to bone across a joint, providing stability (see Figure 10.3). Collateral ligament
sprains and avulsions at the PIP joint are known to
occur in climbers, particularly as a result of a powerful lunge or awkward torque off a "fixed" finger (as in
a jam or tight pocket). A sprain manifests with mild to
moderate pain and swelling around the PIP joint, but
with no loss of stability (Jebson 1997). A rupture or
avulsion will produce significant pain and swelling as
well as loss of stability, medially or laterally.
Treatment of incomplete collateral ligament
injuries typically involves splinting of the PIP joint for
ten to fourteen days, after which buddy taping can be
used and range-of-motion exercises started (Bach
1999). Climbing can gradually be reintroduced despite
persistent low-grade pain and swelling, which may
take months to resolve (Jebson 1997).
Complete collateral ligament injuries at the PIP
joint are usually treated operatively. If the collateral
ligament is completely avulsed from the bone, nonoperative treatment may result in chronic swelling and
long-term instability (Bach 1999). Surgical repair can
improve this, and full function is often restored in
approximately three months.

Other Finger and Hand Injuries
A wide variety of other finger and hand injuries are
possible in a sport that requires fingers to crimp,
pinch, and jam under high passive and dynamic force
loads. No doubt, you will experience your share of
household injuries like torn tips or back-of-hand gobies. There are a few more subtle injuries that can affect
climbers, however, including carpal tunnel syndrome
and swollen or arthritic PIP and DIP joints.
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a condition in which

Injury Treatment & Prevention

a nerve passing through the wrist, with the flexor tendons, is exposed chronically to too much pressure.
This syndrome affects a small number of climbers, but
its occurrence does not appear to be disproportionately common in climbers (Robinson 1993). Therefore,
it's difficult to conclude whether a climber with this
syndrome incurred it from the repetitive gripping of
rock holds or from some other source. Regardless, the
symptoms include numbness, burning, and tingling of
the fingers; these symptoms may become worse at
night or during activity or elevation (Lewis 1993).
Treatment involves cessation or lowering intensity of
climbing, anti-inflammatory medicines, and splinting
of the wrist in a neutral position at night for three to
six weeks. Surgical decompression of the carpal tunnel may be required if this conservative treatment fails
and symptoms are severe enough to be disabling.
ARTHRITIS

For years I have heard speculation that active "rock
climbers will someday become severe arthritis sufferers." Fortunately, anecdotal evidence of many twentyand thirty-year veterans, as well as a recent study of
sixty-five longtime climbers, indicates that these predictions are not quite panning out. In this study, radiographs of the hands of veteran elite climbers were
compared to an age-matched control group. An
increased rate of osteoarthritis for several joints was
found in the climber group, though no significant difference in the overall prevalence of osteoarthritis was
found between the two groups (Rohrbough 1998). This
study is really good news for those of us entering middle age with many years of climbing under our belts!
Still, it's likely that individuals who predominantly
use the crimp grip may experience some mild swelling
and arthritis in the PIP and DIP joints. As shown in
Figure 10.4, use of the crimp grip produces hyperextension of the DIP joint under large passive force,
while the PIP joint is sharply flexed under great force.
Therefore, both the DIP and PIP joints are possible sites
of mild swelling and arthritis (Robinson 1993).
If you are an aging climber who experiences some
swelling, pain, or stiffness of the DIP and PIP joints, you
will find some relief through use of nonsteroidal anti-

159

inflammatory medications. A growing body of research
also points to a supplement called glucosamine sulfate
as an effective treatment for mild osteoarthritis. Daily
supplementation of 1,500 milligrams of glucosamine
sulfate has been shown to reduce pain and stiffness,
and—more important—to slow the degradation of
affected joints (Reginster 2001). Acquiring these benefits requires a long-term commitment to taking glucosamine sulfate, because the effects are cumulative,
not immediate as in taking anti-inflammatory medicines. But the promise of slowing or halting joint degradation is a huge benefit for individuals—climbers and
nonclimbers—over forty years of age who take glucosamine sulfate daily.
Some supplement manufacturers are now adding a
compound known as chondroitin to their glucosamine
sulfate supplements. Chondroitin is believed to produce
benefits similar to glucosamine sulfate's, and one study
showed positive results in patients with joint problems
from four to eight weeks of taking both supplements
together. The study proposes a five-to-four ratio of glucosamine sulfate to chondroitin with a total daily dose
of 1,500 and 1,200 milligrams, respectively (McAlindon
2000). All of the studies showed these compounds to be
safe, and with almost no side effects.

Elbow Injuries
Tendonitis around the elbow joint is another common
ailment among climbers. This overuse injury can
develop near the bony inside (medial) area of the
elbow or on the outside (lateral), top portion of the
elbow. Let's take a closer look at the pathology and
treatment of each.
MEDIAL EPICONDYLITIS
Tendonitis near the medial epicondyle is commonly
called golfer's elbow or climber's elbow, since it occurs
most frequently among participants in these sports.
Inflammation occurs in the tendon connecting the
many forearm flexor muscles (responsible for finger
flexion and forearm pronation) to the knobby, medial
epicondyle of the inside elbow.
This overuse injury usually reveals itself gradually through increasing incidence of painful twinges or

160

soreness during or after climbing. A small number of
cases seem to occur acutely, however, when sharp
pain develops in the midst of a single hard move, like
cranking a powerful boulder problem or a one-arm
pull-up. Even in these cases cumulative microtrauma
may be involved in making the tissue vulnerable to
the single-event trauma.
In most cases medial epicondylitis is caused by
muscular imbalances of the forearm that result from
climbing too often, too hard, and, most important,
with too little rest. Consider that all the muscles that
produce finger flexion are anchored to the medial epicondyle. Furthermore, the muscles that produce hand
pronation (turning of the palm down and outward)
originate from the medial epicondyle. This subtle fact
plays a vital role in causing this injury: Biceps contraction produces supination (turning of the palm
upward), but in gripping the rock you generally need
to maintain a pronated, palms-out position. This battle, between the supinating action of the biceps
pulling and the necessity to maintain a pronated hand
position (to maintain grip with the rock), strains the
typically undertrained forearm pronator muscles and
their attachment at the medial epicondyle.
Given the above factors, it's easy to see why the
tendons attaching to the medial epicondyle are subjected to repeated high stress loads and, inevitably,
microtraumas. Just as muscular microtraumas are
repaired to new level of capability, the tendons
increase in strength and can withstand higher stress
loads given adequate rest. Unfortunately, the repair
and strengthening process occurs more slowly in tendons than in muscles. Eventually, the muscles are able
to create more force and accumulated stress than the
tendons can adapt to—the result is tendonitis.
As in treating other injuries, you can more easily
manage epicondylitis and speed your return to climbing by recognizing and proactively treating the injury
in its earliest stages. Treating the problem early versus
climbing through it could mean the difference
between six weeks and six months of downtime.
Treatment of epicondylitis has two phases. Phase
I is pain relief; Phase II, rehabilitation and prevention
of recurrence. Phase I demands withdrawal from

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

climbing (and all sport-specific training) and commencement of anti-inflammatory measures. Icing the
elbow for ten to fifteen minutes, two times a day, and
use of anti-inflammatory medication will gradually
decrease inflammation and pain. A cortisone injection
may be helpful in chronic or severe cases, though this
practice is somewhat controversial among physicians
and, in fact, may be detrimental to the healing process
(Nirschl 1996). Depending on the severity of the epicondylitis, successful completion of Phase I could
require anywhere from two weeks to several months.
The goal of Phase II is to retrain and rehabilitate the
injured tissues through use of stretching and strengthtraining exercises. Since forearm-muscle imbalance
plays a primary role in this injury, it's vital to perform
exercises that strengthen the weaker aspects of the forearm—hand pronation and hand/wrist extension.
Always perform some general warm-up activity
or, ideally, warm the elbow directly with a heating pad
before beginning the stretching and strengthening
exercises. Initially, stretch the muscles of the forearm
as shown in the photos on page 72, twice daily.
Introduce strength training with the dumbbell exercises shown in the photos on pages 103 and 104 only
when stretching exercises have successfully restored
normaf range of motion and produced no pain. It's
important to progress slowly on the weight-training
exercises, and to cut back at the first sign of pain.
Begin with just a couple of pounds of resistance and
gradually increase the weight over the course of a few
weeks. Use the stretching exercises daily, but do the
weight-training exercises only three days per week.
After three to four weeks of pain-free training,
begin a gradual return to climbing. Start with low-angle
and easy vertical routes, and take a month or two to
return to your original level of climbing. Continue with
the stretching and strength-training exercises indefinitely—as long as you are a climber, you must engage
in these preventive measures. Failed rehabilitation may
signal a need for surgical intervention.
Finally, let's take a look at the use of counterforce
bracing, or circumferential taping of the upper forearm, as a curative (or preventive) measure for elbow
tendonitis. A counterforce brace designed specifically

Injury Treatment & Prevention

for medial or lateral epicondylitis can provide some
comfort by dispersing forces away from the underlying tissues (Nirschl 1996). These braces are not a substitute for proper rehabilitation, however; they instead
act only to help prevent recurrence after full rehabilitation. There is little evidence that supportive taping
of the forearm provides the same benefit as use of a
counterforce brace.
LATERAL EPICONDYLITIS

Lateral epicondylitis, commonly called tennis elbow, is
an inflammation of the tendon that attaches the forearm extensor and hand supinator muscles to the lateral epicondyle on the outside of the elbow. The forearm
extensor muscles are antagonists to the forearm flexor
muscles used so heavily in gripping the rock. The
extensors are often disproportionately weak compared
to the flexors, so regular strength training of this muscle group is vital to preventing injury.
Onset of pain is typically gradual, and will first
appear after a hard day of climbing. Without treatment, the condition will progressively worsen to the
point that climbing becomes prohibitively painful and
even everyday tasks are hampered. Since such a
severe case often requires a six-month (or longer)
rehabilitation period away from climbing, it's paramount that you take the necessary steps to mitigate
this injury early on.
The treatment protocol for lateral epicondylitis is
basically the same as that described above for medial
epicondylitis. Time away from climbing is mandatory—very few people successfully climb through elbow
tendonitis of either kind. Use of anti-inflammatory
medication and icing is helpful during the initial period of pain and inflammation, though these should
never be used to allow continuation of climbing.
As pain and swelling subside, daily use of the
stretching exercises outlined earlier is absolutely necessary to begin the rehabilitation process. Use a heating pad for a few minutes before stretching and ice the
elbow for ten to fifteen minutes afterward. Gradually
add in the dumbbell exercises for strengthening the
forearm muscles (see "Medial Epicondylitis") and add
weight incrementally over the course of a few weeks.

161

In mild cases of epicondylitis, you may be able to
progress through this rehabilitation and begin a slow
return to climbing in six to eight weeks. A counterforce brace worn just below the elbow may be beneficial upon beginning a slow return to climbing.
As stated earlier, severe episodes may take six
months or more to eliminate and rehabilitate, so commit to the treatment process as early as possible. A surgical solution should be viewed as a last resort, when
this conservative treatment repeatedly fails. The most
popular procedure is to simply excise the diseased tissue from the tendon, then reattach the tendon to the
bone. Eighty-five to 90 percent of patients recuperate
in three months, 10 to 12 percent have improvement
but some pain during exercise, and only 2 to 3 percent
have no improvement (Auerback 2000).

Shoulder Injuries
The shoulder joint takes lot of punishment from
climbing, especially in those obsessed with "V-hard"
bouldering, steep terrain, and sport-specific training.
A variety of injuries can occur, ranging from tendonitis or a tear of the rotator cuff to partial or complete dislocations of the ball-and-socket joint of the
shoulder. Given the complexity of the shoulder joint,
however, a diagnosis can be difficult and may require
expert consultation or an MRI to detect small tears of
the rotator cuff and other subtle injuries.
SHOULDER INSTABILITY
The most common shoulder injury I've seen in climbers
seems to center on development of a loose or unstable
shoulder. More than one climber I know developed
shoulder instability apparently from far too many hours
hanging on a fingerboard or from long-term, overzealous stretching of the upper body. Climbing on overhanging routes day after day, and hard bouldering and
training without adequate rest and antagonist-muscle
training, can also lead to loose shoulders. No matter the
mechanism, constant stretching of the ligaments and
tendons and a growing muscular imbalance will make
the shoulder joints susceptible to dislocation and injury.
This may eventually lead to a debilitating injury and,
possibly, the need for a surgical solution.

162

Dr. Joel Rohrbough has worked with many
climbers and believes that a partial dislocation known as
subluxation is the most common injury among
climbers. This injury produces instability of the shoulder
joint and manifests with pain from deep within or in
back of the shoulder (Rohrbough 2001). In most cases
the ball portion of the shoulder joint is levered forward
during extreme movements with the elbow located
behind the plane of the body. Furthermore, the force of
the levering motion on the shoulder joint increases
when the arm is extended with the elbow out (or back),
as in grabbing a high gaston hold or making a long reach
on overhanging rock.
Fresh shoulder injuries should be treated with the
two-phase process of resting until pain diminishes and
then use of rehabilitative exercises to strengthen the
rotator cuff muscle group. Climbing activity must be
markedly reduced or eliminated while you engage in
the rehabilitative process, and you should also avoid
any overhead motion or other activity that causes
pain in the shoulder. Anti-inflammatory medicine and
ice applied twice daily are useful in reducing initial
pain and swelling.
The common course of therapy begins with gentle
stretching and strengthening of the shoulder, but with
no exercises above the level of the shoulder. Perform
the four exercises from the "Shoulder Rehab Exercises"
on pages 163 and 164 every other day, and gradually
increase the weight from one pound to five pounds
over about a five-week period. Gradually, you can
introduce some basic push-muscle exercises (see
Chapter 6) that strengthen the antagonist muscles.
Decrease resistance on or eliminate completely any
exercise that is too painful. Of course, rehabilitation is
best guided by a professional physical therapist, and
may take anywhere from two to six months before
reintroducing climbing activities.
Unfortunately, a significant number of people with
shoulder injuries ultimately require a surgical solution.
The procedure may include removal of damaged tissue,
repair of minor tears, or surgical tightening of affected
ligaments and tendons. Surgery will be followed with
long-term physical therapy; given a successful outcome,
climbing activity may resume in six to twelve months.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Exercise: Shoulder Rehab Exercises
Perform the shoulder rehabilitation exercises three or
four days per week. Be sure to perform each exercise
on both sides of the body (with both arms).

with a ninety-degree angle between your forearm
and upper arm. Do three sets of twenty slow, controlled repetitions. Gradually add weight, in onepound increments, over the course of a few weeks.

• Dumbbell Internal Rotation
Lie on your side with your bottom arm in front of
your waist and a pillow under your head to support
your neck. Hold a one-pound dumbbell in the hand
of your bottom arm and position the arm so the
forearm is perpendicular to your body. Keeping
your upper arm motionless, bring the weight up to
your body and hold for a moment before lowering
it back to the floor. Perform the full range of motion

Dumbbell External Rotation
Lie on the floor in the same position described in
the previous exercise; this time, however, place a
rolled-up towel under your upper arm. Hold a onepound dumbbell in your upper hand and, while
keeping your upper arm against the side of your
body, let your forearm hang across the body so the
elbow is bent at a ninety-degree angle. Now raise
the weight toward the ceiling until it's parallel to

Dumbbell Internal Rotation

1. Lie on your side with your bottom arm in front of
your waist

2. Bring the weight up to your body.

Dumbbell External Rotation

1. Lie on the floor and let your forearm hang across
your body.

Injury Treatment & Prevention

2. Raise the weight toward the ceiling until it's
parallel to the ground.

163

Bent-Over Arm Raise

7. Assume a bent-over position.

the ground and hold for a
moment before lowering the
weight down to the starting
position. Do three sets of
twenty slow, controlled repetitions. Gradually add weight,
in one-pound increments,
over the course of a few
weeks.

2. Lift your arm up to your side until
it's parallel to the floor.

Bent-Over Arm Kickback

» Bent-Over Arm Raise
With one leg slightly ahead of
the other, assume a bent-over
position with your upper
body supported by a bent arm
braced onto the knee of the
forward leg. Holding a light
dumbbell in the opposite
hand, lift your arm up to
your side until it's parallel to
the floor. Hold for a moment
and lower slowly to the starting position. Keep your
elbow straight throughout
the range of motion. Do three
sets of ten to fifteen repetitions.
Bent-Over A r m Kickback
Assume the same bent-over
position as in the previous
exercise, but this time lift the
dumbbell behind you until
it's parallel to the floor and in
a position next to your hip.
Hold here for a moment and
return to the starting position. Maintain a straight arm
throughout the range of
motion. Do three sets of ten
to fifteen repetitions.

7. Assume a bent-over position.

164

2. Lift the dumbbell behind you until
it's in position next to your hip.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N

Knee

Injuries

Figure 10.5 Meniscus Tear

Injury to the knee is a relatively new phenomenon in
climbing that correlates directly to the proliferation of
indoor and sport climbing. New climbing techniques
like the drop-knee weren't popularized until the
1990s, but this is now a hallmark move of the steep
indoor and outdoor climbs that are so prominent
today. Repeated use of this drop-knee, especially
under high force load, can tear the specialized cartilage in the knee called the meniscus (Stelzle 2000).
MENISCUS TEAR

Meniscus is a tough, fibrous type of cartilage that sits
between the ends of the femur and tibia (see Figure
10.5). The menisci serve primarily as shock absorbers
between the ends of the bones to protect the articulating surfaces (McFarland 2000). There are two separate C-shaped meniscal cartilages in the knee, one.on
the inner half of the knee (the medial meniscus) and
the other on the outer half (the lateral meniscus). A
partial or total tear of a meniscus can occur during
forced rotation of the knee while the foot remains in
a fixed position. In climbing, these tears most often
occur in severe drop-knee positions, which produce
inside rotation of the knee under pressure. They can
also result from high steps in a full hip turnout position and jumping off highball boulder problems.
A small meniscus tear can develop gradually from
repeated use of these climbing moves, or a tear may
occur suddenly. Some tears involve only a small portion of the meniscus, while others produce a bucket
handle, or complete separation of a piece of cartilage.
Symptoms can range from mild pain and no visible
swelling to severe pain and swelling and reduced
mobility (McFarland 2000). Many meniscal tears
cause popping, clicking, and locking of the knee in
certain positions.
Not all meniscus tears cause big problems. A
minor tear in the thick outer portion of the meniscus
may be able to repair itself given fairly good blood
supply. Also, use of the supplement glucosamine sulfate (see "Arthritis" for more info) is believed to support the formation of new cartilage and may enhance
the healing process. In minor cases, symptoms will

Injury Treatment & Prevention

Meniscus

Meniscal

tear

The meniscus can tear when the knee is forced to
rotate while the foot remains in a fixed position.
A severe drop-knee move or a twisting jump off a
boulder problem can cause this injury.
disappear on their own; persistent pain that affects
daily activities or produces significant pain in certain
climbing positions may require surgery, however.
Arthroscopic surgery is very successful in relieving pain and restoring full function to the injured
knee. The goal of arthroscopic surgery is to preserve as
much of the meniscus as possible so as to decrease the
chance of future arthritis (McFarland 2000). Tears on
the outer margin of the meniscus are more amenable
to repair, since they have greater blood flow compared
to the thin, inner margin of the meniscus. Tears in the

165

thin portion of the meniscus are typically excised;
entirely detached pieces of cartilage are removed.
Recovery from arthroscopic surgery is rapid. The
procedure is generally performed as outpatient surgery, followed by three to seven days of rest, ice packs,
and elevating the limb. Crutches are often used during
the first postoperative week, though weight can be
placed on the injured leg as can be tolerated. Most
patients return to work in less than a week, and other
normal activities can be added during the second and
third week after surgery.
Physical therapy may be beneficial, but is not
required for fit individuals who can begin a gradual
return to physical activity after two or three weeks. A
full return to training activities and climbing typically
takes two to three months.

Preventing Injuries
This chapter began by quoting studies that place your
odds—as an avid rock climber—of getting injured as at
least at three to one. Therefore, it seems appropriate
that we conclude this tome with an attempt at lowering those odds!
First, abstinence is the only preventive measure
that is absolute. Climbing is a stressful sport, and injury
may be unavoidable. Still, I estimate that you can lower
the risk by at least 50 percent if you follow all the preventive measures outlined below. Undoubtedly, some
of these guidelines fly in opposition to the modus
operandi of many climbers. By now, however, you are
familiar with the thread weaving throughout this book:
"To outperform the masses, you must do things that
they do not do."

Ten Rules for Preventing Overuse Injuries
Detailed below are ten strategies for lowering your
exposure to overuse injuries. Clearly, there will be situations that demand breaking one or more of these
rules. By climbing and training in accordance with
these guidelines most of the time, however, you will
likely decrease your risk of injury and never, or only
rarely, join the injured mass of climbers.
1. Focus o n technique training over strength
training. Many overuse injuries result from too

166

much of a focus on strength training too early in an
individual's climbing career. As advised throughout
this book, it's fundamental to develop a high level of
technical competence before jumping full bore into
sport-specific training. Not only does good technique
help you reduce stress on your fingers and shoulders,
but it also helps maximize economy of movement
and, thus, increases apparent strength on the rock.
Remember that two to four days per week of
climbing will naturally produce rapid gains in
sport-specific strength in beginners. Because tendons strengthen at a slower rate than muscles,
novice climbers are not exempt from injury risk.
With little experience, these new climbers have not
yet developed the keen sense needed to distinguish
"good pain" from "bad pain." The number of
climbers who become injured during their first
year or two in the sport—as they quickly progress
from, say, 5.5 to 5.10 (or higher)—is alarming.
Therefore, awareness, maturity, and a prudent
approach to training are vital traits that must be
fostered in all enthusiastic climbers.
Finally, it's important to avoid the added stress
of using highly specific training tools, like a fingerboard or campus board, during the first year of
climbing. After that, these activities can be added
gradually as part of an intelligent, well-planned
training for climbing program.
2. Regularly vary the type of climbing. Varying the
type and magnitude of climbing stressors on the
body is a highly effective way of lowering your
exposure to injury. For instance, alternating consecutive weekends of climbing between sport and traditional routes naturally varies the type of specific
strains placed on the body. Likewise, regularly
changing the focus of weekday climbing and training activities—for example, alternating among bouldering, roped gym climbing, and general training—
prevents any single system from being overly
stressed. This practice of constantly mixing things up
is the essence of cross-training applied to climbing.
3. Use prophylactic finger taping in the most
stressful situations and after injury. This subject

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

was covered in length earlier in the chapter, but it's
worth underscoring here—supportive taping of the
finger tendon pulleys helps lower the force load
placed on the tendons and may help prevent injury.
Still, prophylactic taping is not something you
should use every day and on every climb.
Subjecting the finger tendons and annular pulleys
to gradually increasing levels of stress is what will
make them stronger and able to function under
higher and higher loads in the future. The use of
taping all the time could have a negative impact on
the long-term strength of this system.
Reserve use of prophylactic taping techniques
for workouts or climbs that you expect will push
the envelope of what your tendons have previously experienced. For instance, taping would be a wise
measure for attempting a hardest-ever route, any
climb known to possess injurious hold types (onefinger pockets, extreme crimps, and the like), or
high-intensity training techniques such as campus
or HIT training. Of course, individuals recovering
from recent finger injuries should tape their fingers
during the early stages of returning to climbing.
4. Proceed cautiously through dangerous moves.
An important sense to develop is that of knowing
and managing movement through inherently dangerous moves or sequences. In recognizing that you
are entering a dangerous sequence (say, a one-finger lock with poor feet) and in sensing that you are
near injury on a move, you are empowered to
either disengage from the move or cautiously manage through the sequence as expeditiously as possible. Clearly you need experience in such situations
in order to develop this sense, but you can foster
this important skill by knowing your body and the
sensations you feel on various types of movements.
As a final note, a climber will often escape
injury on the first attempt or pass through some
heinous move, then get injured by attempting or
rehearsing the painful move repeatedly. This is
obviously a very unintelligent approach—no single
route is worth getting injured and, possibly, laid up
for months over. Bottom line: If you find yourself
climbing into a move that feels overly painful or

Injury Treatment & Prevention

injury-scary, simply lower off and find a better
route to enjoy.
5. Don't climb to exhaustion. There is nothing I
enjoy more than occasionally maximizing a day of
climbing fun by pulling down right into the
evening twilight. As a regular practice, however,
this is a prescription for injury. This chapter covered a range of overuse injuries that are largely
caused by accumulated stress beyond what the
body is capable of handling—that's why they call
them overuse injuries!
Knowing when to say when is one of the subtle climbing skills that you can't learn from a book
or video, but only through experience. Obviously,
the best strategy is to err on the side of ending
climbing early in the day versus right after you feel
that finger tweak. The chapter on strength training
hammered home the idea that quality training
stimulus is far more important that the quantity of
training. In strength training, less is often more.
When climbing, the right decision on when to
call it a day is much less clear, since you want to
maximize climbing fun without getting injured. In
this situation only you can decide what's right for
you. Don't be swayed into another burn on a strenuous route if you are approaching exhaustion and
think your climbing technique will not be up to
snuff. Keep in mind that many injuries occur late in
the day, when you are tired and climbing sloppily.
One rule of thumb you might adopt is to call it
quits early when planning to climb again the very
next day or if you are already on your second day
of climbing. In this way, you will limit undue accumulation of stress. Conversely, when sandwiching
a single day of climbing between two rest days, you
can feel better about packing in as many climbs as
possible before dark.
6. Don't climb or train more than four days per
week. This is another rule right out of Chapter 7,
"Personal Training Programs." In most cases it's
counterproductive to climb and train more than a
total of four days per week. Consequently, if you are
climbing four days a week on the rock, in the gym,

167

or both combined, you should do no other sportspecific training during the three remaining days of
the week. Even with three days rest out of seven,
your body will struggle to repair the microtraumas
incurred to the tendons and muscles during your
four climbing days. For this reason, it is wise to
incorporate a training cycle that provides a complete
week off every so often. This is valuable catch-up
time for your biological climbing machine!
In a pure strength- and power-training program (such as in focused off-season training), you
may only be able to train two or three days per
week while resting four or five. Earlier in this chapter I presented several studies that indict overtraining (or under-resting) as one of the most common
causes of overuse injury. Don't set yourself up for
failure by succeeding at overtraining. Listen to
your body, and when in doubt, favor over-resting.

one of the most overlooked—and most vital—parts
of training for climbing. Muscle imbalances in the
forearms, shoulders, and torso are primary factors in
many of the overuse injuries covered in this chapter.
If you are serious about climbing your best and preventing injury, then you must commit to training
the antagonist muscles twice per week.
The time and equipment involved is minimal.
All of the antagonist-muscle exercises described in
Chapter 6 can be performed at home with nothing
more than a couple of dumbbells. As for the time
commitment, it's less than twenty minutes, twice
per week. I advise doing these exercises at the end
of your weekday climbing or sport-specific workout. Keep the weights light, and do every single
exercise outlined for the antagonist muscles of the
upper body and forearms, as well as the handfuf of
exercises for the core muscles of the torso.

7. Always w a r m up and cool d o w n . Anyone with
experience in traditional sports knows firsthand
the importance of a proper warm-up and cooldown. Unfortunately, I have observed more than a
few climbers who just tie in and start climbing
without any preparatory warm-up activity, stretching, or submaximum climbing.
All that's needed for a good warm-up is to
break a light sweat by jogging, hiking, or riding a
bike for five to fifteen minutes. Follow this with
some light stretching exercises, as described in
Chapter 6. Start your climbing for the day by doing
a series of easy boulder problems or a route or two
that is much easier than you might want to get on.
This minor inconvenience is a worthy investment
in avoiding injury and maximizing your performance later in the day.
A brief cool-down is also beneficial since it will
loosen up tight muscle groups and enhance the
recovery process. In particular, stretching and a few
minutes of light aerobic activity help maintain
increased blood flow and speed dispersion of lactic
acid accumulated in the most fatigued muscles.

9. Use periodization to vary your training schedule. Many sports scientists consider periodization
to be the gold standard for interweek planning of
an effective and optimal strength-training program. As described in Chapter 5, periodization
involves a premeditated variation in workout
focus, intensity, and volume, which in the long
term produces a maximum training response.
Periodization may also reduce the risk of overuse
injury, since the training focus and intensity
changes every few days or weeks.
In a highly stressful sport like climbing, the
most valuable aspect of periodization may be the
intermittent rest phases or breaks away from all
sport-specific activity. Chapter 7 advised use of the
4-3-2-1 cycle for most intermediate and elite
climbers. Use of this training cycle provides one full
week of rest out of every ten-week mesocycle, for
systemic recovery and to blunt long-term accumulation of overuse stress. In the yearlong macrocycle it
is advised to take one full month off from climbingrelated stresses. These breaks away from climbing
go a long way toward allowing the slow-to-adapt
tendons and ligaments to catch up to the gains in
muscular strength. It's also a healthy break for your
mental muscle!

8. Maintain muscle balance by training antagonist
muscle groups. Training the antagonist muscles is

168

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

10. Make getting proper rest and nutrition a top
priority. Getting proper rest and nutrition seems like
an obvious rule for a serious athlete, but I'm often
surprised by the bad dietary and sleep habits possessed by some very serious climbers. Fortunately, I
have noticed improvement and increased awareness
about rest and nutrition issues in recent years. No
doubt the better-informed and more disciplined
climbers are performing cfoser to their ultimate
potential and with fewer injuries.
The chapters "Performance Nutrition" and
"Accelerating Recovery" provide many useful
strategies to employ as you increase the priority
placed on these subjects. If you use most of these
strategies, most of the time, I am confident that
you will outperform the masses and reduce your
risk of overuse injuries.

Injury Treatment & Prevention

Certainly an occasional late night out or free
day of eating and drinking whatever you like won't
hurt (in fact, it's a great reward after a hard tick!).
Still, consistent lack of sleep and poor nutrition
slow recovery between workouts and days of
climbing, and undoubtedly make you more vulnerable to injury. Most important is good nutrition
and a solid eight to nine hours of sleep in the day
or two following an especially hard workout or
day(s) of climbing. Remember that training and
recovery are opposite sides of the same coin—if
you put the effort into training optimally, then it
would be a waste not do everything in your power
to recovery optimally as well.

169

Jeff Batzer showing no handicap as
he tops out on Upper Re
odral
Ledge, New Hampshire.
PHOTO

BY

ERIC

J.

HORST

Afterword
T

he power of climbing is awesome. The simple act of moving over
stone can change your day, and it can change your life. Climbing
takes you to places you have never been before—breathtaking vistas
that few humans ever see and deep into the very core of your being. In
this way climbing helps us discover who we are and gives us the gift of
insight into our true potential and what really is possible in our lives.
Many "flatlanders" never gain this insight, and worse yet, far too many
people around the world will never have the opportunity to experience
the wonder of climbing (or any other pleasure-seeking activity) because
they spend each day of their lives just trying to get by. From this perspective, I trust you will agree that in simply being able to go climbing
and pursue self-actualization, we are better off than the majority of people on this planet. Regardless of your current disposition, vow to live
each day with an attitude of gratitude. Look for ways to brighten the day
of everyone you meet, and consider contributing some time or money
to aid those who are less fortunate. I invite you to check out some of my
favorite charities listed below. Share some of your climbing power with
the world!
• www.MakeAWish.org
• www.RedCross.org
• www.WorldVision.org

171

Appendix A
Training Charts

U

se the two blank training charts on the following pages to track
your training progress. The Training and Climbing Macrocycle will
enable you to set annual training objectives and seasonal climbing goals
as well as record your actual progress. You can use the chart to plan your
training for the four seasons, target specific types of training, track the
number of days you train, and record your achievements throughout
the year. In contrast, the Energy-Emotion Levels chart will allow you to
track your physical energy and emotional mind-set hour by hour
throughout the day. You can use this chart to observe patterns, avoid
negative triggers, modify your emotional state, and better manage your
energy and outlook for optimal performance.

173

Training and Climbing Macrocyde

Name/Year

Training Objectives and Seasonal Climbing Goals

Month
r
Week
Climbing/endurance
Max. strength and power
•giE Anaerobic endurance
F
Rest
7

Total number of days
per week of finger
training or climbing
2
1

Benchmark achievements
and notes

Jan
2

3

Feb
4

5

6

7

8

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

9 10 n 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 3 0 3 1 3 2 3 3 3 4 3 5 3 6 3 7 3 8 3 9 4 0 4 1 42 4 3 4 4 4 5 4 6 47 4 8 4 9 5 0 51 52

CQ

negative
O

CO

CD

->

positive
NO

O

K)

.>

CT>

CO

<5'

i

-r

d>

O

CO

>
2

CO

>
2

o
>

o
CD

r-*•
CD

N>

!

N>

s

2
>5

•>

CT>
2

CO

2

o
T3

S

Appendix B
Self-Assessment Test Comments & Training Tips
I he Self-Assessment Test in Chapter 2 covers
physical strength, mental focus, and techniques
and tactics. Taking the test should help you to gauge
your overall strengths and weaknesses and pinpoint
some specific areas for improvement. If you gave
yourself a score of three or lower on any of the questions, you've identified weak spots that should be targeted for training. Here is a brief comment on each of
these common problems as well as some specific tips
for improving your climbing performance. For more
in-depth information on any of these topics, see the
chapters referenced below.
1.

If your footwork deteriorates during the hardest
part of the climb, you might be focusing on the
lack of good handholds instead of zeroing in on
crucial footholds (often the key to unlocking
hard sequences).

TIP: Begin daily stretching for a minimum of
ten minutes and practice high steps in a gym
setting. (See Chapter 6.)
4.

TIP: Before starting u p a climb, close your
eyes and take five slow, deep breaths (each
breath should take at least ten seconds). Try to
maintain steady breathing as you climb. Take
three more slow, deep breaths at each rest
position and before you begin the crux
sequence. (See Chapter 3.)
5.

TIP: When the going gets tough, focus on your
feet! (See Chapter 3.)
2.

3.

If you have difficulty stepping onto critical
footholds during hard sequences, lack of flexibility or weak hip flexor muscles is the likely problem.

If your biceps pump out before your forearms, it
usually means you're hanging out with bent
arms. Straight-arm positions are fundamental to
good climbing technique.
TIP: Whenever possible, hang "by the bone"
and not with flexed arm muscle. Straight-arm
positions are especially important w h e n placing gear, shaking out, or pausing to decipher
the next sequence.

If your forearms balloon and your grip begins to
fail, you are probably overgripping the holds
and/or climbing too slowly.
TIP: On near-vertical walls, relax your grip
and place maximum weight over your feet.
When the wall angle is overhanging, the number one rule is to climb fast from one rest to
the next. (See Chapter 4.)

If you find you get anxious and tight as you
head into crux sequences, normalized breathing
is the key to reducing tension and anxiety.

6.

Do you have difficulty hanging on small, necessary holds? Although poor body positioning can
make small holds even harder to use, it's likely
that your contact strength (grip) needs work.
TIP: Spend more time training on steep walls
and gym cave areas, and go bouldering more
often. Some limited fingerboard and hypergravity training is also recommended for intermediate and advanced climbers. (See Chapter 6.)

177

7.

8.

If you fail on sequences you know by heart, you
might be making the common mistake of trying
or inventing new sequences during a redpoint
attempt.

k n o w n (wired) routes and when redpointing.
Foster a watchful eye that's on the lookout for
creative rests that might stop the clock for a
few moments. (See Chapter 4.)

TIP: When you find a sequence that works, it's
usually best to stick with it. Counter any midclimb thoughts of trying a n e w sequence with
the definitive belief that you already know
(and can do) the best sequence.

12. Do you get out of breath when you climb?
Rapid breathing while climbing results from
excess tension, irregular breathing, or poor aerobic fitness.

If you stall at the start of crux sequences, you
might be suffering from paralysis by analysis.
TIP: When faced with a crux sequence, visualize two possible sequences, and then immediately try the one that looks more promising.
Once you commit to a sequence, go for it! Only
one thing should be on your mind—getting to
the next good hold (or rest) as fast as possible.

9.

Do you climb three or four days in a row?
Unless you are one of those genetically gifted
extreme outliers, climbing or training on three
or four consecutive days is a practice that will
lead to overtraining, injury, and a drop in performance.
TIP: In this case, less is more. Switch to a twoday-on, one-day-off (or two-day-off) schedule
and you will be training smarter and climbing
harder!

10. Sewing-machine leg is common in the tight,
anxious climber.
TIP: Lengthen your warm-up and begin working some of the relaxation exercises described
later in this text. (See Chapter 3.)
11. If you pump out on overhanging climbs, you
should be aware that the pump clock starts running when you leave the ground. You might not
be too weak to climb the route, just too slow!
TIP: Practice climbing more quickly on

178

TIP: Concentrate on maintaining relaxed, normal breathing while you climb. Also, consider
engaging in some aerobic training (preferably
running) three to four days per week. Build up
to a maximum of four, twenty-minute runs per
week. (See Chapter 6.)
13. If you begin thinking about how you might fail
on a route before you even start, you should
know that belief gives birth to reality. If the
thought of failing crosses your mind, you likely
will.
TIP: Before you start u p a climb, always visualize yourself successfully climbing the route
from bottom to top. (See Chapter 3.)
14. Do you miss hidden holds on routes? Tunnel
vision is a common cause of failure, especially
during on-sight climbing.
TIP: Scope the route from a few different vantage points before leaving the ground. As you
climb, keep an open mind for hidden holds—
the key hold always seems to take a little extra
effort to locate. If a route feels really hard for its
grade, chances are there's a good handhold or
foothold escaping your view. (See Chapter 4.)
15. If you have difficulty hanging on to small holds
or pockets, keep in mind that open-hand grip
strength is crucial. Expert climbers favor it,
while beginner climbers avoid it.
TIP: While training and bouldering, force
yourself to use the open-hand grip at least 50

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

percent of the time. Most intermediate and
advanced climbers can significantly improve
open-hand grip strength through use of HIT
workouts. (See Chapter 6.)
16. It's common to grab onto gear rather than risk a
fafl trying a hard move. Assuming the potential
fall is safe, always go for the move instead of
grabbing gear or hanging on the rope. The bad
habit of grabbing gear is easy to develop and
very hard to break. Plus, you'll never learn
where your true limit is if you give up in this
way.
TIP: Counter any thought of grabbing gear with
the belief that there is absolutely a good hold
just a few moves above you (there probably is!).
17. If much of your body weight is hanging on your
arms, you might not be placing your weight
(center of gravity) over your feet.
TIP: Invest more time practicing technique
and body positioning. Focus on keeping your
crotch and hips in near the wall (except on
slabs) and experiment with moves where you
turn one hip or the other to the wall. Some
flexibility training may be beneficial, too.
18. Intense soreness after only one day of cragging
means that your training volume and intensity
are not congruent with your outdoor climbing
goals.
TIP: Step up your indoor training and always
try for two solid training days during the
workweek.
19. Do you have difficulty visualizing yourself successfufly climbing the route? All peak performers
acknowledge the importance of visualization.
TIP: Get into the habit of climbing each route
in your mind's eye at least twice before giving
it a real go. (See Chapter 3.)

Appendix B

20. If you think you cannot reach key holds on difficult routes, you should be aware that this is the
oldest excuse in this sport. Funny thing is, some
great short climbers never use this excuse! The
reason—there is almost always a technical solution or intermediate hold to be discovered that
will solve apparent reach problems.
TIP: Try a move twenty different ways and
you'll almost always find one that works!
2 1 . If your feet cut loose and swing out on overhanging routes and roofs, it's possibie that poor
footwork and body positioning are responsibie
for the swinging feet syndrome. More often,
however, it commonly resuits from weak core
muscles (torso).
TIP: Perform the core-muscle exercises,
described in Chapter 6, at least twice weekly.
Also, spend more time in a bouldering cave
working on your steep-wall footwork and
body position.
22. If you get distracted by activity on the ground,
remember that whiie climbing your focus must
be aimed upward, not down toward the ground.
If less than 95 percent of your focus or attention
is pointed toward the top of the climb, you don't
have much of a chance of getting there.
TIP: Clear your mind of what's happening on
the ground. If you need confirmation that your
belayer is paying attention, a simple "watch
me" will do; then refocus on the move at hand.
(See Chapter 3.)
23. It's common for beginning climbers to have difficulty reading sequences. Reading sequences
comes from experience.
TIP: Climb up to four days a week. Always
try to figure sequences from the ground and
"just say no" to beta (a real handicap to learning), except when climbing for performance.

179

24. Do you experience a deep flash pump on the
first climb of the day? A flash pump results
when you push your muscles too hard, too
soon.
TIP: Lengthen your warm-up period, add
more stretching and some sports massage, and
always do a few increasingly difficult routes
before attempting your project.
25. If you have more difficulty climbing when people are watching, remember that the pressure of
needing to perform is entirely self-imposed.
Therefore, it can be turned off as easily as you
turn it on.
TIP: Commit to climb for yourself—for the
challenge, adventure, and fun of it (all the reasons you got into climbing in the first place).
Forget about the rest of the world, engage the
process of climbing, and let the outcome take
care of itself. (See Chapter 3.)
26. If your feet unexpectedly pop off footholds, take
heart that this is a common problem, even
among some advanced climbers.
TIP: Refocus your attention on your feet for a
few weeks. Evaluate whether you carefully
place your feet on the best part of a hold or
simply drop them onto the biggest-looking
part. Also, do you hold your foot position stationary as you stand up or does your shoe
move on the hold? These are things you need
to practice in a nonperformance setting. (See
Chapter 4.)
27. Do you experience frequent elbow pain? There
are two types of elbow tendonitis common to
climbers. If you climb enough years, chances are
you'll experience at least one of them.
TIP: Reverse wrist curls and forearm rotation
exercises as well as regular forearm stretching
will help prevent these problems. Perform
three sets of reverse wrist curls (twenty-five

180

reps with a five- to fifteen-pound dumbbell)
and two sets of forearm rotation, three days per
week, year-round. Stretch both sides of your
forearms each day. (See Chapter 6.)
28. If you have trouble pushing yourself to the limit
lead climbing a safe route, your problem is more
likely mental than physical. Keep in mind that
mental fortitude is as important as physical
strength.
TIP: Practice pushing yourself a little farther
into the discomfort zone (mental and physical)
each week. This can be done in the gym and on
safe routes at the crags. In time, you will
instinctively push beyond your k n o w n limits
when climbing on a personal-best route. (See
Chapter 3.)
29. If you have difficulty finding midroute rest positions, you are missing the key to sending routes
near your limit.
TIP: Creative practice (in a nonperformance
setting) at finding funky rest positions and
climbing experience at a wide range of crags
will, in time, make finding "thank God" rests
instinctual!
30. If your first attempt on a hard route is usually
• better than second or third attempts that day,
you might lack endurance. Most climbers get
three or more good tries on a project before
experiencing diminishing returns. If you fatigue
more quickly than this, lack of endurance is the
likely culprit.
TIP: Climbing laps on training routes is a great
way to improve endurance. Use an intervalclimbing strategy in which you climb hard for
five to ten minutes, then rest anywhere from
five to twenty minutes, then repeat.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Appendix C
Fitness Evaluation & Questionnaire
Fitness Evaluation

T

his ten-part evaluation is strenuous. Perform a complete warm-up before proceeding, and rest extensively
between tests. Take this fitness test annually to gauge your changes in conditioning for climbing. Please send
me a copy of your initial test results so they can be included in an ongoing statistical study.
Test 1:

One set maximum number of pull-ups. Do this test on a standard pull-up bar (or bucket hold on a
fingerboard) with your palms away and hands shoulder width apart. Do not bounce, and be sure
to go up and down the whole way.
Evaluation: Total number of pull-ups in a single set to failure.
Results:

Test 2:

One repetition maximum pull-up. Do a single pull-up with a ten-pound weight clipped to your
harness. Rest three minutes, then add ten more pounds and repeat. (If you are very strong, begin
with a twenty-pound weight and increase at ten- to twenty-pound increments.) Continue in this
fashion until you have added more weight than you can pull up.
Evaluation: The maximum amount of added weight successfully lifted for a single pull-up divided
by your body weight.
Results:

Test 3:

One-arm lock-off. Start with a standard chin-up (palms facing) then lock off at the top on one arm
and fet go with the other.
Evaluation: Length of time in the lock-off before your chin drops below the bar.
Results: Right arm

Test 4:

Left arm

One set maximum number of Frenchies. Perform the exercise as described on page 95-96.
Remember, each cycie consists of three pull-ups separated by the three different lock-off positions,
which are heid for five seconds. Have a partner time your lock-offs.
Evaluation: The number of cycles (or part of) completed in a single set.
Results:

181

Test 5:

One set maximum number of fingertip pull-ups on a '/-inch (19 millimeter) edge. Perform this
exercise as in test 1 except on a fingerboard edge or doorjamb of approximately the stated size.
Evaluation: The number of fingertip pull-ups done in a single go.
Results:

Test 6:

Lock off in the top position of a fingertip pull-up (%-inch or i9-millimeter edge) for as long as
possible.
Evaluation: Length of time in the lock-off until your chin drops below the edge.
Results:

Test 7:

Straight-arm hang from a standard pull-up bar. Place your hands shoulder width apart with palms
facing away.
Evaluation: Length of time you can hang on the bar before muscle failure.
Results:

Test 8:

One set maximum number of sit-ups. Perform these on a pad or carpeted floor with your knees
bent at approximately ninety degrees, your feet flat on the floor with nothing anchoring them.
Cross your arms over your upper chest and perform each sit-up until your elbows touch your
knees or thighs.
Evaluation: Number of sit-ups you can perform without stopping. Do them in a controlled
manner—no bouncing off the floor.
Results:

Test 9:

Wall split as described in the box in on page 74. Be sure that your rear end is no more than
6 inches from the wall.
Evaluation: Position your legs so they are equidistant from the floor and measure the distance from
your heels to the floor.
Results:

Test 10:

High-step stretch. Stand facing a wall with one foot flat on the floor with toes touching the wall.
Lift the other leg up to the side as high as possible without any aid from your hands.
Evaluation: Measure the height of your step off the floor and divide it by your height.
Results:

182

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Questionnaire

1.

Name
Address
City/State/Zip _
Country
E-mail address

2.

Age

Sex_

3.

Height

4.

Previous sports background

5.

Number of years climbing? .

6.

Preferred type of climbing (sport, trad, bouldering, big wall)?_

7.

Current on-sight lead ability (75 percent success rate at what level)?

8.

Hardest redpoint (worked route)?

9.

Are you currently doing sport-specific training for climbing?

Weight

Percent body fat (if known).

If so, which exercises do you use (circle): fingerboard, campus training, HIT, system wall, other?

10. Do you have a home climbing wall?_

11. How often do you climb indoors (days per month):

Appendix C

183

12. Do you belong to a climbing gym?

Which one?

13. Have you ever participated in a climbing competition?

14. Have you ever been injured while climbing or training for climbing?
If so, describe.

15. Approximately how many days per year do you climb?

16. How many different climbing areas have you visited in the past twelve months?

17. What are your goals in this sport?

18. What chapter or part of Training for Climbing do you like best?

19. What subjects would you like to know about in a future edition?.

20. What climbers would you like to see interviewed with regard to their training and climbing?

Please send a copy of your Fitness Evaluation and Questionnaire to the address below. Include a selfaddressed stamped envelope and I'll send you a Training for Climbing sticker. Thank you!
Contact information:
Eric J. Horst
P.O. Box 8633
Lancaster, PA 17604
www.TrainingForClimbing.com

184

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Glossary
T

he following is a compilation of some of the technical terms and climbing jargon used throughout
this book.
acclimatization—Physiological, adaptive responses
to a new environment, such as high altitude, hot,
and cold. Acclimation is acclimatization in an artificial environment.
active recovery—Restoration of homeostasis following vigorous exercise that involves continued
light-intensity movement; facilitates faster recovery by enhancing lactate removal from the blood.
acute—Having rapid onset and severe symptoms.
adaptive response—Physiological changes in structure or function particularly related to response to
a training overload.
adipose tissue—Body fat.
aerobic(s)—Any physical activity deriving energy
from the breakdown of glycogen in the presence
of oxygen, thus producing little or no lactic acid,
enabling an athlete to continue exercise much
longer.
aggro—Short for aggressive.
agonist—A muscle directly engaged in a muscular
contraction.
anaerobic—Energy production in the muscles
involving the breakdown of glycogen in the
absence of oxygen; a by-product called lactic acid
is formed resulting in rapid fatigue and cessation
of physical activity.

anaerobic endurance—The ability to continue
moderate- to high-intensity activity over a period
of time; commonly called power-endurance or
power-stamina by climbers, though these terms are
scientifically incorrect.
anaerobic threshold—The workload or level of
oxygen consumption where lactate production by
the working muscles exceeds the rate of lactate
removal by the liver; typically at 50 percent to 80
percent of maximum intensity of exercise, and in
proportion to one's level of anaerobic-endurance
conditioning.
anorexia—Pathological absence of appetite or
hunger in spite of a need for food.
antagonist—A muscle providing an opposing force
to the primary muscles of action (agonist).
antioxidants—Substances (vitamins and minerals)
proven to oppose oxidation and inhibit or neutralize free radicals.
ape-index—Fingertip to fingertip distance (across
your chest with arms out to each side) minus
your height; a positive Ape-index is associated
with above-average reach for a given height.
artery—A vessel that carries oxygenated blood away
from the heart to the tissues of the body.
arthritis—Disease that causes inflammation,
swelling, and pain in the joints.
arousal—An internal state of alertness or excitement.

185

ATP—Adenosine triphosphate; a high-energy molecule which is stored in the muscles in very small
amounts. The body's ultimate fuel source.
atrophy—Gradual shrinking and deconditioning of
muscle tissue from disuse.
back stepping—Outside edging on a foothold
which is behind you while climbing a move with
your side to the wall.
barndoor—Sideways swinging or uncontrolled turning of the body resulting from poor balance or
body positioning.
basal metabolic rate—The minimum level of energy required to sustain the body's vital functions.
beta—Any prior information about a route including
sequence, rests, gear, clips, etc.
biological value (BV)—A method for evaluating
protein sources; a high BV protein source has a
high percentage of nutrients actually absorbed
from the human intestine as opposed to excreted.
blocked practice—A practice routine in which a
specific task is practiced repeatedly, as in working
a crux move or sequence.
bouldering—Variable practice of climbing skills performed without a belay rope at the base of a cliff
or on small boulders.
campus (or campusing)—Climbing an overhanging section of rock or artificial wall with no feet,
usually in a dynamic left hand, right hang, left
hand (and so forth) sequence.
campus training—A sport-specific form of plyometric exercise, developed by Wolfgang Gullich at the
Campus Center, a weight-lifting facility at the
University in Niirnberg, Germany.
capillary—The tiny blood vessels that receive blood
flow from the arteries, interchange substances
between the blood and the tissues, and return the
blood to the veins.

186

capillary density—Number of capillaries per unit
area of muscle tissue. Capillary density increases,
mainly in slow-twitch fibers, in response to aerobic training.
catabolic—A breaking down process in the body, as
in muscle breakdown during intense exercise.
center of gravity—The theoretical point on which
the total effect of gravity acts on the body.
chronic—Continuing over time.
concentric contraction—Any movement involving
a shortening of muscles fibers while developing
tension, as in the biceps muscle during a pull-up.
contact strength—Initial grip strength (and speed
of gripping) upon touching a handhold.
Cortisol—A hormone, released in response to
emotional or exercise stress, that promotes fat utilization, inhibits inflammatory response, and facilitates breakdown of muscle proteins for energy.
cortisone—A synthetic form of Cortisol used (injected) as an anti-inflammatory.
creatine phosphate (CP)—A high-energy phosphate compound stored in skeletal muscle and
used to supply energy for brief, high-intensity
muscle action.
crimp grip—The most natural (and stressful) way to
grip a rock hold characterized by hyperextension
of the first joint in the fingers and nearly full flexion of the second joint.
crux—The hardest move, or sequence of moves, on
a route.
deadpoint—The high position in a dynamic movement where, for a moment, all motion stops.
detox—To shakeout, rest, and recover from pumped
forearm muscles.
detraining—Reversal of positive adaptations to
chronic exercise upon cessation of an exercise
program.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

drop knee—An exaggerated backstep, commonly
used on overhanging rock, where the inside knee
is dropped toward the ground resulting in a stable
chimney-like position.

flash pump—A rapid, often vicious, muscular pump
resulting from strenuous training or climbing
without first performing a proper, gradual warmup.

dynamic move—An explosive leap for a hold otherwise out of reach.

flexion—A movement that brings the ends of a body
part closer together, as in bending the arm.

dyno—Short for dynamic.

G-tox—A technique which uses gravity to help
speed recovery from a forearm pump. It involves
alternating, every five to ten seconds, the position
of the resting arm between the normal hanging at
your side position and a raised-hand position
above your shoulder.

eccentric contraction—Muscle action in which the
muscle resists as it is forced to lengthen, as in the
biceps during the lowering phase of a pull-up.
electrolyte—A substance which, in solution, is
capable of conducting electricity. Certain electrolytes are essential to the electrochemical functioning of the body.
endurance—Ability to perform physical work for an
extended period of time. Cardiovascular
endurance is directly related to VO2 Max, whereas muscular endurance is influenced by circulation and available oxygen.
enzyme—A protein molecule that aids chemical
reactions.
epicondylitis—Inflammation of the tendon origins
of the forearm flexors (medial) or extensors (lateral) near the elbow.
ergogenic—Performance enhancing.
estrogen—The sex hormone that predominates in
females, but also has some functions in males.
extension—A movement which moves the two
ends of a jointed body part away from each other,
as in straightening the arm.
fast-twitch fibers—Muscle fiber type that contracts
quickly and is used mostly during intense, powerful movements.
flagging—A climbing technique in which one foot is
crossed behind the other to avoid barndooring
and to improve balance.
flash—To climb a route first try without ever having
touched the route, but with the aid of beta.

Glossary

glycogen—Compound chains of glucose stored in
the muscle and liver for use during aerobic or
anaerobic exercise.
glycemic index (GI)—A scale which classifies how
the ingestion of various foods affects blood-sugar
levels in comparison to the ingestion of straight
glucose.
Golgi t e n d o n organ—Sensory receptors located
between the muscle and its tendon that are sensitive to the stretch of the muscle tendon produced
during muscular contraction.
gripped—Extremely scared.
hangdogging—Climbing a route, usually bolt to
bolt, with the aid of a rope to hang and rest while
practicing the sequence.
heel hook—Use of the heel on a hold, usually near
chest level, to aid in pulling and balance.
homeostasis—The body's tendency to maintain a
steady state despite external changes.
honed—In extremely good shape; with low body
fat.
hormone—A chemical secreted into the bloodstream
to regulate the function of a certain organ.
hyperemia—Increased blood flow in the working
muscles during exercise or as a result of deep
sports massage.

187

Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT)—A highly
refined and specific method of training maximum
finger strength and upper-body power by climbing
on identical finger holds (isolation) with greater
than body weight (hypergravity). Also known as
Horst Isolation Training.
hypertrophy—Enlargement in size (for example,
muscular hypertrophy).
insertion—The point of attachment of a muscle to a
distal or relatively more movable bone.
insulin—A hormone that decreases blood glucose
level by driving glucose from the blood into muscle and fat cells.
interval training—A method of anaerobic
endurance training that involves brief periods of
intense training interspaced with periods of rest or
low-intensity training.
isometric—Muscular contraction resulting in no
shortening movement of the muscle.
kinesiology—The scientific study of human movement.
kinesthetic—The sense derived from muscular contractions and limb movements.

manky—Of poor quality, as in a manky finger jam
or a manky protection placement.
m a x i m u m strength—The peak force of a muscular
contraction, irrespective of the time element.
micronutrients—Noncaloric nutrients needed in
very small amounts, as in vitamins and minerals.
modeling—A learning technique where an individual watches, then attempts, a skill as performed
properly by another person.
motor learning—Set of internal processes associated with practice or experience leading to a relatively permanent gain in performance capability.
motor skill—A skill where the primary determinant
of success is the movement component itself.
motor unit—A motor neuron, together with a
group of muscle cells stimulated in an all-ornothing response.
muscular endurance—The length of time a given
level of power can be maintained.
on-sight—When a route is climbed first try and with
absolutely no prior information of any kind.
open-hand grip—The less-stressful finger grip
involving only slight flexion of the finger joints.

killer—Extraordinarily good, as in a killer route.
lactic acid—Acid by-product of the anaerobic
metabolism of glucose during intense muscular
exercise.
lactic acid system—Energy pathway used in highintensity activity over a short duration.
lean body weight—The weight of the body, less the
weight of its fat.
ligament—Fibrous tissue that connects bone to
bone, or bone to cartilage, to hold together and
support the joints.
lunge—An out-of-control dynamic move; an explosive jump for a far-off hold.

osteoarthritis—A joint disease of older persons, in
which cartilage in the joints wears down and
there is bone growth at the edges of the joint.
overload—Subjecting a part of the body to greater
efforts (intensity or volume) than it is accustomed
to in order to elicit a training response.
overtraining—Constant severe training that does
not provide adequate time for recovery; symptoms include increased frequency of injury,
decreased performance, irritability, and apathy.
overuse—Excessive repeated exertion or shock that
results in injuries such as inflammation of the
muscles and tendons.

macronutrients—Basic nutrients needed for energy, cell growth, and organ function (carbohydrates, fat, and protein).

188

k

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

plyometric—An exercise that suddenly preloads
and forces the stretching of a muscle an instant
prior to its concentric contraction, as in dynamic
up-and-down campus training.
power—A measure of both force and speed (speed =
distance x time) of a muscular contraction
through a given range of motion. Power is the
explosive aspect of strength. (Technically the term
finger power is meaningless since the fingers normally don't move when gripping the rock).
pronation—The inward turning of a body part, as in
turning the forearm inward and the palm face
down.
psyched—Raring to go or very happy.
pumped—When the muscles become engorged with
blood due to extended physical exertion.
random practice—A practice sequence in which
tasks from several classes are experienced in random order over consecutive trails.
r e c o m m e n d e d dietary allowances (RDA)—
Quantities of specific vitamins, minerals, and
other nutrients needed daily that have been
judged adequate for maintenance of good nutrition. Developed by the Food and Nutrition Board
of the National Academy of Science.
recruitment—The systematic increase in the number of active motor units called upon during muscular contraction.
redpoint—Lead climbing a route bottom to top in
one push.
reminiscence effect—The phenomena of enhanced
motor skill and performance after an extended
time-off period from climbing and training.
schema—A set of rules, usually developed and
applied unconsciously by the motor system in the
brain and spinal cord, relating how to move and
adjust muscle forces, body positions, etcetera,
given the parameters at hand, such as steepness of
the rock, friction qualities, holds being used and
type of terrain.

Glossary

sharp end—The lead climber's end of the rope.
shred—To do really well, or to dominate.
skill—A capability to bring about an end result with
maximum certainty, minimum energy, and minimum time.
slow-twitch fibers—Muscle fiber type that contracts slowly and is used most in moderateintensity endurance activities such as easy to
moderate climbing or running.
sport climbing—Usually refers to any indoor or
outdoor climbing on bolt-protected routes.
spotter—A person designated to slow the fall of a
boulderer, with the main goal of keeping the
boulderer's head from hitting the ground.
stabilizer muscle—A muscle that is stimulated to
help anchor or stabilize the position of a bone.
strength—The amount of muscle force that can be
exerted; speed and distance are not factors of
strength.
strength endurance—See anaerobic endurance.
supination—Rotation of the forearm outward and
palm upward.
tendonitis—A disorder involving the inflammation
of a tendon and synovial membrane at a joint.
tendon—A white fibrous cord of dense connective
tissue that attaches muscle to bone.
trad—Short for a traditional climb (or climber) that
requires natural protection placements.
training effect—A basic principle of exercise science
which states that adaptation occurs from an exercise only in those parts or systems of the body
that are stressed by the exercise.
transfer of learning—The gain or loss in proficiency on one task as a result of practice or experience
on another task.
tweak—To injure, as in a tweaked finger tendon.

189

variable practice—Practice in which many variations of a class of actions are performed; opposite
of blocked practice.
v e i n - A vessel which returns blood from the various
parts of the body back to the heart.

VO2 max—Maximal oxygen uptake, as in the measurement of maximum aerobic power,
wired—Known well, as in a wired route.
W O r k i n g - P r a c t i c i n g the moves on a difficult

route

via toprope or hangdogging.

visualization—Controlled and directed imagery that
can be used for awareness building, monitoring
and self-regulation, healing, and most important,
as mental programming for good performances.

190

j ^

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Suggested Reading
Anient, Pat. (1977,1998) Master of Rock. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
Armstrong, Lawrence E. (2000) Performing in Extreme Environments. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Brand-Miller, Jennie, et al. (1999) The Glucose Revolution: The Authoritative Guide to the Glycemic Index. New York:
Marlowe & Company.
Burke, Edmund R. (1999) Optimal Muscle Recovery. Garden City Park, NY: Avery Publishing Group.
Colgan, Michael. (1993) Optimum Sports Nutrition. Ronkonkoma, NY: Advanced Research Press.
Covey, Stephen. (1989) The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. (1990) Flow. The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper Perennial.
Garfield, Charles A. (1984) Peak Performance: Mental Training Techniques of the World's Greatest Athletes. New York:
Warner Books.
Goddard, Dale, Neumann, Udo. (1993) Performance Rock Climbing. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
Horst, Eric J. (1997) How to Climb 5.12. Guilford, CT: Globe Pequot Press/Falcon Publishing.
Horst, Eric J. (2003) Mental Wings: A Seven-Step, Life-Elevating Program for Uncommon Success.
www.MentalWings.com.
Long, John. (1993) How to Rock Climb! Guilford, CT: Globe Pequot Press/Falcon Publishing.
Meagher, Jack. (1990) Sports Massage. New York: Station Hill.
Orlick, Terry. (1990) In Pursuit of Excellence. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Sagar, Heather Reynolds. (2001) Climbing Your Best. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
Schmidt, R. A. (1991) Motor Learning and Performance: From Principles to Practice. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.

191

References
Chapter 1
Ament, Pat. (1977, 1992) Master of Rock. Lincoln, NE:
Adventure's Meaning Press.
Barss, Stephanie J. (1997) "Physiological attributes of
recreational rock climbers." A master's thesis presented to the faculty of Western Washington University.
Bloomfield, J., Ackland, T. R., Elliot, B. C. (1994)
Applied Anatomy and Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton,
Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., Tech-Rsmer, C. (1993)
"The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of
expert performance." Psychological Review 100(3):
363-406.
Fox, P. W., Hershberger, S. L., Bouchard, T. J. (1996)
"Genetic and environmental contributions to the
acquisition of a motor skill." Nature 384: 356-358.
Goddard, Dale, Neumann, Udo. (1993) Performance
Rock Climbing. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
Giillich, W , Kubin, A. (1986) Sportklettern Heute:
Technik, Taktik, Training. Miinchen, Germany:
Bruckmann.
Horst, Eric J. (1994) Flash Training. Evergreen, CO:
Chockstone Press.
Horst, Eric J. (1997) How to Climb 5.12. Helena, MT:
Falcon Press/Globe Pequot.
Mermier, C. M., Janot, J. M., Parker, D. L., Swan,
J. G. (2000) "Physiological and anthropometric
determinants of sport climbing performance." Brit J
Sports Med 34(5) (Oct): 359-365.
Seiler, S. (2000) "Limits to performance. Sportscience
4(2).

Watts, P. B., Martin, D. T., Durtschi, S. (1993)
"Anthropometric profiles of elite male and female
competitive sport rock climbers." J Sport Sci 11(2)
(Apr): 113-117.

Chapter 3
Covey, Stephen. (1989) The Seven Habits of Highly
Effective People. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Feltz, D., Landers, D. (1983) "The effects of mental
practice on motor skill learning and performance."
Sport Psych 5.
Garfield, C. (1984) Peak Performance. New York:
Warner Books.
Kubistant, T. (1986) Performing Your Best. Champaign,
IL: Leisure Press.
Levinson, W. (1994) The Way of Strategy. Milwaukee,
WI: ASQC Quality Press.

Chapter 4
Knudson, D. V., Morrison, C. S. (1997) Qualitative
Analysis of Human Movement. Champaign, PL: Human
Kinetics.
Schmidt, R. A. (1991) Motor Learning and Performance:
From Principles to Practice. Champaign, IL: Human
Kinetics.

Chapter 5
Adams, K., O'Shea, J., O'Shea, K., Climstein, M.
(1992) "The effect of six weeks of squat, plyometric,
and squat-plyometric training on power production."
Applied Sport Sci Res 6.

193

Bloomfield, J., Ackland, T. R., Elliot, B. C. (1994)
Applied Anatomy and Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton,
Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Bloomfield, J., Fricker, P., Fitch, K. (1992) Textbook of
Science and Medicine in Sport. Carlton, Victoria,
Australia: Blackwell Scientific Publications.

Chapter 7
Bloomfield, J., Ackland, T. R., Elliot, B. C. (1994)
Applied Anatomy and Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton,
Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific Publications.

Chu, Donald A. (1996) Explosive Power & Strength.
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.

Davis, B., Elford, J., Jamieson, K. (1991) "Variation
in performance in simple muscle tests at different
phases of the menstrual cycle." J Sports Med Physical
Fitness 31.

Kaneko, M., Fuchimoto, T., Toji, H., Suei, K. (1983)
"Training effect of differing loads on the forcevelocity relationship and mechanical power output in
human muscle." Scand J Sport Sci 5.

Wilmore, J. (1974) "Alterations in strength, body
composition and anthropometric measurements consequent to a ten-week weight training program." Med
Sci Sports 5.

O'Shea, K., O'Shea, J. (1989) "Functional isometric
weight training: Its effect on dynamic and static
strength." J Applied Sport Sci Res 3.
Tidow, G. (1990) "Aspects of strength training in athletes." New Studies in Athletics 1.
Watts, P., Newbury, V, Sulentic, J. (1996) "Acute
changes in handgrip strength, endurance, and blood
lactate with sustained sport rock climbing." J Sports
Med Physical Fitness (Dec).

Chapter 6
Bell, G., Peterson, S., Quinney, A., Wenger, H.
(1989) "The effect of velocity-specific strength training on peak torque and anaerobic rowing power." J
Sports Sci 7.
King, J., et al. (2001) "A comparison of high intensity vs. low intensity exercise on body composition in
overweight women." American College of Sports
Medicine Annual Meeting.
Solveborn, Sven-A. (1985) The Book About Stretching.
Japan Publications.
Wilmore, J. (1983) "Body composition in sport and
exercise: Directions for future research." Med Sci
Sports Exercise 15.

194

Chapter 8
Brilla, L. R., Conte, V. (1999) "A novel zinc and magnesium formulation (ZMA) increases anabolic hormones and strength in athletes." Sports Med, Training
Rehab J (Nov).
Duchaine, Daniel. (1996)
Xipe Press.

opus. Carson City, NV:

Graham, T. E., et al. (1998) "Metabolic and exercise
endurance effects of coffee and caffeine ingestion." J
Appl Physiol 85: 883-889.
Horswill, C. A. (1995) "Effects of bicarbonate, citrate,
and phosphate loading on performance." Int J Sport
Nutrition 5: SI 11-119.
Kelly, G. S. (1997) "Sports nutrition: A review of
selected nutritional supplements for endurance athletes." Alt Med Rev.
Linderman, J. K., Gosselink, K. L. (1994) "The effects
of sodium bicarbonate ingestion on exercise performance." Sports Med 18: 75-80.
McBride, J. B., et al. (1998) "Effect of resistance
exercise on free radical production." Med Sci Sports
Exercise 30 (1).
Nissen, S., Panton, L., et al. (1996) "Effect of HMB
supplementation on strength and body composition
of trained and untrained males undergoing intense
strength training." FASEB J 10A: A287.

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Nissen, S., Sharp, R., et al. (1996) "Effect of leucine
metabolite HMB on muscle metabolism during resistive exercise training." J Appl Physiol 81: 2095-2104.

Kreider, R. B., et al. (1992) "Effects of phosphate loading on metabolic and myocardial responses to maximal and endurance exercise." Int J Sports Nutrition 2.

Pasman, W. J., et al. (1995) "The effect of different
dosages of caffeine on endurance performance time."
Int J Sports Med 16: 225-230.

Meagher, Jack. (1990) Sports Massage. New York:
Station Hill Press.

Robergs, R. A. (1991) "Nutrition and exercise determinants of post-exercise glycogen synthesis." Int J
Sport Nutrition.
Schoffstall, J., et al. (2001) "Effects of dehydration
and rehydration on the one-rep maximum bench
press of weight-trained males." J Strength Cond Res 15.
Sprier, L. (1995) "Caffeine and performance." Int J
Sport Nutrition 5: S84-99.
Toubro, et al. (1993) "Safety and efficacy of long-term
treatment with ephedrine, caffeine and an ephedrine/
caffeine mixture." Int J Obes 17 (1): S69-72.

Monedero, J., Donne, B. (2000) "Effect of recovery
interventions on lactate removal and subsequent performance." Int J Sports Med (Nov.)
Niles, T. S., et al. (1997) "The effects of carbohydrateprotein drink on muscle glycogen resynthesis after
endurance exercise." Med Sci Sports Exercise 29 Suppl 5.
Richter, E. A., et al. (1984) "Enhanced muscle glycogen metabolism after exercise." Amer J Physiol 246.
Rupp, J. C , et al. (1983) "Effect of sodium bicarbonate ingestion on blood and muscle pH and exercise
performance." Med Sci Sports Exercise 15.

Vukovich, M., et al. (1997) "Effect of HBM on V 0 2
peak and maximal lactate in endurance-trained
cyclists." Med Sci Sports Exercise.

Watts, P. B., Daggett, M., Gallagher, P., Wilkens, B.
(2000) "Metabolic response during sport rock climbing and the effects of active versus passive recovery."
Int J Sports Med (Apr).

Williams, Melvin H. (1989) Beyond Training.
Champaign, IL: Leisure Press/Human Kinetics
Publishing.

Williams, R. B., et al. (1982) "Type A behavior and
elevated physiological and neuroendocrine responses
to cognitive tasks." Science 29 (Oct): 218.

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Bloomfield, J., Ackland, T. R., Elliot, B. C. (1994)
Applied Anatomy and Biomechanics in Sport. Carlton,
Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Scientific Publications.

Auerback, David, M. (2000) Tennis Elbow/Lateral
Epicondylitis. Southern California Orthopedic
Institute, www.scoi.com.

Bompa, Tudor O. (1983) Theory and Methodology of
Training. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co.

Bach, Allan W. (1999) "Finger joint injuries in active
patients." Physician Sportsmedicine 27(3).

Burke, Edmund R. (1999) Optimal Muscle Recovery.
Garden City Park, NY: Avery Publishing Group.

Bannister, P., Foster, P. (1986) "Upper limb injuries
associated with rock climbing." Brit J Sports Med 20.

Coyle, E. E, Coggan, A. R. (1984) "Effectiveness of
carbohydrate feeding in delaying fatigue during prolonged exercise." Sports Med 5.

Bollen, S. R. (1988) "Soft tissue injuries in extreme
rock climbers." Brit J Sports Med 22.

Dinan, T. G., et al. (1994) "Lowering Cortisol
enhances growth hormone response in healthy individuals." Acta Physiol Scand 151(3) (Jul).

References

Crouch, D. M. (1998) "Finger tips: the key to treating finger injuries is knowing what ails you." Rock &
Ice 84.

195

Doran, D. A., Reay, M. (2000) "Injuries and associated training and performance characteristics in recreational rock climbers." In The Science of Rock Climbing
and Mountaineering. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics
Publishing.
Gabl, M., Lener, M., Pechlaner, S., Lutz, M., Rudisch,
A. (1996) "Rupture or stress injury of the flexor tendon pulleys? Early diagnosis with MRI." Handchir
Mikrochir Plast Chir 28 (Nov).
Gabl, M., Rangger, C, Lutz, M., Fink, C, Rudisch,
A., Pechlaner, S. (1998) "Disruption of the finger
flexor pulley system in elite rock climbers." Am J
Sports Med 26(5) (Sep-Oct).
Jebson, Peter, Steyers, J. L., Curtis, M. (1997) "Hand
injuries in rock climbing: Reaching the right treatment." Physician Sportsmedicine 25(5).
Klauster A., et al. (2002) "Finger pulley injuries in
extreme rock climbers: depiction with Dynamic
Ultrasonography." Radiology (222) (3): 755-61.

Moutet, E, Guinard, D., Gerard, P., Mugnier, C. (1993)
"Subcutaneous rupture of long finger flexor pulleys in
rock climbers." Ann Chir Main Memb Super 12(3).
Nirschl, Robert P., Kraushaar, Barry S. (1996)
"Assessment and treatment guidelines for elbow
injuries." Physician Sportsmedicine 25(4).
Reginster, J. Y., et al. (2001) "Long-term effects of
glucosamine sulfate on osteoarthritis progression: A
randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial." Lancet
357(9252) (Jan 27).
Robinson, Mark. (1988) "Fingers: Get a grip on
injury prevention and treatment." Climbing (Aug).
Robinson, Mark. (1993) "Snap, crackle, pop:
Climbing injuries to fingers and forearms." Climbing
(Jun-Jul).
Robinson, Mark. (1993) "The elbow: Understanding
a common sore subject." Climbing (Apr).
Rohrbough, Joel. (2000) "'Pop'" goes your climbing
season." Climbing (Nov).

Lewis, R. A., Shea, O. E, Shea, K. G. (1993) "Acute
carpal tunnel syndrome: Wrist stress during a major
climb." Physician Sportsmedicine 21(7).

Rooks, M. D. (1997) "Rock climbing injuries." Sports
Med 23.

Lin, G. T., et al. (1989) "Functional anatomy of the
human digital flexor pulley system." J Hand Surg Am
14.

Seiler, J. G., Leversedge, F. J. (2000) "Digital flexor
sheath: Repair and reconstruction of the annular
pulleys and membranous sheath." J S Orth Assn 9(2).

Lin, G. T., et al. (1998) "Biomechanical analysis of
flexor pulley reconstruction." J Hand Surg Brit 14.

Seiler, J. G., et al. (1995) "The flexor digitorum
longus: an anatomic and microscopic study for use as
a tendon graft." J Hand Surg Am 20.

Lister, G. D. (1979) "Reconstruction of pulleys
employing extensor retinaculum." J Hand Surg Am 4.
Marco, R. A., Sharkey, N. A., Smith, T. S., Zissimos,
A. G. (1998) "Pathomechanics of closed rupture of
the flexor tendon pulleys in rock climbers." J Bone
Joint Surg Am 80(7) (Jul).
McAlindon, T., et al. (2000) "Glucosamine and chondroitin for treatment of osteoarthritis." JAMA 283:
1469-1475.
McFarland, Edward G., et al. (2000) Patient guide to
knee arthroscopy. Johns Hopkins Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, www.hopkinsmedicine.org.

196

Stelzle, E D., Gaulrapp, H., Pforringer, W. (2000)
"Injuries and overuse syndromes due to rock climbing
on artificial walls." Sportverletz Sportschaden 14(4) (Dec).
Warme, W. J., Brooks, D. (2000) "The effect of circumferential taping on flexor tendon pulley failure
in rock climbers." Am J Sports Med 28 (Sep-Oct).
Wright, D. M., Royle, T. J., Marshall, T. (2001)
"Indoor rock climbing: Who gets injured?" Brit J
Sports Med 35(3) (Jun).

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

Index
A2 ring finger taping method, 157
abdominal crunch exercise, 100, 101
abdominal stretch, 76
accomplished climber workout, 116,
118-19
anaerobic endurance and, 118, 119
antagonist muscle training and,
118, 119
core muscle training and, 118, 119
grip strength and, 118, 119
lock-off and, 118
mental technique and, 118, 119
motor learning and, 118, 119
nutrition and, 118
pull power and, 118, 119
rest and, 118, 119
sport-specific strength training and,
118, 119
achievement curve, 8
Action Directe, 8, 92
active rest, 143, 145, 149
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 139
aerobic energy production, 58
aerobic training, 61, 66-67, 71
beginner-level workout and, 116,
117
bouldering and, 106
elite climber workout and, 121
female issues and, 121
goals of, 106
sport climbing and, 106
agonist muscle training, 54, 56
female climbers and, 121
algae, 136
All Sport, 133, 145
Allen, Tori, 122
alpine climbing, 11, 66, 106, 114
aerobic training and, 106, 107

big wall climbing and, 106, 107
electrolytes and, 133
fat and, 126
nutrition and, 125, 130
anabolic steroids, 149
anaerobic endurance (A-E) training,
65, 66
accomplished climber workout and,
118, 119
elite climber workout and, 120
lactic acid .and, 65, 66, 139
mesocycle training schedule and,
111-12, 113
protocol (B) and, 89
System Training (B) and, 85
anaerobic energy production, 57-58
anaerobic threshold, 57-58, 62, 65,
66, 139, 144
androstenidione (aka andro), 136
annular pulley, 154, 155, 158, 159,
167
crimp grip and, 155, 158
injury treatment and, 156-57, 167
surgery and, 156-57
ANSWER Sequence, 33, 34-35
antagonist muscle training
accomplished climber workout and,
118, 119
beginner-level workout and, 116,
117
bench press and, 105
dips and, 105-6
elite climber workout and, 120, 121
female climbers and, 121
forearm rotation exercise and, 103
hand and forearm exercises and,
102-3
injury prevention and, 168
muscle description and, 54
push ups and, 105

reverse wrist curl exercise and, 103
shoulder injury and, 162
shoulder press and, 104-5
antioxidants, 131, 148
aquaman exercise (A), 99, 100
arm
positions of, 78-79
stretch of, 73
arthritis, 159-60
arthroscopic surgery, 165-66
Atkins diet, 128
ATP-CP
creatine and, 135
fatigue and, 139
recovery and, 141
system of, 57, 58, 61, 90
attitude, 27, 32, 34, 35, 45, 149
autonomous stage learning, 43
avulsion, 158, 159
awareness, 34
axis of rotation, 5-6, 57

B
B a char, John, 3
Bachar Ladder (B-), 4, 97-98
back extension exercise (A), 99-100
backstepping, 41, 44, 47
Balance Bars, 134, 144
Basic Rockeraft (Robbins), 3
beginner-level workout, 116-17
aerobic training and, 116, 117
antagonist muscle training and,
116, 117
body composition and, 116, 117
mental training and, 116, 117
nutrition and, 116, 117
sport-specific training and, 117
supercompensation and, 116, 117
bench press, 105

197

beta hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate
(HMB), 135-36
bicep stretch, 72
big-wall climbing, 106, 107, 114
electrolytes and, 133
biological value (BV), 132, 133
blocked practice, 47, 48, 49
blood glucose
carbohydrates and, 139-40
fatigue and, 139-40
recovery and, 141
body composition, 70, 71, 106, 116,
117
body fat, 70, 71
female issues and, 121
bouldering (A), 2, 8, 9, 11, 30, 44, 45,
48-49, 50
anaerobic endurance and, 84, 65,
66
aerobic training and, 106
ATP-CP and, 57, 139
campus training and, 90
carbohydrates and, 134
central fatigue and, 140
cool down and, 89
core muscle training and, 98
effective training and, 83
effectiveness of, 47
elite climber workout and, 120
fast twitch muscle fibers and, 55
fat and, 126
forearm pump and, 90
gym membership and, 114
home wall and, 114
Hypergravity Isolation Training
and, 86
indoor training and, 84
junior climbers and, 122, 123
medium-term recovery and, 144
mesocycle training schedule and,
112
nutrition and, 125, 130
outdoor training and, 84
periodization training and, 60
power training and, 64-65, 84
shoulder injury and, 162
skill practice and, 84
strength training and, 62, 63, 64,
66, 84

198

target training and, 114
"bowstringing," 154, 155, 157, 158
breathing, 26, 33, 34-35, 39, 50
Bridwell, Jim, 2-3
Brown, Katie, 5
B-scale grading system, 8
"buddy taping," 156, 158, 159

calcium, 132
calf stretch, 76
calorie deficit, 70-71
camming device, 8
campus board, 67, 80, 84, 90,115. See
also campus training.
ATP-CP and, 139
creation of, 91
plyometric training and, 91
Campus Center, 4
campus training, 4, 9, 55, 61, 65, 90
central fatigue and, 140
double dynos and, 92
feet-on and, 65
finger taping and, 167
injury and, 152, 153
laddering (B) and, 91
lock-offs and, 92
mesocycle training schedule and,
112
neurological adaptation and, 93
campusing. See laddering,
capacity, absolute maximum, 56
capillary density, 61, 65
carbohydrates
blood glucose and, 139-40
bouldering and, 134
cragging and, 134
daily requirements of, 129-30
fuel sources and, 133-34
function of, 128
glycemic index (GI) and, 128, 129,
134
glycogen and, 139
long-term recovery and, 148
medium-term recovery and, 144,
145
performance nutrition and, 128-30,
131

types of, 128
carpal tunnel syndrome, 159
centering, 32, 34, 39
central fatigue, 137, 140
chalking, 33
chest stretch, 72
chitosan, 136
cholesterol, 127
chondroitin, 160
"chunking down," 48, 50
circuit training, 59
Clark, Dr. Kristine, 130
Climber's elbow, 160
climbing
history of, 1
requirements for, 1
climbing gyms, commercial, 4, 53,
109, 114
coenzyme Q10, 136
cognitive stage learning, 42
Collins, Jim, 3
comfort zone, 25, 31
commitment, 13, 41
community wall, 115
competition, 48, 49
elite climber workout and, 120
macrocycle training schedule and,
113
preparation for, 38
complex training, 67, 111
elite climber workout and, 120
concentric contraction, 54, 59, 64, 65,
93
concentric strength, 49
conditioning exercises
difficulty level of, 69, 76
confidence, 23, 25, 32, 36, 37, 42, 44,
50
contact strength, 62
core muscle training (A)
abdominal crunch (A) and, 100
accomplished climber workout and,
118, 119
aquaman (A) and, 99, 100
back extension (A) and, 99
bouldering and, 98
female climbers and, 121
front lever (B/C) and, 98, 100-101
hanging knee lift (B) and, 100-101

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

side hip raises (A) and, 99
straight-arm flag and, 98
traversing and, 98
upper-trunk extension (A) and,
99-100
Cortisol, 149
cortisone injection, 161
counterforce bracing, 161, 162
course corrections, 18, 22
crack climbing, 41, 44, 48
cragging
carbohydrates and, 134
lat and, 126
medium-term recovery and, 144
nutrition and, 125, 130
cramps, 140
creatine, 134-35
loading of, 135
creatine phosphate, 139
creativity, 44-45, 51
crimp grip, 48, 54, 59, 77, 79, 86
annular pulley injury and, 155, 158
arthritis and, 159-60
full-crimp grip and, 81, 85, 87
half-crimp grip and, 77, 81, 84, 85,
87
medium crimp grip and, 82
overhanging crimp ladder and, 80
overhanging crimpfest route and,
45
small crimp grip and, 82
cross-fiber friction, 146-47
cross-through, 48
cross-training, 59, 166
cruciform pulley, 154
crux move, 14, 32, 48
ATP-CP system and, 57
fast twitch muscle fibers and, 55
lactic acid and, 57
training and, 81
crux sequence, 48, 50
curiosity, 14, 45

^%
dangling-arm shakeout, 142, 143
deadpoint, 41, 44, 47
one-arm traversing training (B)

Index

and, 89-90
deep two-finger pocket, 82
dehydration, 130
delayed-onset muscle soreness, 140
Designer Whey Protein, 132
detraining principle, 58, 61
dip exercise
chair and, 105-6
stair and, 105-6
direct-pressure strokes, 147
disinhibition, 56, 64
DOMS. See delayed-onset muscle
soreness,
double dynos (C), 92
double stag stretch, 75
down pull, 78, 85
downclimbing route, 49
drop-knee technique, 47, 165
Dynamic Ultrasonography, 155
dyno throws,' 62

early training techniques, 2, 3
eccentric contraction, 54, 64, 65, 79,
91, 93, 98
eccentric strength, 49
elbow
counterforce bracing and, 161, 162
lateral epicondyle tendonitis of,
161-62
medial epicondyle tendonitis of,
160-61
rest and, 156
taping and, 161
electrolytes, 133
elimination drill, 49
elite climber workout, 116, 119-21
aerobic training and, 121
anaerobic endurance training and,
120
antagonist muscle training and,
120, 121
bouldering and, 120
competition and, 120
complex training and, 120
indoor climbing and, 120
mental training and, 119

Mental Wings and, 120
nutrition and, 120
planning and, 120
self-assessment and, 119
sport-specific strength training and,
119, 120, 121
strength training and, 119, 120
supercompensation and, 120, 121
embarrassment, 31-32
emotions
alteration of, 30
control of, 27-28, 30
Energy-Emotion Matrix and, 28
evaluation of, 28, 29, 30, 174
energy bars, 128, 134, 144, 145, 148
glycemic index (GI) and, 134
energy production, 57-58
Energy-Emotion Matrix, 28
engram. See schemas.
epinephrine, 149
ergogenic effect, 136
ergogenic supplements, 132
evaluation, 9
extended grip. See open-hand grip.

failure, 23, 31
falls, 31, 50
fast twitch muscle fiber (FT), 54, 55,
57, 64, 67
fat
alpine climbers and, 126
daily requirements for, 126
functions of, 126
long-term recovery and, 148
menstruation and, 126
performance nutrition and, 125,
126-27, 128, 131
sources of, 127
types of, 127
"fat whackers," 136
fatigue, 38, 44, 137-40
accumulation of metabofic by-products and, 137, 139
anaerobic endurance training and,
139
ATP-CP and, 139

199

blood glucose and, 139-40
central, 137, 140
cramps and, 137, 140
dehydration and, 130
depletion of muscle fuel and, 137,
139
glycogen and, 134, 139
lactic add and, 57-58, 65, 139
low blood glucose and, 137, 139
massage and, 147
microtraumas and, 137, 140
rest and, 61
System Training and, 84
fear, 44, 30-32
control of, 30-32
embarrassment and, 31-32
failure and, 31
falls and, 31
pain and, 31
feet off-climbing, 65
feet skidding, 14
female issues
aerobic training and, 121
agonist muscle training and, 121
antagonist muscle training and, 121
body fat and, 121
calcium and, 132
core muscle training and, 121
grip strength and, 122
hypertrophy and, 122
iron and, 132
menstruation and, 122
mental training and, 122
sport-specific strength training and,
121, 122
Fig Newtons, 134
finger
anatomy of, 154-55
annular pulley injury and, 155,
158-59, 167
arthritis and, 159-60
avulsion and, 158, 159
"bowstringing" injury and, 154,
155, 157, 158
carpal tunnel syndrome and, 159
collateral ligament sprains and, 159
crimp grip and, 159-60
Dynamic Ultrasonography and, 155

200

flexibility training and, 80
injury of, 152, 153, 154
injury treatment and, 156-57, 158,
159, 160
positioning and, 76-77
rest and, 156
stretches of, 72-73
surgery and, 156-57, 159
taping methods for, 157-58, 159,
166-67
tendon rupture and, 158, 159
tendonitis and, 158
Finger rolls, heavy (B+), 92-93, 94
fingerboard, 4, 8, 9, 56, 60, 61, 66,
80, 115
central fatigue and, 140
endurance training and, 83
hangs and, 64
injury and, 152, 153
moving hangs and, 83
neurological adaptation and, 93
pyramid training and, 82-83
training and, 81, 82
fingertip
exercises for, 86
fingertip pull-ups (A+) and, 2, 81
pyramid training (B) and, 82-83
repeaters training (B) and, 82
First Touch game, 48-49
fitness training, 9, 10-11
campus training and, 9
fingerboard and, 9
fitness v. skill and, 10
free-weights and, 9
hypergravity and, 9
running and, 9
stretching and, 9
Flash Training (Horst), 4
flashing, 9, 50
flexibility training, 71, 72
finger and forearm training and, 80
lower-body stretches and, 73-76
upper-body stretches and, 72-73
focus, 23, 44, 49
creation of, 38
drills and, 39
practice and, 38-39
foot

footwork and, 14, 49
placement of, 48
popping off holds and, 14
weighting of, 48
foot flags, 51
force production rate, 62
forearm
flexibility training and, 80
G-Tox recovery technique and,
142-43
rotation exercise of, 103-4
stretches for, 72-73
Frenchies exercise, 64, 81, 95-96
froggie stretch, 75
front lever, 2
exercise (B/C) for, 100, 102
fuel sources, 133-34

gamma oryzanol, 136
Gaston move, 51, 79, 84, 85
shoulder and, 162
Gatorade, 129, 133, 134, 145
genetics, 4, 5, 6, 7
GHB, 136
Gill, John, 1-2, 3, 8, 81, 97, 98, 109
glucosamine sulfate, 160, 165
glycemic index (GI), 128, 129, 134
energy bars and, 134
long-term recovery and, 148
medium-term recovery and,
144-45
glycogen, 129, 134, 139
carbohydrates and, 139
medium-term recovery and, 144,
145
nutrition and, 139
recovery and, 141, 142, 143
goals
importance of, 13
long-term (mega) and, 13, 19, 21
medium-term and, 19, 21
setting, 18-21, 43
short-term and, 19, 20, 50
Goldstone, Richard, 2
golf, 5, 42, 45, 47
golfer's elbow, 160
Golgi tendon organ, 56

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

grade explosion, 8
grading systems, 8
Graham, David, 5, 6
Gravitron, 65
Griffiths, Laura, 123
grip strength, 5, 6, 59, 62, 63
accomplished climber workout and,
118, 119
female climbers and, 122
ratio to body mass and, 7
grip-relax repeating sequence (GRRS),
81-82
growth hormone, 149
G-Tox forearm recovery technique,
142-43
Gullich, Wolfgang, 4, 8, 23, 65, 92

hand pronator exercise. See forearm
rotation exercise,
hangdogging, 8, 9, 44, 48
hanging knee lift exercise (B), 100,
101
Harding, Warren, 3
heel hook, 44, 51
high repetition training, 66
high-stepping, 51, 71
Hill, Lynn, 3, 27, 51
Hindenbergian forearm pump, 65
hip flexors, 100
hip turns, 47
HMB. See beta hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate.
hold recognition, 49
Holloway, Jim, 3
homeopathic supplements, 136
home-wall climbing, 83, 114, 115
hormones
profiles of, 5, 6
release of, 149
Horst, Lisa Ann, 42
How to Climb 5.12 (Horst), 4, 30, 42,
48
Huber, Alex, 5, 6
Huber.Thomas, 5, 6
hydrogenated oils, 127, 128
hyperemia, 146
Hypergravity Isolation Training (HIT)
(B/C), 67

Index

anaerobic endurance protocol (B)
and, 89
central fatigue and, 140
effectiveness of, 85-86
finger taping and, 167
grips and, 87-89
HIT Strip, 87, 88, 89
HIT system and, 56
HIT workout and, 60
maximum strength protocols
(B+/C) and, 86-89
sample workouts for, 87-89
tips for, 88
hypergravity training, 9, 56, 57, 60,
63-64, 67, 80, 111
mesocycle training schedule and,
112
hypertrophy, 56-57, 64, 65, 93
female climbers and, 122
hypogravity, 65
V
impact force, 65
improvement
course correction and, 18
Cycle of Improvement and, 18, 22
gear and, 53
goal setting and, 18
rate of, 45
taking action and, 18, 22
individualization training principle,
58, 59
indoor climbing wall, 4, 47, 49,
84-84, 120. See also climbing
gyms, commercial; home-wall
climbing,
injury and, 152, 153, 165
junior climbers and, 122, 123
injury, 38
ability and, 152, 153
back and, 152
"bowstringing," 154, 155, 157, 158
campus training and, 152, 153
causes of, 152-53
indoor walls and, 152, 153
medical attention and, 154
overuse and, 151-53
rest and, 156, 160, 161, 162
sport-climbing and, 152, 153

strength-training and, 161, 162
stretching and, 161, 162
types of, 151-52
wrist and, 152
injury, elbow, 152, 153
counterforce bracing and, 161, 162
lateral epicondyle tendonitis and,
161-62
medial epicondyle tendonitis and,
160-61
rest and, 160, 161, 162
taping and, 161
injury, finger, 152, 153, 154
arthritis and, 159-60
avulsion and, 158, 159
carpal tunnel syndrome and, 159
collateral ligament sprains and, 159
crimp grip and, 159-60
fingerboard and, 152, 153
rest and, 156
rupture and, 158, 159
surgery and, 156-57, 159
taping methods for, 157-58, 159,
166-67
tendonitis and, 158
treatment of, 156-57, 158, 159,
160
injury, knee, 152, 153
arthroscopic surgery of, 165-66
meniscus tear of, 165-66
injury prevention, 166-69
antagonist muscle training and, 168
caution and, 167
conservative finger taping and,
166-67
cooling down and, 168
cross-training and, 166
dehydration and, 130
exhaustion and, 167
good technique and, 166
massage and, 146
nutrition and, 169
periodization and, 168
rest and, 167-68, 168, 169
sport-specific training and, 166
strength-training and, 167
stretching and, 168
supercompensation and, 148
variation principle and, 166

201

warming up and, 168
injury, shoulder, 152, 153
rehab exercises for, 163-64
subluxation of, 162
surgery and, 162
inosine, 136
instruction, one-on-one, 41
interday recovery. See recovery, longterm,
internal self-talk, 14, 27, 50, 51
interval training, 58, 66, 71, 80-81
mesocycle training schedule and,
112
intraclimb recovery. See recovery,
short-term,
intraday recovery. See recovery,
medium-term,
introspection, 14
iron, 132
isometric contraction, 54, 59, 64, 96

Jacobson, Edward, 32
"jersey finger," f 58-59
junior climbers, 121
bouldering and, 122, 123
fun and, 122, 123
indoor climbing and, 122, 123
mental training and, 122, 123
skill training and, 122, 123
sport climbing and, 122, 123
sport-specific training and, 122, 123
strength training and, 122, 123
training of, 122, 123

anaerobic endurance training and,
139
fatigue and, 139
lactic acid system and, 57-58, 65
massage and, 145-46
recovery and, 141, 142, 143
rest and, 139
lactic acid buffering supplements
recovery and, 143, 144 laddering, 91
layoff
skills and, 10-11
learning curve, 45
LeMenestral, Antoine, 5, 6
LeMenestral, Marc, 5, 6
lever length, 5
Levinson, William, 31
local endurance, 5
lock-offs, 84, 89
accomplished climber workout and,
118
arm angles exercise (B+) and, 96
Frenchies (A+) and, 95-96
one-arm (B+) and, 80, 96-97
palms away exercise (B+) and, 96
palms inward exercise (B+) and, 96
steep-wall exercise (B) and, 96
training and, 59, 64, 94-98
uneven-grip pull-ups exercise (B)
and, 96
Long, Jim, 3
lunges, 51, 59, 65, 6 7 .
central fatigue and, 140
one-arm lunges (B) and, 65, 89-90

M
Kauk, Ron, 3
Ketogenic diet, 128
knee, 152
arthroscopic surgery of, 165meniscus tear and, 165-66
kneebar technique, 51

lactic acid, 106, 139
active rest and, 149

202

macrocycle training schedule, 113-14
competition and, 113
rest and, 113
macronutrients, 125, 127, 130
magnesium, 131-32
massage, 144-45, 148
recovery and, 143
strokes for, 146, 147
Master of Rock, 3
McCarthy, Jim, 2
MCTs, 136

Meagher, Jack, 146
menstruation, 122, 126
mental training, 9, 23-39, 41
attitude and, 27
beginner-level workout and, 116,
117
breathing and, 26
comfort zone and, 25
confidence and, 25
detached seif-image and, 25
elite climber workout and, 119
female climbers and, 122
importance of, 6, 7
internal self-talk and, 14, 27
junior climbers and, 122, 123
peak performance zone and, 26
positive influence and, 25
process-orientation and, 27
quality of thinking and, 23
relaxation and, 27
risk and, 25
rituals and, 26
strategies for, 50-51
tension and, 26
visualization and, 9, 25-26
Mental Wings, 9, 23, 50-51, 120
mesocycle training schedule, 111-13
anaerobic endurance training and,
111-12, 113
bouldering and, 112
campus training and, 112
complex training and, 112
hypergravity training and, 112
interval training and, 112
power training and, 111, 112, 113
rest and, 112, 113
schemas and, 111
strength training and, 111, 112,
113
microcycle training schedule, 110-11
micronutrients, 130-31
minerals and, 131-32
vitamins and, 130-31
microtraumas, 140, 147, 160, 168
recovery and, 141
milk, 133
mitochondrial density, 61
modeling, 41

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

monounsaturated fatty acids, 127
motor learning, 41, 42
accomplished climber workout and,
118, 119
autonomous stage and, 43
cognitive stage and, 42
definition of, 42
motor stage and, 42-43
neural adaptation and, 55-56
relaxation and, 50
schema and, 43-44
skill transference and, 45
Motor Learning & Performance
(Schmidt), 42
motor stage learning, A2-A1>
motor unit, 55, 67
synchronization of, 56
moving hangs (B), 83
multipitch climbing, 66, 106
gym membership and, 114
home wall and, 114
target training and, 114
multipitch routes, 11
multisensory learning
verbal beta and, 51
muscle
description of, 147
muscular system adaptation and,
56-57, 60, 63
stress points of, 147
muscle fiber
fast twitch (FT) and, 54, 55, 57, 64,
67
growth of, 56-57
motor units and, 55,67
recruitment and, 55, 67
slow twitch (ST) and, 54, 55, 64, 67
types of, 5, 6
muscle glycogen, 62, 70-71
muscle movement
agonist and, 54
antagonist and, 54
concentric contraction and, 54, 64
eccentric contraction and, 54, 64
isometric contraction and, 54, 64
stabilizer and, 54
musculotendinous junction, 56

N
narrow pinch grip, 82
nervous system fatigue, 140
neural system adaptation, 55-56, 63
plyometric training and, 65
neuromuscular adaptation
campus training and, 93
fingerboard training and, 93
recovery and, 141
Next Proteins, 132
Nicole, Francois, 5, 6
Nicole, Frederic, 5, 6
nonjudgment, 51
nutrition, 9, 70-71, 106, 116, 117
accomplished climber workout and,
118
elite climber workout and, 120
glycogen and, 139
injury prevention and, 169
long-term recovery and, 148
macronutrients and, 125, 127, 130,
131
nutrition, performance, 125-36
carbohydrates and, 128-130, 131
fat and, 125, 126-27, 128, 131
micronutrients and, 130-31
protein and, 125-26, 131, 132
sports supplements and, 130,
131-36
water and, 130

OKG, 136
Olympic Training Village, 3
O'Neal, Shaquille, 6
one-pitch sport routes, 11
on-sight ascent, 9, 29, 37, 38, 43, 49
open-hand grip, 54, 59, 77, 79, 81
position of, 84, 85, 86, 87
double dyno training and, 92
open-grip finger position, 48
overgripping, 14, 32
overtraining syndrome, 60-61

P

passive rest, 143
peak performance zone, 26, 35, 43
Penn State Center for Sports
Medicine, 130
performance
genes and, 5, 6, 7
performance triad and, 5, 23
practice and, 5, 6, 7
Performance Rock Climbing (Goddard), 4
periodization, 60, 168
Phos Fuel, 144
phospholipids, 126
pinch grip, 51, 54, 59, 77, 78, 85, 86,
87, 88
plyometric training, 4, 56, 65
campus board and, 90, 91
complex training and, 67
heavy finger rolls and, 93
one-arm deadpoint traversing (B)
and, 90
one-arm lunges and, 90
pocket climbing, 48
pocket holds, 88
polyunsaturated fatty acids, 127
positive attitude, 23, 25, 30, 50
posture, 30, 35, 39, 59
power, 62
mesocycle training schedule and,
111, 112, 113
training for, 64
PowerBar, 134
premature fatigue, 14
problem solving, 50, 51
process v. outcome orientation, 25,
27, 31, 32, 35, 48, 50
progressive overload training principle, 58, 60, 63
Progressive Relaxation Sequence, 32,
33, 147
protein
beta hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate
(HMB) and, 135-36
biological value (BV) and, 132, 133
daily requirements for, 126, 132
functions of, 125
long-term recovery and, 148
medium-term recovery and, 145

pain, 31

Index

203

performance nutrition and, 125-26,
131, 132
sources for, 126, 132
whey, 132, 133
protein powders, 132-33
pull muscles, 61
pulldowns, 56, 84
pulldown machine and, 66
pull-ups, 4, 59, 61, 66
central fatigue and, 140
ATP-CPand, 139
power training and, 65
weighted pull-ups and, 57, 60, 64,
89
pull-ups, training, 94-98
Frenchies (A+) and, 95-96
heavy pull-downs (A+) and, 95
lat pull-downs (A/B) and, 94
power pull-ups (B) and, 95
pull-up intervals (A) and, 95
30 second pull-ups (A) and, 95
pump doubling, 49
push-ups, 105
pyruvate, 136

recovery, 137-49
acceleration of, fO, 137
central fatigue and, 140
curve of, 140
lactic acid and, 141
microtraumas and, 141
rebuild and, 141-42
recharge and, 141
refuel and, 141
stretching and, 71
water and, 141
recovery, long-term
active rest and, 149
attitude and, 149
carbohydrates and, 148
delayed-onset muscle soreness and,
141
fat and, 148
glycemic index (GI) and, 148
massage and, 146, 148
microtraumas and, 147

204

neuromuscular adaptation and, 141
nutrition and, 148
protein and, 148
stretching and, 148
supercompensation and, 141, 148
recovery, medium-term
blood glucose and, 141
bouldering and, 144
calorie consumption during climb
and, 144-45
carbohydrates and, 144, 145
cragging and, 144
energy bars and, 144
glycemic index (GI) and, 144-45
glycogen and, 141, 144, 145
hyperemia and, 146
massage and, 144, 145^-7
protein and, 145
refueling strategies for, 145
relaxation and, 144, 147
stretching and, 144, 145, 146, 147
water and, 144
recovery, short-term
active rest and, 143
ATP-CP and, 141
dangling-arm shakeout and, 142,
143
efficient climbing and, 142
glycogen and, 142, 143
G-Tox and, 142-43
hydration and, 143-44
lactic acid and, 142, 143, 144
massage and, 143
passive rest and, 143
Watts study and, 143
recruitment, muscle fiber, 55, 67
redpoint ascent, 9, 29, 37, 38, 42, 43,
48, 49, 50
refueling strategies, 145
relaxation, 27, 39, 42, 48
ANSWER Sequence and, 34—35
creativity and, 51
differential relaxation and, 33-34
learning and, 44, 50
progressive relaxation and, 32, 33
Progressive Relaxation Sequence
and, 32, 33
recovery and, 147

Reminiscence Effect, 112, 140
rest, 9, 58, 60-61, 80
accomplished climber workout and,
118, 119
finger injury and, 158
Hypergravity Isolation Training
and, 86-87, 89
individualization and, 59
injury and, 156, 160, 161, 162
injury prevention and, 167-68,
168, 169
lactic acid and, 139
macrocycle training schedule and,
113
mesocycle training schedule and,
112, 113
microcycle training and, 111
muscular adaptation and, 60
relaxation positions and, 33, 34
supercompensation and, 60-61
reverse side pull, 79, 85
reverse wrist curi exercise, 103
risk, 25
ritual, 26
Robbins, Royal, 3
Robinson, Dr. Mark, 42, 44, 77, 93,
157
Rock & Ice, 158
Rohrbough, Dr. Joel, 157, 162
rope climbing exercise (B-), 97-98
rotator cuff, 162
running, i 1
rupture, 158

sacrifice, 19, 20, 21
SAID Principle (specific adaptation to
imposed demand), 11, 66, 106,
114
schemas
definition of, 43
development of, 43-44, 45, 46, 47
mesocycle training schedule and,
111
Schmidt, Dr. Richard, 42
selenium, 132, 148
self-assessment, 13-22

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

action and, 18
conditioning exercises and, 69
course correction and, 18
Cycle of Improvement and, 18, 22
elite climber workout and, 119
evaluation of test scores, 17
goal setting and, 18-19
importance of, 13, 14
mind map for, 18
test of, 15-16
test comments and training tips,
177-80
self-image, 25
serratus muscle, 100
shallow three-finger pocket, 82
shallow two-finger pocket grip, 82
shark cartilage, 136
Sharma, Chris, 5, 6, 27, 51
Shawagunks, 2, 3
shoulder
injury, 162-64
rehab exercises for, 163-64
rest for, 162
shoulder press exercise, 104—5
stretch for, 72, 73
subluxation and, 162
surgery, 162
side hip raise exercise (A), 99
side pulls, 48, 49, 51, 85
skills
acquisition of, 45
autonomous stage learning and, 43
cognitive stage learning and, 42
confidence and, 44
discipline and, 44
drills and, 47-49
fitness and, 10
junior climber training and, 122,
123
motor learning and, 41, 42-43
performance and, 46, 47
practice of, 9, 10-11, 14, 41
self-assessment and, 46
transference of, 45, 59, 66
weaknesses and, 46
Skinner, Todd, 3, 92, 93
sleep, 148-49, 169
sloper, 82

Index

slow twitch muscle fiber (ST), 54, 55,
64, 67
smiling, 30, 35
sodium bicarbonate, 144
sodium phosphate, 144
solution orientation, 50
specific adaptation to imposed
demands. See SAID Principle,
specificity training principle, 58, 59
speed training, 49, 64-65
spinal twist, 7 5
splinting, 156, 159
splits, 74
sport climbing, 66
gym membership and, 114
home wall and, 114
injury and, 153
junior climbers and, 122, 123
knee injury and, 165
target training and, 114
Sportklettern Heute (Gullich), 4
sport-route, 30
sports drinks, 135
electrolytes and, 133
fuel sources and, 133-34
Sports Massage (Meagher), 146
sports massage. See massage.
Sports Medicine, 153
sports supplements, 131-36
beta hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate
(HMB) and, 135-36
creatine and, 134-35
energy bars and, 134
ineffective products and, 136
protein powders and, 132-33
sports drinks and, 133-34
sport-specific strength training, 53,
56, 66, 70, 109
accomplished climber workout and,
118, 119
arm positions and, 78-79
beginner-level workout and, 117
central fatigue and, 140
elite climber workout and, 119,
120, 121
female issues and, 121, 122
finger positions and, 76-77
fingertip exercises and, 81-82

injury prevention and, 166
junior climbers and, 122, 123
shoulder injury and, 162
stabilizer, 54, 56
stemming, 71
stick game, 48
sticking, 62, 65
straight-arm hangs (A), 80-81, 81, 83
endurance test of, 6
strategy, 41
strength, concentric, 49
strength deficit, 56
strength, eccentric, 49
strength protocol (B+/C), 86-89
strength training, 9, 10-11, 23, 41
bouldering and, 63, 64
complex training and, 67
creatine and, 134—35
definition of, 62
disinhibition and, 56, 64
elite climber workout and, 119, 120
endurance training v., 61, 62
fitness v. skill and, 10
grip and, 54
injury and, 161, 162
injury prevention and, 167
junior climbers and, 122, 123
maximum ability and, 63
mental technique and, 14
mesocycle training schedule and,
111, 112, 113
motor learning and, 55-56
motor unit synchronization and, 56
muscular failure and, 53-54
muscular power and, 62
muscular system adaptation and,
56-57, 63
negative impact of, 10
neural system adaptation and,
55-56, 63
recovery and, 137
System Training (B) and, 85
technical skills and, 14
stretching, 9, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148.
See also flexibility training.
injury and, 161, 162
injury prevention and, 168
lower-body, 73-76

205

range of motion and, 71
upper-body, 72-73
subluxation, 162
supercompensation, 60-61, 67,
86-87, 89, 116, 117
creatine and, 135
elite climber workout and, 120, 121
long-term recovery and, 148
recovery and, 141
surgical tubing, 2
Swiss finger taping method, 157
System Training (B), 84-85
anaerobic endurance and, 85
forearm pump and, 90
Hypergravity Isolation Training
and, 85, 86
strength training and, 85

taping methods, 157-58, 159, 166-67
target thinking, 9
target training, 114
;echnical skills, 6, 7, 23
technology, 8
tendon insertions, 5, 6
tendonitis, 158
lateral epicondyle tendonitis and,
161-62
medial epicondyle tendonitis and,
160-61
tennis elbow, 161
tension, 26, 32, 33-34, 35
testosterone, 136
toproping, 48, 49
torso stretch, 73
touches. See lock-offs.
tracking, 49
training
definition of, 8
variables of, 6, 7
training program
accomplished climber workout and,
116, 118-19
beginner-level workout and,
116-17
blank charts, 173
competition and, 110

206

elite climber workout and, 116,
119-21
motivation and, 110
nutrition and, 9-10
recovery acceleration techniques
and, 9-10
rest and, 9-10
weakness' targeted for, 110
workout manipulation and, 110
workout schedule and, 110-14
trans fatty acids, 127
travel, 9
traversing
core muscle training and, 98
one-arm, 65, 67
training, 4 7 ^ 8
tricep stretch, 73
Troyer, Vern, 6
Twinlab, 144
two-finger grip, 87, 88
two-finger pocket hold, 86

u

safety and, 37
seif-confidence and, 36-37
training and, 35-36
vitamin C, 131, 132, 148
vitamin E, 131, 132, 148
voluntary force, maximum, 56

Iff
water, 128-30, 134, 143, 144
Way of Strategy, The (Levinson), 31
webbing loop, 59
whey protein, 132, 133, 145
Woods, Tiger, 45
workout schedule
macrocycle and, 113-14
mesocycle and, 111-13
microcycle and, 110-11

X finger taping method, i 57

Y

underclinging, 47, 48, 49, 51, 78-79,
84, 85
uneven-grip pull ups (B), 55, 96
upper back stretch, 73
upper-body power, 5
upper-trunk extension exercise (A),
99-100

Yaniro, Tony, 3, 61
Yosemite Camp Four, 2-3

zinc, 131-32
ZMA supplement, 132
Zone diet, 128

vanadyl sulfate, 136
variable practice, 47
variation training principle, 58, 60,
82, 94, 111
injury prevention and, 166
verbal beta, 51
vertical jump increase, 67
visualization, 9, 23, 25-26, 33, 50
associated visualization, 36-37
future success and, 37
competition and, 38
disassociated visualization, 36
fatigue and, 38
injury and, 38

T R A I N I N G

for

C L I M B I N G

About the Author
A

n accomplished climber for more than twentyfive years, Eric J. Horst has ascended cliffs all
across the United States and Europe. Driven by his
passion for adventure and challenge, he has established more than 400 first ascents, primarily on his
home cliffs in the eastern U.S.
A student and teacher of climbing performance,
Eric has personally helped train hundreds of climbers,
and his training books and concepts have spread
around the world to climbers in more than forty countries. He is widely recognized for his innovative practice methods and training tools, and he has been a
training products design consultant for Nicros, Inc.,
since 1994.
Eric is also known as the author of the popular
Flash Training (Falcon, 1994) and How to Climb 5.12
(Falcon, 1997); both books have foreign translations
available in parts of South America and Europe. He
has written more than two dozen magazine articles on
the subject, appeared on numerous TV broadcasts,
and his techniques have been featured in magazines
such as Climbing, Rock & Ice, Outside, Men's Health,
Muscle Media, and Men's Journal, among others. Eric's
Web site is www.TrainingForClimbing.com; visit here
for the latest information on climbing performance, or
to schedule a personal consultation, training seminar,
or speaking engagement.
Eric currently lives in Lancaster, Pennsylvania,
with his wife, Lisa Ann, and his sons, Cameron and
Jonathan.

Eric Horst on Welcome to Conditioning (5,12d/5.13a),
Fern Buttress, Endless Wall, New River Gorge, West
Virginia.
P H 0T0 GRAPH

1Y

STEWART

GREEN

/IFALCON GUIDE*
02313

Outdoor Recreation/Climbing
o

Maximize your strength, skill, and focus
to achieve peak performance on the rock!
"Covering everything from mental exercises to injury prevention to nutrition
to goal-specific workouts, Training for Climbing is a must read for climbers of
any ability who are looking to take their performance to the next level."
—Jonathan Thesenga, Editor
Climbing Magazine

Highly entertaining, idea-packed, and loaded with practical
techniques and strategies. Training for Climbing presents a
distillation of twenty-five years of experience and experimentation by accomplished veteran climber, renowned
author, and performance coach Eric J. Horst.
In this follow-up to his popular Flash Training, Horst
presents a unique synthesis of leading-edge strength-training
methods, tried-and-true practice strategies, and powerful
mental-training techniques that will empower you to climb
better—regardless of your current ability.
Training for Climbing begins with a logical progression
of self-analysis and goal setting, then takes an in-depth look
at the vital mental and technical skills that separate the best
from the rest. In three breakthrough chapters on sportspecific strength training, the author presents the principles
of effective training, followed by dozens of exercises, as well
as sample personalized training programs for climbers of all
abilities. He concludes with expert advice on the often overlooked subjects of performance nutrition, accelerating recovery, and the prevention and treatment of climbing injuries.
Let Horst's passion for climbing and his exploration of
the boundaries of personal performance help you achieve
your personal best!

ISBN
m

>

$16.95
0-7627-2313-0
5>

| $ 38.95

Also inside:

• Self-assessment test and
corrective tips
• Mental training strategies
• Technique training drills
•

Finger and forearm
strengthening exercises
• Lock-off and powerbuilding exercises
• Core muscle conditioning
• Power endurance training
• Strategies for accelerating
recovery
• Performance nutrition
• Personal training plans for
beginner, accomplished,
and elite climbers
• Yearly training planner
and much more!
Front cover: Eric J. Horst on Fight Gravity,
Frankenjura, Germany. Photo by Mike McGill

FALCON GUIDE
P.O. Box 480
Guilford, CT 06437
www.falcon.com
Falcon® is an imprint of The Globe Pequot Press

