ALSO BY ROBERT M. SAPOLSKY

Monkeyluv and Other Essays on Our Lives as Animals
A Primate’s Memoir
The Trouble with Testosterone and Other Essays on the Biology of the
Human Predicament
Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: A Guide to Stress, Stress-Related
Diseases, and Coping
Stress, the Aging Brain, and the Mechanisms of Neuron Death

1

2

PENGUIN PRESS
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
penguin.com
Copyright © 2017 by Robert M. Sapolsky
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free
speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and
for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in
any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to
publish books for every reader.
Illustration credits appear here.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Sapolsky, Robert M., author.
Title: Behave: the biology of humans at our best and worst / Robert M. Sapolsky.
Description: New York: Penguin Press, 2017.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016056755 (print) | LCCN 2017006806 (ebook) | ISBN 9781594205071
(hardback) | ISBN 9780735222786 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Neurophysiology. | Neurobiology. | Animal behavior. | BISAC: SCIENCE / Life
Sciences / Biology / General. | SOCIAL SCIENCE / Criminology. | SCIENCE / Life Sciences /
Neuroscience.
Classification: LCC QP351 .S27 2017 (print) | LCC QP351 (ebook) | DDC 612.8–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016056755
Interior Illustrations by Tanya Maiboroda here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here,
here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here
Version_1

3

To Mel Konner, who taught me.
To John Newton, who inspired me.
To Lisa, who saved me.

4

Contents
Also by Robert M. Sapolsky
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
INTRODUCTION
One THE BEHAVIOR
Two ONE SECOND BEFORE
Three SECONDS TO MINUTES BEFORE
Four HOURS TO DAYS BEFORE
Five DAYS TO MONTHS BEFORE
Six ADOLESCENCE; OR, DUDE, WHERE’S MY FRONTAL

CORTEX?
Seven BACK TO THE CRIB, BACK TO THE WOMB
Eight BACK TO WHEN YOU WERE JUST A FERTILIZED EGG
Nine CENTURIES TO MILLENNIA BEFORE

5

Ten THE EVOLUTION OF BEHAVIOR
Eleven US VERSUS THEM
Twelve HIERARCHY, OBEDIENCE, AND RESISTANCE
Thirteen MORALITY AND DOING THE RIGHT THING, ONCE

YOU’VE FIGURED OUT WHAT THAT IS
Fourteen FEELING SOMEONE’S PAIN, UNDERSTANDING

SOMEONE’S PAIN, ALLEVIATING SOMEONE’S PAIN
Fifteen METAPHORS WE KILL BY
Sixteen BIOLOGY, THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM, AND (OH,

WHY NOT?) FREE WILL
Seventeen WAR AND PEACE

EPILOGUE
Acknowledgments
Appendix 1: Neuroscience 101
Appendix 2: The Basics of Endocrinology
Appendix 3: Protein Basics
Glossary of Abbreviations
Notes
Illustration Credits
Index
About the Author

6

Introduction

T

he fantasy always runs like this: A team of us has fought our way
into his secret bunker. Okay, it’s a fantasy, let’s go whole hog. I’ve
single-handedly neutralized his elite guard and have burst into his
bunker, my Browning machine gun at the ready. He lunges for his Luger;
I knock it out of his hand. He lunges for the cyanide pill he keeps to
commit suicide rather than be captured. I knock that out of his hand as
well. He snarls in rage, attacks with otherworldly strength. We grapple; I
manage to gain the upper hand and pin him down and handcuff him.
“Adolf Hitler,” I announce, “I arrest you for crimes against humanity.”
And this is where the medal-of-honor version of the fantasy ends and
the imagery darkens. What would I do with Hitler? The viscera become
so raw that I switch to passive voice in my mind, to get some distance.
What should be done with Hitler? It’s easy to imagine, once I allow
myself. Sever his spine at the neck, leave him paralyzed but with
sensation. Take out his eyes with a blunt instrument. Puncture his
eardrums, rip out his tongue. Keep him alive, tube-fed, on a respirator.
Immobile, unable to speak, to see, to hear, only able to feel. Then inject
him with something that will give him a cancer that festers and
pustulates in every corner of his body, that will grow and grow until
every one of his cells shrieks with agony, till every moment feels like an
infinity spent in the fires of hell. That’s what should be done with Hitler.
That’s what I would want done to Hitler. That’s what I would do to
Hitler.

—
I’ve had versions of this fantasy since I was a kid. Still do at times. And
when I really immerse myself in it, my heart rate quickens, I flush, my
fists clench. All those plans for Hitler, the most evil person in history, the
soul most deserving of punishment.
7

But there is a big problem. I don’t believe in souls or evil, think that
the word “wicked” is most pertinent to a musical, and doubt that
punishment should be relevant to criminal justice. But there’s a problem
with that, in turn—I sure feel like some people should be put to death,
yet I oppose the death penalty. I’ve enjoyed plenty of violent, schlocky
movies, despite being in favor of strict gun control. And I sure had fun
when, at some kid’s birthday party and against various unformed
principles in my mind, I played laser tag, shooting at strangers from
hiding places (fun, that is, until some pimply kid zapped me, like, a
million times and then snickered at me, which made me feel insecure and
unmanly). Yet at the same time, I know most of the lyrics to “Down by
the Riverside” (“ain’t gonna study war no more”) plus when you’re
supposed to clap your hands.
In other words, I have a confused array of feelings and thoughts
about violence, aggression, and competition. Just like most humans.
To preach from an obvious soapbox, our species has problems with
violence. We have the means to create thousands of mushroom clouds;
shower heads and subway ventilation systems have carried poison gas,
letters have carried anthrax, passenger planes have become weapons;
mass rapes can constitute a military strategy; bombs go off in markets,
schoolchildren with guns massacre other children; there are
neighborhoods where everyone from pizza delivery guys to firefighters
fears for their safety. And there are the subtler versions of violence—say,
a childhood of growing up abused, or the effects on a minority people
when the symbols of the majority shout domination and menace. We are
always shadowed by the threat of other humans harming us.
If that were solely the way things are, violence would be an easy
problem to approach intellectually. AIDS—unambiguously bad news—
eradicate. Alzheimer’s disease—same thing. Schizophrenia, cancer,
malnutrition, flesh-eating bacteria, global warming, comets hitting earth
—ditto.
The problem, though, is that violence doesn’t go on that list.
Sometimes we have no problem with it at all.
This is a central point of this book—we don’t hate violence. We hate
and fear the wrong kind of violence, violence in the wrong context.
Because violence in the right context is different. We pay good money to
watch it in a stadium, we teach our kids to fight back, we feel proud
when, in creaky middle age, we manage a dirty hip-check in a weekend

8

basketball game. Our conversations are filled with military metaphors—
we rally the troops after our ideas get shot down. Our sports teams’
names celebrate violence—Warriors, Vikings, Lions, Tigers, and Bears.
We even think this way about something as cerebral as chess
—“Kasparov kept pressing for a murderous attack. Toward the end,
Kasparov had to oppose threats of violence with more of the same.”1 We
build theologies around violence, elect leaders who excel at it, and in the
case of so many women, preferentially mate with champions of human
combat. When it’s the “right” type of aggression, we love it.
It is the ambiguity of violence, that we can pull a trigger as an act of
hideous aggression or of self-sacrificing love, that is so challenging. As a
result, violence will always be a part of the human experience that is
profoundly hard to understand.
This book explores the biology of violence, aggression, and
competition—the behaviors and the impulses behind them, the acts of
individuals, groups, and states, and when these are bad or good things. It
is a book about the ways in which humans harm one another. But it is
also a book about the ways in which people do the opposite. What does
biology teach us about cooperation, affiliation, reconciliation, empathy,
and altruism?
The book has a number of personal roots. One is that, having had
blessedly little personal exposure to violence in my life, the entire
phenomenon scares the crap out of me. I think like an academic egghead,
believing that if I write enough paragraphs about a scary subject, give
enough lectures about it, it will give up and go away quietly. And if
everyone took enough classes about the biology of violence and studied
hard, we’d all be able to take a nap between the snoozing lion and lamb.
Such is the delusional sense of efficacy of a professor.
Then there’s the other personal root for this book. I am by nature
majorly pessimistic. Give me any topic and I’ll find a way in which
things will fall apart. Or turn out wonderfully and somehow, because of
that, be poignant and sad. It’s a pain in the butt, especially to people
stuck around me. And when I had kids, I realized that I needed to get
ahold of this tendency big time. So I looked for evidence that things
weren’t quite that bad. I started small, practicing on them—don’t cry, a T.
rex would never come and eat you; of course Nemo’s daddy will find
him. And as I’ve learned more about the subject of this book, there’s
been an unexpected realization—the realms of humans harming one

9

another are neither universal nor inevitable, and we’re getting some
scientific insights into how to avoid them. My pessimistic self has a hard
time admitting this, but there is room for optimism.

10

THE APPROACH IN THIS BOOK
make my living as a combination neurobiologist—someone who
Istudies
the brain—and primatologist—someone who studies monkeys
and apes. Therefore, this is a book that is rooted in science, specifically
biology. And out of that come three key points. First, you can’t begin to
understand things like aggression, competition, cooperation, and
empathy without biology; I say this for the benefit of a certain breed of
social scientist who finds biology to be irrelevant and a bit ideologically
suspect when thinking about human social behavior. But just as
important, second, you’re just as much up the creek if you rely only on
biology; this is said for the benefit of a style of molecular fundamentalist
who believes that the social sciences are destined to be consumed by
“real” science. And as a third point, by the time you finish this book,
you’ll see that it actually makes no sense to distinguish between aspects
of a behavior that are “biological” and those that would be described as,
say, “psychological” or “cultural.” Utterly intertwined.
Understanding the biology of these human behaviors is obviously
important. But unfortunately it is hellishly complicated.2 Now, if you
were interested in the biology of, say, how migrating birds navigate, or in
the mating reflex that occurs in female hamsters when they’re ovulating,
this would be an easier task. But that’s not what we’re interested in.
Instead, it’s human behavior, human social behavior, and in many cases
abnormal human social behavior. And it is indeed a mess, a subject
involving brain chemistry, hormones, sensory cues, prenatal
environment, early experience, genes, both biological and cultural
evolution, and ecological pressures, among other things.
How are we supposed to make sense of all these factors in thinking
about behavior? We tend to use a certain cognitive strategy when dealing
with complex, multifaceted phenomena, in that we break down those
separate facets into categories, into buckets of explanation. Suppose
there’s a rooster standing next to you, and there’s a chicken across the
street. The rooster gives a sexually solicitive gesture that is hot by
chicken standards, and she promptly runs over to mate with him (I
haven’t a clue if this is how it works, but let’s just suppose). And thus we
11

have a key behavioral biological question—why did the chicken cross
the road? And if you’re a psychoneuroendocrinologist, your answer
would be “Because circulating estrogen levels in that chicken worked in
a certain part of her brain to make her responsive to this male signaling,”
and if you’re a bioengineer, the answer would be “Because the long bone
in the leg of the chicken forms a fulcrum for her pelvis (or some such
thing), allowing her to move forward rapidly,” and if you’re an
evolutionary biologist, you’d say, “Because over the course of millions
of years, chickens that responded to such gestures at a time that they
were fertile left more copies of their genes, and thus this is now an innate
behavior in chickens,” and so on, thinking in categories, in differing
scientific disciplines of explanation.
The goal of this book is to avoid such categorical thinking. Putting
facts into nice cleanly demarcated buckets of explanation has its
advantages—for example, it can help you remember facts better. But it
can wreak havoc on your ability to think about those facts. This is
because the boundaries between different categories are often arbitrary,
but once some arbitrary boundary exists, we forget that it is arbitrary and
get way too impressed with its importance. For example, the visual
spectrum is a continuum of wavelengths from violet to red, and it is
arbitrary where boundaries are put for different color names (for
example, where we see a transition from “blue” to “green”); as proof of
this, different languages arbitrarily split up the visual spectrum at
different points in coming up with the words for different colors. Show
someone two roughly similar colors. If the color-name boundary in that
person’s language happens to fall between the two colors, the person will
overestimate the difference between the two. If the colors fall in the
same category, the opposite happens. In other words, when you think
categorically, you have trouble seeing how similar or different two things
are. If you pay lots of attention to where boundaries are, you pay less
attention to complete pictures.
Thus, the official intellectual goal of this book is to avoid using
categorical buckets when thinking about the biology of some of our most
complicated behaviors, even more complicated than chickens crossing
roads.
What’s the replacement?
A behavior has just occurred. Why did it happen? Your first category
of explanation is going to be a neurobiological one. What went on in that

12

person’s brain a second before the behavior happened? Now pull out to a
slightly larger field of vision, your next category of explanation, a little
earlier in time. What sight, sound, or smell in the previous seconds to
minutes triggered the nervous system to produce that behavior? On to the
next explanatory category. What hormones acted hours to days earlier to
change how responsive that individual was to the sensory stimuli that
trigger the nervous system to produce the behavior? And by now you’ve
increased your field of vision to be thinking about neurobiology and the
sensory world of our environment and short-term endocrinology in
trying to explain what happened.
And you just keep expanding. What features of the environment in
the prior weeks to years changed the structure and function of that
person’s brain and thus changed how it responded to those hormones and
environmental stimuli? Then you go further back to the childhood of the
individual, their fetal environment, then their genetic makeup. And then
you increase the view to encompass factors larger than that one
individual—how has culture shaped the behavior of people living in that
individual’s group?—what ecological factors helped shape that culture—
expanding and expanding until considering events umpteen millennia
ago and the evolution of that behavior.
Okay, so this represents an improvement—it seems like instead of
trying to explain all of behavior with a single discipline (e.g.,
“Everything can be explained with knowledge about this particular [take
your pick:] hormone/gene/childhood event”), we’ll be thinking about a
bunch of disciplinary buckets. But something subtler will be done, and
this is the most important idea in the book: when you explain a behavior
with one of these disciplines, you are implicitly invoking all the
disciplines—any given type of explanation is the end product of the
influences that preceded it. It has to work this way. If you say, “The
behavior occurred because of the release of neurochemical Y in the
brain,” you are also saying, “The behavior occurred because the heavy
secretion of hormone X this morning increased the levels of
neurochemical Y.” You’re also saying, “The behavior occurred because
the environment in which that person was raised made her brain more
likely to release neurochemical Y in response to certain types of stimuli.”
And you’re also saying, “. . . because of the gene that codes for the
particular version of neurochemical Y.” And if you’ve so much as
whispered the word “gene,” you’re also saying, “. . . and because of the

13

millennia of factors that shaped the evolution of that particular gene.”
And so on.
There are not different disciplinary buckets. Instead, each one is the
end product of all the biological influences that came before it and will
influence all the factors that follow it. Thus, it is impossible to conclude
that a behavior is caused by a gene, a hormone, a childhood trauma,
because the second you invoke one type of explanation, you are de facto
invoking them all. No buckets. A “neurobiological” or “genetic” or
“developmental” explanation for a behavior is just shorthand, an
expository convenience for temporarily approaching the whole
multifactorial arc from a particular perspective.
Pretty impressive, huh? Actually, maybe not. Maybe I’m just
pretentiously saying, “You have to think complexly about complex
things.” Wow, what a revelation. And maybe what I’ve been tacitly
setting up is this full-of-ourselves straw man of “Ooh, we’re going to
think subtly. We won’t get suckered into simplistic answers, not like
those chicken-crossing-the-road neurochemists and chicken evolutionary
biologists and chicken psychoanalysts, all living in their own limited
categorical buckets.”
Obviously, scientists aren’t like that. They’re smart. They understand
that they need to take lots of angles into account. Of necessity, their
research may focus on a narrow subject, because there are limits to how
much one person can obsess over. But of course they know that their
particular categorical bucket isn’t the whole story.
Maybe yes, maybe no. Consider the following quotes from some
card-carrying scientists. The first:
Give me a dozen healthy infants, well formed, and my own
specified world to bring them up in and I’ll guarantee to take any
one at random and train him to become any type of specialist I
might select—doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant-chief and yes, even
beggar-man thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies,
abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors.3
This was John Watson, a founder of behaviorism, writing around
1925. Behaviorism, with its notion that behavior is completely malleable,
that it can be shaped into anything in the right environment, dominated
American psychology in the midtwentieth century; we’ll return to
14

behaviorism, and its considerable limitations. The point is that Watson
was pathologically caught inside a bucket having to do with the
environmental influences on development. “I’ll guarantee . . . to train
him to become any type.” Yet we are not all born the same, with the
same potential, regardless of how we are trained.*4
The next quote:
Normal psychic life depends upon the good functioning of brain
synapses, and mental disorders appear as a result of synaptic
derangements. . . . It is necessary to alter these synaptic
adjustments and change the paths chosen by the impulses in their
constant passage so as to modify the corresponding ideas and
force thought into different channels.5
Alter synaptic adjustments. Sounds delicate. Yeah, right. These were
the words of the Portuguese neurologist Egas Moniz, around the time he
was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1949 for his development of frontal
leukotomies. Here was an individual pathologically stuck in a bucket
having to do with a crude version of the nervous system. Just tweak
those microscopic synapses with a big ol’ ice pick (as was done once
leukotomies, later renamed frontal lobotomies, became an assembly line
operation).
And a final quote:
The immensely high reproduction rate in the moral imbecile has
long been established. . . . Socially inferior human material is
enabled . . . to penetrate and finally to annihilate the healthy
nation. The selection for toughness, heroism, social utility . . .
must be accomplished by some human institution if mankind, in
default of selective factors, is not to be ruined by domesticationinduced degeneracy. The racial idea as the basis of our state has
already accomplished much in this respect. We must—and should
—rely on the healthy feelings of our Best and charge them . . .
with the extermination of elements of the population loaded with
dregs.6

15

This was Konrad Lorenz, animal behaviorist, Nobel laureate,
cofounder of the field of ethology (stay tuned), regular on nature TV
programs.7 Grandfatherly Konrad, in his Austrian shorts and suspenders,
being followed by his imprinted baby geese, was also a rabid Nazi
propagandist. Lorenz joined the Nazi Party the instant Austrians were
eligible, and joined the party’s Office of Race Policy, working to
psychologically screen Poles of mixed Polish/German parentage, helping
to determine which were sufficiently Germanized to be spared death.
Here was a man pathologically mired in an imaginary bucket related to
gross misinterpretations of what genes do.
These were not obscure scientists producing fifth-rate science at
Podunk U. These were among the most influential scientists of the
twentieth century. They helped shape who and how we educate and our
views on what social ills are fixable and when we shouldn’t bother. They
enabled the destruction of the brains of people against their will. And
they helped implement final solutions for problems that didn’t exist. It
can be far more than a mere academic matter when a scientist thinks that
human behavior can be entirely explained from only one perspective.

16

OUR LIVES AS ANIMALS AND OUR
HUMAN VERSATILITY AT BEING
AGGRESSIVE

S

o we have a first intellectual challenge, which is to always think in
this interdisciplinary way. The second challenge is to make sense of
humans as apes, primates, mammals. Oh, that’s right, we’re a kind of
animal. And it will be a challenge to figure out when we’re just like
other animals and when we are utterly different.
Some of the time we are indeed just like any other animal. When
we’re scared, we secrete the same hormone as would some subordinate
fish getting hassled by a bully. The biology of pleasure involves the same
brain chemicals in us as in a capybara. Neurons from humans and brine
shrimp work the same way. House two female rats together, and over the
course of weeks they will synchronize their reproductive cycles so that
they wind up ovulating within a few hours of each other. Try the same
with two human females (as reported in some but not all studies), and
something similar occurs. It’s called the Wellesley effect, first shown
with roommates at all-women’s Wellesley College.8 And when it comes
to violence, we can be just like some other apes—we pummel, we
cudgel, we throw rocks, we kill with our bare hands.
So some of the time an intellectual challenge is to assimilate how
similar we can be to other species. In other cases the challenge is to
appreciate how, though human physiology resembles that of other
species, we use the physiology in novel ways. We activate the classical
physiology of vigilance while watching a scary movie. We activate a
stress response when thinking about mortality. We secrete hormones
related to nurturing and social bonding, but in response to an adorable
baby panda. And this certainly applies to aggression—we use the same
muscles as does a male chimp attacking a sexual competitor, but we use
them to harm someone because of their ideology.
Finally, sometimes the only way to understand our humanness is to
consider solely humans, because the things we do are unique. While a
few other species have regular nonreproductive sex, we’re the only ones
17

to talk afterward about how it was. We construct cultures premised on
beliefs concerning the nature of life and can transmit those beliefs
multigenerationally, even between two individuals separated by
millennia—just consider that perennial best seller, the Bible. Consonant
with that, we can harm by doing things as unprecedented as and no more
physically taxing than pulling a trigger, or nodding consent, or looking
the other way. We can be passive-aggressive, damn with faint praise, cut
with scorn, express contempt with patronizing concern. All species are
unique, but we are unique in some pretty unique ways.
Here are two examples of just how strange and unique humans can
be when they go about harming one another and caring for one another.
The first example involves, well, my wife. So we’re in the minivan, our
kids in the back, my wife driving. And this complete jerk cuts us off,
almost causing an accident, and in a way that makes it clear that it wasn’t
distractedness on his part, just sheer selfishness. My wife honks at him,
and he flips us off. We’re livid, incensed. Asshole-where’s-the-copswhen-you-need-them, etc. And suddenly my wife announces that we’re
going to follow him, make him a little nervous. I’m still furious, but this
doesn’t strike me as the most prudent thing in the world. Nonetheless,
my wife starts trailing him, right on his rear.
After a few minutes the guy’s driving evasively, but my wife’s on
him. Finally both cars stop at a red light, one that we know is a long one.
Another car is stopped in front of the villain. He’s not going anywhere.
Suddenly my wife grabs something from the front seat divider, opens her
door, and says, “Now he’s going to be sorry.” I rouse myself feebly
—“Uh, honey, do you really think this is such a goo—” But she’s out of
the car, starts pounding on his window. I hurry over just in time to hear
my wife say, “If you could do something that mean to another person,
you probably need this,” in a venomous voice. She then flings something
in the window. She returns to the car triumphant, just glorious.
“What did you throw in there!?”
She’s not talking yet. The light turns green, there’s no one behind us,
and we just sit there. The thug’s car starts to blink a very sensible turn
indicator, makes a slow turn, and heads down a side street into the dark
at, like, five miles an hour. If it’s possible for a car to look ashamed, this
car was doing it.
“Honey, what did you throw in there, tell me?”
She allows herself a small, malicious grin.

18

“A grape lollipop.” I was awed by her savage passive-aggressiveness
—“You’re such a mean, awful human that something must have gone
really wrong in your childhood, and maybe this lollipop will help correct
that just a little.” That guy was going to think twice before screwing with
us again. I swelled with pride and love.
And the second example: In the mid-1960s, a rightist military coup
overthrew the government of Indonesia, instituting the thirty-year
dictatorship of Suharto known as the New Order. Following the coup,
government-sponsored purges of communists, leftists, intellectuals,
unionists, and ethnic Chinese left about a half million dead.9 Mass
executions, torture, villages torched with inhabitants trapped inside. V. S.
Naipaul, in his book Among the Believers: An Islamic Journey, describes
hearing rumors while in Indonesia that when a paramilitary group would
arrive to exterminate every person in some village, they would,
incongruously, bring along a traditional gamelan orchestra. Eventually
Naipaul encountered an unrepentant veteran of a massacre, and he asked
him about the rumor. Yes, it is true. We would bring along gamelan
musicians, singers, flutes, gongs, the whole shebang. Why? Why would
you possibly do that? The man looked puzzled and gave what seemed to
him a self-evident answer: “Well, to make it more beautiful.”
Bamboo flutes, burning villages, the lollipop ballistics of maternal
love. We have our work cut out for us, trying to understand the virtuosity
with which we humans harm or care for one another, and how deeply
intertwined the biology of the two can be.

19

One

The Behavior

W

e have our strategy in place. A behavior has occurred—one
that is reprehensible, or wonderful, or floating ambiguously in
between. What occurred in the prior second that triggered the behavior?
This is the province of the nervous system. What occurred in the prior
seconds to minutes that triggered the nervous system to produce that
behavior? This is the world of sensory stimuli, much of it sensed
unconsciously. What occurred in the prior hours to days to change the
sensitivity of the nervous system to such stimuli? Acute actions of
hormones. And so on, all the way back to the evolutionary pressures
played out over the prior millions of years that started the ball rolling.
So we’re set. Except that when approaching this big sprawling mess
of a subject, it is kind of incumbent upon you to first define your terms.
Which is an unwelcome prospect.
Here are some words of central importance to this book: aggression,
violence, compassion, empathy, sympathy, competition, cooperation,
altruism, envy, schadenfreude, spite, forgiveness, reconciliation, revenge,
reciprocity, and (why not?) love. Flinging us into definitional quagmires.
Why the difficulty? As emphasized in the introduction, one reason is
that so many of these terms are the subject of ideological battles over the
appropriation and distortions of their meanings.*1 Words pack power and
these definitions are laden with values, often wildly idiosyncratic ones.
Here’s an example, namely the ways I think about the word
“competition”: (a) “competition”—your lab team races the Cambridge
group to a discovery (exhilarating but embarrassing to admit to); (b)
“competition”—playing pickup soccer (fine, as long as the best player
shifts sides if the score becomes lopsided); (c) “competition”—your
child’s teacher announces a prize for the best outlining-your-fingers
20

Thanksgiving turkey drawing (silly and perhaps a red flag—if it keeps
happening, maybe complain to the principal); (d) “competition”—whose
deity is more worth killing for? (try to avoid).
But the biggest reason for the definitional challenge was emphasized
in the introduction—these terms mean different things to scientists living
inside different disciplines. Is “aggression” about thought, emotion, or
something done with muscles? Is “altruism” something that can be
studied mathematically in various species, including bacteria, or are we
discussing moral development in kids? And implicit in these different
perspectives, disciplines have differing tendencies toward lumping and
splitting—these scientists believe that behavior X consists of two
different subtypes, whereas those scientists think it comes in seventeen
flavors.
Let’s examine this with respect to different types of “aggression.”2
Animal behaviorists dichotomize between offensive and defensive
aggression, distinguishing between, say, the intruder and the resident of a
territory; the biology underlying these two versions differs. Such
scientists also distinguish between conspecific aggression (between
members of the same species) and fighting off a predator. Meanwhile,
criminologists distinguish between impulsive and premeditated
aggression. Anthropologists care about differing levels of organization
underlying aggression, distinguishing among warfare, clan vendettas,
and homicide.
Moreover, various disciplines distinguish between aggression that
occurs reactively (in response to provocation) and spontaneous
aggression, as well as between hot-blooded, emotional aggression and
cold-blooded, instrumental aggression (e.g., “I want your spot to build
my nest, so scram or I’ll peck your eyes out; this isn’t personal,
though”).3 Then there’s another version of “This isn’t personal”—
targeting someone just because they’re weak and you’re frustrated,
stressed, or pained and need to displace some aggression. Such thirdparty aggression is ubiquitous—shock a rat and it’s likely to bite the
smaller guy nearby; a beta-ranking male baboon loses a fight to the
alpha, and he chases the omega male;* when unemployment rises, so do
rates of domestic violence. Depressingly, as will be discussed in chapter
4, displacement aggression can decrease the perpetrator’s stress hormone
levels; giving ulcers can help you avoid getting them. And of course

21

there is the ghastly world of aggression that is neither reactive nor
instrumental but is done for pleasure.
Then there are specialized subtypes of aggression—maternal
aggression, which often has a distinctive endocrinology. There’s the
difference between aggression and ritualistic threats of aggression. For
example, many primates have lower rates of actual aggression than of
ritualized threats (such as displaying their canines). Similarly, aggression
in Siamese fighting fish is mostly ritualistic.*
Getting a definitional handle on the more positive terms isn’t easy
either. There’s empathy versus sympathy, reconciliation versus
forgiveness, and altruism versus “pathological altruism.”4 For a
psychologist the last term might describe the empathic codependency of
enabling a partner’s drug use. For a neuroscientist it describes a
consequence of a type of damage to the frontal cortex—in economic
games of shifting strategies, individuals with such damage fail to switch
to less altruistic play when being repeatedly stabbed in the back by the
other player, despite being able to verbalize the other player’s strategy.
When it comes to the more positive behaviors, the most pervasive
issue is one that ultimately transcends semantics—does pure altruism
actually exist? Can you ever separate doing good from the expectation of
reciprocity, public acclaim, self-esteem, or the promise of paradise?
This plays out in a fascinating realm, as reported in Larissa
MacFarquhar’s 2009 New Yorker piece “The Kindest Cut.”5 It concerns
people who donate organs not to family members or close friends but to
strangers. An act of seemingly pure altruism. But these Samaritans
unnerve everyone, sowing suspicion and skepticism. Is she expecting to
get paid secretly for her kidney? Is she that desperate for attention? Will
she work her way into the recipient’s life and do a Fatal Attraction?
What’s her deal? The piece suggests that these profound acts of goodness
unnerve because of their detached, affectless nature.
This speaks to an important point that runs through the book. As
noted, we distinguish between hot-blooded and cold-blooded violence.
We understand the former more, can see mitigating factors in it—
consider the grieving, raging man who kills the killer of his child. And
conversely, affectless violence seems horrifying and incomprehensible;
this is the sociopathic contract killer, the Hannibal Lecter who kills
without his heart rate nudging up a beat.*6 It’s why cold-blooded killing
is a damning descriptor.
22

Similarly, we expect that our best, most prosocial acts be
warmhearted, filled with positive affect. Cold-blooded goodness seems
oxymoronic, is unsettling. I was once at a conference of neuroscientists
and all-star Buddhist monk meditators, the former studying what the
brains of the latter did during meditation. One scientist asked one of the
monks whether he ever stops meditating because his knees hurt from all
that cross-leggedness. He answered, “Sometimes I’ll stop sooner than I
planned, but not because it hurts; it’s not something I notice. It’s as an act
of kindness to my knees.” “Whoa,” I thought, “these guys are from
another planet.” A cool, commendable one, but another planet
nonetheless. Crimes of passion and good acts of passion make the most
sense to us (nevertheless, as we shall see, dispassionate kindness often
has much to recommend it).
Hot-blooded badness, warmhearted goodness, and the unnerving
incongruity of the cold-blooded versions raise a key point, encapsulated
in a quote from Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize winner and
concentration camp survivor: “The opposite of love is not hate; its
opposite is indifference.” The biologies of strong love and strong hate
are similar in many ways, as we’ll see.
Which reminds us that we don’t hate aggression; we hate the wrong
kind of aggression but love it in the right context. And conversely, in the
wrong context our most laudable behaviors are anything but. The
motoric features of our behaviors are less important and challenging to
understand than the meaning behind our muscles’ actions.
This is shown in a subtle study.7 Subjects in a brain scanner entered a
virtual room where they encountered either an injured person in need of
help or a menacing extraterrestrial; subjects could either bandage or
shoot the individual. Pulling a trigger and applying a bandage are
different behaviors. But they are similar, insofar as bandaging the injured
person and shooting the alien are both the “right” things. And
contemplating those two different versions of doing the right thing
activated the same circuitry in the most context-savvy part of the brain,
the prefrontal cortex.
And thus those key terms that anchor this book are most difficult to
define because of their profound context dependency. I will therefore
group them in a way that reflects this. I won’t frame the behaviors to
come as either pro- or antisocial—too cold-blooded for my expository
tastes. Nor will they be labeled as “good” and “evil”—too hot-blooded

23

and frothy. Instead, as our convenient shorthand for concepts that truly
defy brevity, this book is about the biology of our best and worst
behaviors.

24

Two

One Second Before

V

arious muscles have moved, and a behavior has happened.
Perhaps it is a good act: you’ve empathically touched the arm of
a suffering person. Perhaps it is a foul act: you’ve pulled a trigger,
targeting an innocent person. Perhaps it is a good act: you’ve pulled a
trigger, drawing fire to save others. Perhaps it is a foul act: you’ve
touched the arm of someone, starting a chain of libidinal events that
betray a loved one. Acts that, as emphasized, are definable only by
context.
Thus, to ask the question that will begin this and the next eight
chapters, why did that behavior occur?
As this book’s starting point, we know that different disciplines
produce different answers—because of some hormone; because of
evolution; because of childhood experiences or genes or culture—and as
the book’s central premise, these are utterly intertwined answers, none
standing alone. But on the most proximal level, in this chapter we ask:
What happened one second before the behavior that caused it to occur?
This puts us in the realm of neurobiology, of understanding the brain that
commanded those muscles.
This chapter is one of the book’s anchors. The brain is the final
common pathway, the conduit that mediates the influences of all the
distal factors to be covered in the chapters to come. What happened an
hour, a decade, a million years earlier? What happened were factors that
impacted the brain and the behavior it produced.
This chapter has two major challenges. The first is its god-awful
length. Apologies; I’ve tried to be succinct and nontechnical, but this is
foundational material that needs to be covered. Second, regardless of
how nontechnical I’ve tried to be, the material can overwhelm someone
25

with no background in neuroscience. To help with that, please wade
through appendix 1 around now.

—
Now we ask: What crucial things happened in the second before that proor antisocial behavior occurred? Or, translated into neurobiology: What
was going on with action potentials, neurotransmitters, and neural
circuits in particular brain regions during that second?

26

THREE METAPHORICAL (BUT NOT
LITERAL) LAYERS

W

e start by considering the brain’s macroorganization, using a
model proposed in the 1960s by the neuroscientist Paul
MacLean.1 His “triune brain” model conceptualizes the brain as having
three functional domains:
Layer 1: An ancient part of the brain, at its base, found in species from
humans to geckos. This layer mediates automatic, regulatory functions.
If body temperature drops, this brain region senses it and commands
muscles to shiver. If blood glucose levels plummet, that’s sensed here,
generating hunger. If an injury occurs, a different loop initiates a stress
response.
Layer 2: A more recently evolved region that has expanded in
mammals. MacLean conceptualized this layer as being about emotions,
somewhat of a mammalian invention. If you see something gruesome
and terrifying, this layer sends commands down to ancient layer 1,
making you shiver with emotion. If you’re feeling sadly unloved, regions
here prompt layer 1 to generate a craving for comfort food. If you’re a
rodent and smell a cat, neurons here cause layer 1 to initiate a stress
response.
Layer 3: The recently evolved layer of neocortex sitting on the upper
surface of the brain. Proportionately, primates devote more of their brain
to this layer than do other species. Cognition, memory storage, sensory
processing, abstractions, philosophy, navel contemplation. Read a scary
passage of a book, and layer 3 signals layer 2 to make you feel
frightened, prompting layer 1 to initiate shivering. See an ad for Oreos
and feel a craving—layer 3 influences layers 2 and 1. Contemplate the
fact that loved ones won’t live forever, or kids in refugee camps, or how
the Na’vis’ home tree was destroyed by those jerk humans in Avatar
(despite the fact that, wait, Na’vi aren’t real!), and layer 3 pulls layers 2
and 1 into the picture, and you feel sad and have the same sort of stress
response that you’d have if you were fleeing a lion.

27

Thus we’ve got the brain divided into three functional buckets, with
the usual advantages and disadvantages of categorizing a continuum. The
biggest disadvantage is how simplistic this is. For example:
a. Anatomically there is considerable overlap among the
three layers (for example, one part of the cortex can best
be thought of as part of layer 2; stay tuned).
b. The flow of information and commands is not just top
down, from layer 3 to 2 to 1. A weird, great example
explored in chapter 15: if someone is holding a cold
drink (temperature is processed in layer 1), they’re more
likely to judge someone they meet as having a cold
personality (layer 3).
c. Automatic aspects of behavior (simplistically, the
purview of layer 1), emotion (layer 2), and thought
(layer 3) are not separable.
d. The triune model leads one, erroneously, to think that
evolution in effect slapped on each new layer without
any changes occurring in the one(s) already there.
Despite these drawbacks, which MacLean himself emphasized, this
model will be a good organizing metaphor for us.

28

THE LIMBIC SYSTEM

T

o make sense of our best and worst behaviors, automaticity,
emotion, and cognition must all be considered; I arbitrarily start
with layer 2 and its emphasis on emotion.
Early-twentieth-century neuroscientists thought it obvious what layer
2 did. Take your standard-issue lab animal, a rat, and examine its brain.
Right at the front would be these two gigantic lobes, the “olfactory
bulbs” (one for each nostril), the primary receptive area for odors.

Neuroscientists at the time asked what parts of the brain these
gigantic rodent olfactory bulbs talked to (i.e., where they sent their
axonal projections). Which brain regions were only a single synapse
away from receiving olfactory information, which were two synapses,
three, and so on?
And it was layer 2 structures that received the first communiqués.
Ah, everyone concluded, this part of the brain must process odors, and so
it was termed the rhinencephalon—the nose brain.
Meanwhile, in the thirties and forties, neuroscientists such as the
young MacLean, James Papez, Paul Bucy, and Heinrich Klüver were
starting to figure out what the layer 2 structures did. For example, if you
lesion (i.e., destroy) layer 2 structures, this produces “Klüver-Bucy
syndrome,” featuring abnormalities in sociality, especially in sexual and

29

aggressive behaviors. They concluded that these structures, soon termed
the “limbic system” (for obscure reasons), were about emotion.
Rhinencephalon or limbic system? Olfaction or emotion? Pitched
street battles ensued until someone pointed out the obvious—for a rat,
emotion and olfaction are nearly synonymous, since nearly all the
environmental stimuli that elicit emotions in a rodent are olfactory. Peace
in our time. In a rodent, olfactory inputs are what the limbic system most
depends on for emotional news of the world. In contrast, the primate
limbic system is more informed by visual inputs.
Limbic function is now recognized as central to the emotions that
fuel our best and worst behaviors, and extensive research has uncovered
the functions of its structures (e.g., the amygdala, hippocampus, septum,
habenula, and mammillary bodies).
There really aren’t “centers” in the brain “for” particular behaviors.
This is particularly the case with the limbic system and emotion. There is
indeed a sub-subregion of the motor cortex that approximates being the
“center” for making your left pinkie bend; other regions have “center”ish roles in regulating breathing or body temperature. But there sure
aren’t centers for feeling pissy or horny, for feeling bittersweet nostalgia
or warm protectiveness tinged with contempt, or for that what-is-thatthing-called-love feeling. No surprise, then, that the circuitry connecting
various limbic structures is immensely complex.

The Autonomic Nervous System and the Ancient
Core Regions of the Brain
The limbic system’s regions form complex circuits of excitation and
inhibition. It’s easier to understand this by appreciating the deeply held
desire of every limbic structure—to influence what the hypothalamus
does.
Why? Because of its importance. The hypothalamus, a limbic
structure, is the interface between layers 1 and 2, between core
regulatory and emotional parts of the brain.
Consistent with that, the hypothalamus gets massive inputs from
limbic layer 2 structures but disproportionately sends projections to layer
1 regions. These are the evolutionarily ancient midbrain and brain stem,
which regulate automatic reactions throughout the body.

30

For a reptile such automatic regulation is straightforward. If muscles
are working hard, this is sensed by neurons throughout the body that
send signals up the spine to layer 1 regions, resulting in signals back
down the spine that increase heart rate and blood pressure; the result is
more oxygen and glucose for the muscles. Gorge on food, and stomach
walls distend; neurons embedded there sense this and pass on the news,
and soon blood vessels in the gut dilate, increasing blood flow and
facilitating digestion. Too warm? Blood is sent to the body’s surface to
dissipate heat.

—
All of this is automatic, or “autonomic.” And thus the midbrain and
brain-stem regions, along with their projections down the spine and out
to the body, are collectively termed the “autonomic nervous system.”*
And where does the hypothalamus come in? It’s the means by which
the limbic system influences autonomic function, how layer 2 talks to
layer 1. Have a full bladder with its muscle walls distended, and
midbrain/brain-stem circuitry votes for urinating. Be exposed to
something sufficiently terrifying, and limbic structures, via the
hypothalamus, persuade the midbrain and brain stem to do the same.
This is how emotions change bodily functions, why limbic roads
eventually lead to the hypothalamus.*
The autonomic nervous system has two parts—the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems, with fairly opposite functions.
The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) mediates the body’s response
to arousing circumstances, for example, producing the famed “fight or
flight” stress response. To use the feeble joke told to first-year medical
students, the SNS mediates the “four Fs—fear, fight, flight, and sex.”
Particular midbrain/brain-stem nuclei send long SNS projections down
the spine and on to outposts throughout the body, where the axon
terminals release the neurotransmitter norepinephrine. There’s one
exception that makes the SNS more familiar. In the adrenal gland,
instead of norepinephrine (aka noradrenaline) being released, it’s
epinephrine (aka the famous adrenaline).*
Meanwhile, the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) arises from
different midbrain/brain-stem nuclei that project down the spine to the
body. In contrast to the SNS and the four Fs, the PNS is about calm,
vegetative states. The SNS speeds up the heart; the PNS slows it down.

31

The PNS promotes digestion; the SNS inhibits it (which makes sense—if
you’re running for your life, avoiding being someone’s lunch, don’t
waste energy digesting breakfast).* And as we will see chapter 14, if
seeing someone in pain activates your SNS, you’re likely to be
preoccupied with your own distress instead of helping; turn on the PNS,
and it’s the opposite. Given that the SNS and PNS do opposite things, the
PNS is obviously going to be releasing a different neurotransmitter from
its axon terminals—acetylcholine.*
There is a second, equally important way in which emotion
influences the body. Specifically, the hypothalamus also regulates the
release of many hormones; this is covered in chapter 4.

—
So the limbic system indirectly regulates autonomic function and
hormone release. What does this have to do with behavior? Plenty—
because the autonomic and hormonal states of the body feed back to the
brain, influencing behavior (typically unconsciously).* Stay tuned for
more in chapters 3 and 4.

The Interface Between the Limbic System and the
Cortex
Time to add the cortex. As noted, this is the brain’s upper surface (its
name comes from the Latin cortic, meaning “tree bark”) and is the
newest part of the brain.
The cortex is the gleaming, logical, analytical crown jewel of layer 3.
Most sensory information flows there to be decoded. It’s where muscles
are commanded to move, where language is comprehended and
produced, where memories are stored, where spatial and mathematical
skills reside, where executive decisions are made. It floats above the
limbic system, supporting philosophers since at least Descartes who have
emphasized the dichotomy between thought and emotion.
Of course, that’s all wrong, as shown by the temperature of a cup—
something processed in the hypothalamus—altering assessment of the
coldness of someone’s personality. Emotions filter the nature and
accuracy of what is remembered. Stroke damage to certain cortical
regions blocks the ability to speak; some sufferers reroute the cerebral

32

world of speech through emotive, limbic detours—they can sing what
they want to say. The cortex and limbic system are not separate, as scads
of axonal projections course between the two. Crucially, those
projections are bidirectional—the limbic system talks to the cortex,
rather than merely being reined in by it. The false dichotomy between
thought and feeling is presented in the classic Descartes’ Error, by the
neurologist Antonio Damasio of the University of Southern California;
his work is discussed later.2
While the hypothalamus dwells at the interface of layers 1 and 2, it is
the incredibly interesting frontal cortex that is the interface between
layers 2 and 3.
Key insight into the frontal cortex was provided in the 1960s by a
giant of neuroscience, Walle Nauta of MIT.*3 Nauta studied what brain
regions sent axons to the frontal cortex and what regions got axons from
it. And the frontal cortex was bidirectionally enmeshed with the limbic
system, leading him to propose that the frontal cortex is a quasi member
of the limbic system. Naturally, everyone thought him daft. The frontal
cortex was the most recently evolved part of the very highbrow cortex—
the only reason why the frontal cortex would ever go slumming into the
limbic system would be to preach honest labor and Christian temperance
to the urchins there.
Naturally, Nauta was right. In different circumstances the frontal
cortex and limbic system stimulate or inhibit each other, collaborate and
coordinate, or bicker and work at cross-purposes. It really is an honorary
member of the limbic system. And the interactions between the frontal
cortex and (other) limbic structures are at the core of much of this book.
Two more details. First, the cortex is not a smooth surface but instead
is folded into convolutions. The convolutions form a superstructure of
four separate lobes: the temporal, parietal, occipital, and frontal, each
with different functions.

33

Brain Lateralization

34

Brain Lateralization
Analytical
thought
Detailoriented
perception
Ordered
sequencing
Rational
thought
Verbal
Cautious
Planning
Math/science
Logic
Right-field
vision
Right-side
motor skills

Intuitive
thought
Holistic
perception
Random
sequencing
Emotional
thought
Nonverbal
Adventurous
Impulse
Creative
writing/art
Imagination
Left-field
vision
Left-side
motor skills

Second, brains obviously have left and right sides, or “hemispheres,”
that roughly mirror each other.
Thus, except for the relatively few midline structures, brain regions
come in pairs (a left and right amygdala, hippocampus, temporal lobe,
and so on). Functions are often lateralized, such that the left and right
hippocampi, for example, have different but related functions. The
greatest lateralization occurs in the cortex; the left hemisphere is
analytical, the right more involved in intuition and creativity. These
contrasts have caught the public fancy, with cortical lateralization
exaggerated by many to an absurd extent, where “left brain”–edness has
the connotation of anal-retentive bean counting and “right brain”–edness
is about making mandalas or singing with whales. In fact the functional
differences between the hemispheres are generally subtle, and I’m
mostly ignoring lateralization.
We’re now ready to examine the brain regions most central to this
book, namely the amygdala, the frontal cortex, and the
mesolimbic/mesocortical dopamine system (discussion of other bit35

player regions will be subsumed under the headings for these three). We
start with the one arguably most central to our worst behaviors.

36

THE AMYGDALA

T

he amygdala* is the archetypal limbic structure, sitting under the
cortex in the temporal lobe. It is central to mediating aggression,
along with other behaviors that tell us tons about aggression.

A First Pass at the Amygdala and Aggression
The evidence for the amygdala’s role in aggression is extensive,
based on research approaches that will become familiar.
First there’s the correlative “recording” approach. Stick recording
electrodes into numerous species’ amygdalae* and see when neurons
there have action potentials; this turns out to be when the animal is being
aggressive.* In a related approach, determine which brain regions
consume extra oxygen or glucose, or synthesize certain activity-related
proteins, during aggression—the amygdala tops the list.
Moving beyond mere correlation, if you lesion the amygdala in an
animal, rates of aggression decline. The same occurs transiently when
you temporarily silence the amygdala by injecting Novocain into it.
Conversely, implanting electrodes that stimulate neurons there, or
spritzing in excitatory neurotransmitters (stay tuned), triggers
aggression.4
Show human subjects pictures that provoke anger, and the amygdala
activates (as shown with neuroimaging). Sticking an electrode in
someone’s amygdala and stimulating it (as is done before certain types of
neurosurgery) produces rage.
The most convincing data concern rare humans with damage
restricted to the amygdala, either due to a type of encephalitis or a
congenital disorder called Urbach-Wiethe disease, or where the
amygdala was surgically destroyed to control severe, drug-resistant
seizures originating there.5 Such individuals are impaired in detecting
angry facial expressions (while being fine at recognizing other emotional
states—stay tuned).

37

And what does amygdala damage do to aggressive behavior? This
was studied in humans where amygdalotomies were done not to control
seizures but to control aggression. Such psychosurgery provoked fiery
controversy in the 1970s. And I don’t mean scientists not saying hello to
each other at conferences. I mean a major public shit storm.
The issue raised bioethical lightning rods: What counted as
pathological aggression? Who decided? What other interventions had
been tried unsuccessfully? Were some types of hyperaggressive
individuals more likely to go under the knife than others? What
constituted a cure?6
Most of these cases concerned rare epileptics where seizure onset
was associated with uncontrollable aggression, and where the goal was
to contain that behavior (these papers had titles such as “Clinical and
physiological effects of stereotaxic bilateral amygdalotomy for
intractable aggression”). The fecal hurricane concerned the involuntary
lopping out of the amygdala in people without epilepsy but with a history
of severe aggression. Well, doing this could be profoundly helpful. Or
Orwellian. This is a long, dark story and I will save it for another time.
Did destruction of the human amygdala lessen aggression? Pretty
clearly so, when violence was a reflexive, inchoate outburst preceding a
seizure. But with surgery done solely to control behavior, the answer is,
er, maybe—the heterogeneity of patients and surgical approaches, the
lack of modern neuroimaging to pinpoint exactly which parts of the
amygdala were destroyed in each individual, and the imprecision in the
behavioral data (with papers reporting from 33 to 100 percent “success”
rates) make things inconclusive. The procedure has almost entirely fallen
out of practice.
The amygdala/aggression link pops up in two notorious cases of
violence. The first concerns Ulrike Meinhof, a founder in 1968 of the
Red Army Faction (aka the Baader-Meinhof Gang), a terrorist group
responsible for bombings and bank robberies in West Germany. Meinhof
had a conventional earlier life as a journalist before becoming violently
radicalized. During her 1976 murder trial, she was found hanged in her
jail cell (suicide or murder? still unclear). In 1962 Meinhof had had a
benign brain tumor surgically removed; the 1976 autopsy showed that
remnants of the tumor and surgical scar tissue impinged on her
amygdala.7

38

A second case concerns Charles Whitman, the 1966 “Texas Tower”
sniper who, after killing his wife and mother, opened fire atop a tower at
the University of Texas in Austin, killing sixteen and wounding thirtytwo, one of the first school massacres. Whitman was literally an Eagle
Scout and childhood choirboy, a happily married engineering major with
an IQ in the 99th percentile. In the prior year he had seen doctors,
complaining of severe headaches and violent impulses (e.g., to shoot
people from the campus tower). He left notes by the bodies of his wife
and his mother, proclaiming love and puzzlement at his actions: “I
cannot rationaly [sic] pinpoint any specific reason for [killing her],” and
“let there be no doubt in your mind that I loved this woman with all my
heart.” His suicide note requested an autopsy of his brain, and that any
money he had be given to a mental health foundation. The autopsy
proved his intuition correct—Whitman had a glioblastoma tumor
pressing on his amygdala. Did Whitman’s tumor “cause” his violence?
Probably not in a strict “amygdaloid tumor = murderer” sense, as he had
risk factors that interacted with his neurological issues. Whitman grew
up being beaten by his father and watching his mother and siblings
experience the same. This choirboy Eagle Scout had repeatedly
physically abused his wife and had been court-martialed as a Marine for
physically threatening another soldier.* And, perhaps indicative of a
thread running through the family, his brother was murdered at age
twenty-four during a bar fight.8

A Whole Other Domain of Amygdaloid Function
to the Center Stage
Thus considerable evidence implicates the amygdala in aggression.
But if you asked amygdala experts what behavior their favorite brain
structure brings to mind, “aggression” wouldn’t top their list. It would be
fear and anxiety.9 Crucially, the brain region most involved in feeling
afraid and anxious is most involved in generating aggression.
The amygdala/fear link is based on evidence similar to that
supporting the amygdala/aggression link.10 In lab animals this has
involved lesioning the structure, detecting activity in its neurons with
“recording electrodes,” electrically stimulating it, or manipulating genes
in it. All suggest a key role for the amygdala in perceiving fear-

39

provoking stimuli and in expressing fear. Moreover, fear activates the
amygdala in humans, with more activation predicting more behavioral
signs of fear.
In one study subjects in a brain scanner played a Ms. Pac-Man–
from–hell video game where they were pursued in a maze by a dot; if
caught, they’d be shocked.11 When people were evading the dot, the
amygdala was silent. However, its activity increased as the dot
approached; the stronger the shocks, the farther away the dot would be
when first activating the amygdala, the stronger the activation, and the
larger the self-reported feeling of panic.
In another study subjects waited an unknown length of time to
receive a shock.12 This lack of predictability and control was so aversive
that many chose to receive a stronger shock immediately. And in the
others the period of anticipatory dread increasingly activated the
amygdala.
Thus the human amygdala preferentially responds to fear-evoking
stimuli, even stimuli so fleeting as to be below conscious detection.
Powerful support for an amygdaloid role in fear processing comes
from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In PTSD sufferers the
amygdala is overreactive to mildly fearful stimuli and is slow in calming
down after being activated.13 Moreover, the amygdala expands in size
with long-term PTSD. This role of stress in this expansion will be
covered in chapter 4.
The amygdala is also involved in the expression of anxiety.14 Take a
deck of cards—half are black, half are red; how much would you wager
that the top card is red? That’s about risk. Here’s a deck of cards—at
least one is black, at least one is red; how much would you wager that
the top card is red? That’s about ambiguity. The circumstances carry
identical probabilities, but people are made more anxious by the second
scenario and activate the amygdala more. The amygdala is particularly
sensitive to unsettling circumstances that are social. A high-ranking male
rhesus monkey is in a sexual consortship with a female; in one condition
the female is placed in another room, where the male can see her. In the
second she’s in the other room along with a rival of the male. No
surprise, that situation activates the amygdala. Is that about aggression or
anxiety? Seemingly the latter—the extent of activation did not correlate
with the amount of aggressive behaviors and vocalizations the male

40

made, or the amount of testosterone secreted. Instead, it correlated with
the extent of anxiety displayed (e.g., teeth chattering, or self-scratching).
The amygdala is linked to social uncertainty in other ways. In one
neuroimaging study, a subject would participate in a competitive game
against a group of other players; outcomes were rigged so that the
subject would wind up in the middle of the rankings.15 Experimenters
then manipulated game outcomes so that subjects’ rankings either
remained stable or fluctuated wildly. Stable rankings activated parts of
the frontal cortex that we’ll soon consider. Instability activated the
frontal cortex plus the amygdala. Being unsure of your place is
unsettling.
Another study explored the neurobiology of conforming.16 To
simplify, a subject is part of a group (where, secretly, the rest are
confederates); they are shown “X,” then asked, “What did you see?”
Everyone else says “Y.” Does the subject lie and say “Y” also? Often.
Subjects who stuck to their guns with “X” showed amygdala activation.
Finally, activating specific circuits within the amygdala in mice turns
anxiety on and off; activating others made mice unable to distinguish
between safe and anxiety-producing settings.*17
The amygdala also helps mediate both innate and learned fear.18 The
core of innate fear (aka a phobia) is that you don’t have to learn by trial
and error that something is aversive. For example, a rat born in a lab,
who has interacted only with other rats and grad students, instinctually
fears and avoids the smell of cats. While different phobias activate
somewhat different brain circuitry (for example, dentist phobia involves
the cortex more than does snake phobia), they all activate the amygdala.
Such innate fear contrasts with things we learn to fear—a bad
neighborhood, a letter from the IRS. The dichotomy between innate and
learned fear is actually a bit fuzzy.19 Everyone knows that humans are
innately afraid of snakes and spiders. But some people keep them as pets,
give them cute names.* Instead of inevitable fear, we show “prepared
learning”—learning to be afraid of snakes and spiders more readily than
of pandas or beagles.
The same occurs in other primates. For example, lab monkeys who
have never encountered snakes (or artificial flowers) can be conditioned
to fear the former more readily than the latter. As we’ll see in the next
chapter, humans show prepared learning, being predisposed to be
conditioned to fear people with a certain type of appearance.
41

The fuzzy distinction between innate and learned fear maps nicely
onto the amygdala’s structure. The evolutionarily ancient central
amygdala plays a key role in innate fears. Surrounding it is the
basolateral amygdala (BLA), which is more recently evolved and
somewhat resembles the fancy, modern cortex. It’s the BLA that learns
fear and then sends the news to the central amygdala.
Joseph LeDoux at New York University has shown how the BLA
learns fear.*20 Expose a rat to an innate trigger of fear—a shock. When
this “unconditioned stimulus” occurs, the central amygdala activates,
stress hormones are secreted, the sympathetic nervous system mobilizes,
and, as a clear end point, the rat freezes in place—“What was that? What
do I do?” Now do some conditioning. Before each shock, expose the rat
to a stimulus that normally does not evoke fear, such as a tone. And with
repeated coupling of the tone (the conditioned stimulus) with the shock
(the unconditioned one), fear conditioning occurs—the sound of the tone
alone elicits freezing, stress hormone release, and so on.*
LeDoux and others have shown how auditory information about the
tone stimulates BLA neurons. At first, activation of those neurons is
irrelevant to the central amygdala (whose neurons are destined to
activate following the shock). But with repeated coupling of tone with
shock, there is remapping and those BLA neurons acquire the means to
activate the central amygdala.*
BLA neurons that respond to the tone only once conditioning has
occurred would also have responded if conditioning instead had been to
a light. In other words, these neurons respond to the meaning of the
stimulus, rather than to its specific modality. Moreover, if you
electrically stimulate them, rats are easier to fear-condition; you’ve
lowered the threshold for this association to be made. And if you
electrically stimulate the auditory sensory input at the same time as
shocks (i.e., there’s no tone, just activation of the pathway that normally
carries news of the tone to the amygdala), you cause fear conditioning to
a tone. You’ve engineered the learning of a false fear.
There are synaptic changes as well. Once conditioning to a tone has
occurred, the synapses coupling the BLA and central nucleus neurons
have become more excitable; how this occurs is understood at the level
of changes in the amount of receptors for excitatory neurotransmitters in
dendritic spines in these circuits.* Furthermore, conditioning increases
levels of “growth factors,” which prompt the growth of new connections

42

between BLA and central amygdala neurons; some of the genes involved
have even been identified.
We’ve now got learning to be afraid under our belts.*21 Now
conditions change—the tone still occurs now and then, but no more
shock. Gradually the conditioned fear response abates. How does “fear
extinction” occur? How do we learn that this person wasn’t so scary after
all, that different doesn’t necessarily equal frightening? Recall how a
subset of BLA neurons respond to the tone only once conditioning has
occurred. Another population does the opposite, responding to the tone
once it’s no longer signaling shock (logically, the two populations of
neurons inhibit each other). Where do these “Ohhh, the tone isn’t scary
anymore” neurons get inputs from? The frontal cortex. When we stop
fearing something, it isn’t because some amygdaloid neurons have lost
their excitability. We don’t passively forget that something is scary. We
actively learn that it isn’t anymore.*
The amygdala also plays a logical role in social and emotional
decision making. In the Ultimatum Game, an economic game involving
two players, the first makes an offer as to how to divide a pot of money,
which the other player either accepts or rejects.22 If the latter, neither
gets anything. Research shows that rejecting an offer is an emotional
decision, triggered by anger at a lousy offer and the desire to punish. The
more the amygdala activation in the second player after an offer, the
more likely the rejection. People with damaged amygdalae are atypically
generous in the Ultimatum Game and don’t increase rejection rates if
they start receiving unfair offers.
Why? These individuals understand the rules and can give sound,
strategic advice to other players. Moreover, they use the same strategies
as control subjects in a nonsocial version of the game, when believing
the other player is a computer. And they don’t have a particularly long
view, undistracted by the amygdala’s emotional tumult, reasoning that
their noncontingent generosity will induce reciprocity and pay off in the
long run. When asked, they anticipate the same levels of reciprocity as
do controls.
Instead, these findings suggest that the amygdala injects implicit
distrust and vigilance into social decision making.23 All thanks to
learning. In the words of the authors of the study, “The generosity in the
trust game of our BLA-damaged subjects might be considered
pathological altruism, in the sense that inborn altruistic behaviors have
43

not, due to BLA damage, been un-learned through negative social
experience.” In other words, the default state is to trust, and what the
amygdala does is learn vigilance and distrust.
Unexpectedly, the amygdala and one of its hypothalamic targets also
play a role in male sexual motivation (other hypothalamic nuclei are
central to male sexual performance)* but not female.* What’s that
about? One neuroimaging study sheds some light. “Young heterosexual
men” looked at pictures of attractive women (versus, as a control, of
attractive men). Passively observing the pictures activated the reward
circuitry just alluded to. In contrast, working to see the pictures—by
repeatedly pressing a button—also activated the amygdala. Similarly,
other studies show that the amygdala is most responsive to positive
stimuli when the value of the reward is shifting. Moreover, some BLA
neurons that respond in that circumstance also respond when the severity
of something aversive is shifting—these neurons are paying attention to
change, independent of direction. For them, “the amount of reward is
changing” and “the amount of punishment is changing” are the same.
Studies like these clarify that the amygdala isn’t about the pleasure of
experiencing pleasure. It’s about the uncertain, unsettled yearning for a
potential pleasure, the anxiety and fear and anger that the reward may be
smaller than anticipated, or may not even happen. It’s about how many
of our pleasures and our pursuits of them contain a corrosive vein of
disease.*24

The Amygdala as Part of Networks in the Brain
Now that we know about the subparts of the amygdala, it’s
informative to consider its extrinsic connections—i.e., what parts of the
brain send projection to it, and what parts does it project to?25
SOME INPUTS TO THE AMYGDALA
Sensory inputs. For starters, the amygdala, specifically the BLA, gets
projections from all the sensory systems.26 How else can you get

terrified by the shark’s theme music in Jaws? Normally, sensory
information from various modalities (eyes, ears, skin . . .) courses into
the brain, reaching the appropriate cortical region (visual cortex, auditory
cortex, tactile cortex . . .) for processing. For example, the visual cortex
would engage layers and layers of neurons to turn pixels of retinal
44

stimulation into recognizable images before it can scream to the
amygdala, “It’s a gun!” Importantly, some sensory information entering
the brain takes a shortcut, bypassing the cortex and going directly to the
amygdala. Thus the amygdala can be informed about something scary
before the cortex has a clue. Moreover, thanks to the extreme excitability
of this pathway, the amygdala can respond to stimuli that are too fleeting
or faint for the cortex to note. Additionally, the shortcut projections form
stronger, more excitable synapses in the BLA than do the ones from the
sensory cortex; emotional arousal enhances fear conditioning through
this pathway. This shortcut’s power is shown in the case of a man with
stroke damage to his visual cortex, producing “cortical blindness.” While
unable to process most visual information, he still recognized emotional
facial expressions via the shortcut.*
Crucially, while sensory information reaches the amygdala rapidly by
this shortcut, it isn’t terribly accurate (since, after all, accuracy is what
the cortex supplies). As we’ll see in the next chapter, this produces tragic
circumstances where, say, the amygdala decides it’s seeing a handgun
before the visual cortex can report that it’s actually a cell phone.
Information about pain. The amygdala receives news of that reliable
trigger of fear and aggression, namely pain.27 This is mediated by
projections from an ancient, core brain structure, the “periaqueductal
gray” (PAG); stimulation of the PAG can evoke panic attacks, and it is
enlarged in people with chronic panic attacks. Reflecting the amygdala’s
roles in vigilance, uncertainty, anxiety, and fear, it’s unpredictable pain,
rather than pain itself, that activates the amygdala. Pain (and the
amygdala’s response to it) is all about context.
Disgust of all stripes. The amygdala also receives a hugely interesting
projection from the “insular cortex,” an honorary part of the prefrontal
cortex, which we will consider at length in later chapters.28 If you (or
any other mammal) bite into rancid food, the insular cortex lights up,
causing you to spit it out, gag, feel nauseated, make a revolted facial
expression—the insular cortex processes gustatory disgust. Ditto for
disgusting smells.
Remarkably, humans also activate it by thinking about something
morally disgusting—social norm violations or individuals who are
typically stigmatized in society. And in that circumstance its activation
drives that of the amygdala. Someone does something lousy and selfish
to you in a game, and the extent of insular and amygdaloid activation

45

predicts how much outrage you feel and how much revenge you take.
This is all about sociality—the insula and amygdala don’t activate if it’s
a computer that has stabbed you in the back.
The insula activates when we eat a cockroach or imagine doing so.
And the insula and amygdala activate when we think of the neighboring
tribe as loathsome cockroaches. As we’ll see, this is central to how our
brains process “us and them.”
And finally, the amygdala gets tons of inputs from the frontal cortex.
Much more to come.
SOME OUTPUTS FROM THE AMYGDALA
Bidirectional connections. As we’ll see, the amygdala talks to many of the

regions that talk to it, including the frontal cortex, insula, periaqueductal
gray, and sensory projections, modulating their sensitivity.
The amygdala/hippocampus interface. Naturally, the amygdala talks to other
limbic structures, including the hippocampus. As reviewed, typically the
amygdala learns fear and the hippocampus learns detached, dispassionate
facts. But at times of extreme fear, the amygdala pulls the hippocampus
into a type of fear learning.29
Back to the rat undergoing fear conditioning. When it’s in cage A, a
tone is followed by a shock. But in cage B, the tone isn’t. This produces
context-dependent conditioning—the tone causes fearful freezing in cage
A but not in cage B. The amygdala learns the stimulus cue—the tone—
while the hippocampus learns about the contexts of cage A versus B. The
coupled learning between amygdala and hippocampus is very focalized
—we all remember the view of the plane hitting the second World Trade
Center tower, but not whether there were clouds in the background. The
hippocampus decides whether a factoid is worth filing away, depending
on whether the amygdala has gotten worked up over it. Moreover, the
coupling can rescale. Suppose someone robs you at gunpoint in an alley
in a bad part of town. Afterward, depending on the circumstance, the gun
can be the cue and the alley the context, or the alley is the cue and the
bad part of town the context.
Motor outputs. There’s a second shortcut regarding the amygdala,
specifically when it’s talking to motor neurons that command
movement.30 Logically, when the amygdala wants to mobilize a behavior
—say, fleeing—it talks to the frontal cortex, seeking its executive
approval. But if sufficiently aroused, the amygdala talks directly to

46

subcortical, reflexive motor pathways. Again, there’s a trade-off—
increased speed by bypassing the cortex, but decreased accuracy. Thus
the input shortcut may prompt you to see the cell phone as a gun. And
the output shortcut may prompt you to pull a trigger before you
consciously mean to.
Arousal. Ultimately, amygdala outputs are mostly about setting off
alarms throughout the brain and body. As we saw, the core of the
amygdala is the central amygdala.31 Axonal projections from there go to
an amygdala-ish structure nearby called the bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis (BNST). The BNST, in turn, projects to parts of the
hypothalamus that initiate the hormonal stress response (see chapter 4),
as well as to midbrain and brain-stem sites that activate the sympathetic
nervous system and inhibit the parasympathetic nervous system.
Something emotionally arousing occurs, layer 2 limbic amygdala signals
layer 1 regions, and heart rate and blood pressure soar.*
The amygdala also activates a brain-stem structure called the locus
coeruleus, akin to the brain’s own sympathetic nervous system.32 It sends
norepinephrine-releasing projections throughout the brain, particularly
the cortex. If the locus coeruleus is drowsy and silent, so are you. If it’s
moderately activated, you’re alert. And if it’s firing like gangbusters,
thanks to inputs from an aroused amygdala, all neuronal hands are on
deck.
The amygdala’s projection pattern raises an important point.33 When
is the sympathetic nervous system going full blast? During fear, flight,
fight, and sex. Or if you’ve won the lottery, are happily sprinting down a
soccer field, or have just solved Fermat’s theorem (if you’re that kind of
person). Reflecting this, about a quarter of neurons in one hypothalamic
nucleus are involved in both sexual behavior and, when stimulated at a
higher intensity, aggressive behavior in male mice.
This has two implications. Both sex and aggression activate the
sympathetic nervous system, which in turn can influence behavior—
people feel differently about things if, say, their heart is racing versus
beating slowly. Does this mean that the pattern of your autonomic
arousal influences what you feel? Not really. But autonomic feedback
influences the intensity of what is felt. More on this in the next chapter.
The second consequence reflects a core idea of this book. Your heart
does roughly the same thing whether you are in a murderous rage or

47

having an orgasm. Again, the opposite of love is not hate, it’s
indifference.

—
This concludes our overview of the amygdala. Amid the jargon and
complexity, the most important theme is the amygdala’s dual role in both
aggression and facets of fear and anxiety. Fear and aggression are not
inevitably intertwined—not all fear causes aggression, and not all
aggression is rooted in fear. Fear typically increases aggression only in
those already prone to it; among the subordinate who lack the option of
expressing aggression safely, fear does the opposite.
The dissociation between fear and aggression is evident in violent
psychopaths, who are the antithesis of fearful—both physiologically and
subjectively they are less reactive to pain; their amygdalae are relatively
unresponsive to typical fear-evoking stimuli and are smaller than
normal.34 This fits with the picture of psychopathic violence; it is not
done in aroused reaction to provocation. Instead, it is purely
instrumental, using others as a means to an end with emotionless,
remorseless, reptilian indifference.
Thus, fear and violence are not always connected at the hip. But a
connection is likely when the aggression evoked is reactive, frenzied,
and flecked with spittle. In a world in which no amygdaloid neuron need
be afraid and instead can sit under its vine and fig tree, the world is very
likely to be a more peaceful place.*

—
We now move to the second of the three brain regions we’re considering
in detail.

48

THE FRONTAL CORTEX

I

’ve spent decades studying the hippocampus. It’s been good to me;
I’d like to think I’ve been the same in return. Yet I think I might have
made the wrong choice back then—maybe I should have studied the
frontal cortex all these years. Because it’s the most interesting part of the
brain.
What does the frontal cortex do? Its list of expertise includes
working memory, executive function (organizing knowledge
strategically, and then initiating an action based on an executive
decision), gratification postponement, long-term planning, regulation of
emotions, and reining in impulsivity.35
This is a sprawling portfolio. I will group these varied functions
under a single definition, pertinent to every page of this book: the frontal
cortex makes you do the harder thing when it’s the right thing to do.
To start, here are some important features of the frontal cortex:
It’s the most recently evolved brain region, not approaching full
splendor until the emergence of primates; a disproportionate
percentage of genes unique to primates are active in the frontal
cortex. Moreover, such gene expression patterns are highly
individuated, with greater interindividual variability than average
levels of whole-brain differences between humans and chimps.
The human frontal cortex is more complexly wired than in other
apes and, by some definitions as to its boundaries,
proportionately bigger as well.36
The frontal cortex is the last brain region to fully mature, with
the most evolutionarily recent subparts the very last. Amazingly,
it’s not fully online until people are in their midtwenties. You’d
better bet this factoid will be relevant to the chapter about
adolescence.

49

Finally, the frontal cortex has a unique cell type. In general, the
human brain isn’t unique because we’ve evolved unique types of
neurons, neurotransmitters, enzymes, and so on. Human and fly
neurons are remarkably similar; the uniqueness is quantitative—
for every fly neuron, we have a gazillion more neurons and a
bazillion more connections.37
The sole exception is an obscure type of neuron with a distinctive
shape and pattern of wiring, called von Economo neurons (aka spindle
neurons). At first they seemed to be unique to humans, but we’ve now
found them in other primates, whales, dolphins, and elephants.* That’s
an all-star team of socially complex species.
Moreover, the few von Economo neurons occur only in two
subregions of the frontal cortex, as shown by John Allman at Caltech.
One we’ve heard about already—the insula, with its role in gustatory and
moral disgust. The second is an equally interesting area called the
anterior cingulate. To give a hint (with more to come), it’s central to
empathy.
So from the standpoint of evolution, size, complexity, development,
genetics, and neuron type, the frontal cortex is distinctive, with the
human version the most unique.

The Subregions of the Frontal Cortex
Frontal cortical anatomy is hellishly complicated, and there are
debates as to whether some parts of the primate frontal cortex even exist
in “simpler” species. Nonetheless, there are some useful broad themes.
In the very front is the prefrontal cortex (PFC), the newest part of the
frontal cortex. As noted, the frontal cortex is central to executive
function. To quote George W. Bush, within the frontal cortex, it’s the
PFC that is “the decider.” Most broadly, the PFC chooses between
conflicting options—Coke or Pepsi; blurting out what you really think or
restraining yourself; pulling the trigger or not. And often the conflict
being resolved is between a decision heavily driven by cognition and one
driven by emotions.
Once it has decided, the PFC sends orders via projections to the rest
of the frontal cortex, sitting just behind it. Those neurons then talk to the

50

“premotor cortex,” sitting just behind it, which then passes it to the
“motor cortex,” which talks to your muscles. And a behavior ensues.*
Before considering how the frontal cortex influences social behavior,
let’s start with a simpler domain of its function.

The Frontal Cortex and Cognition
What does “doing the harder thing when it’s the right thing to do”
look like in the realm of cognition (defined by Princeton’s Jonathan
Cohen as “the ability to orchestrate thought and action in accordance
with internal goals”)?38 Suppose you’ve looked up a phone number in a
city where you once lived. The frontal cortex not only remembers it long
enough to dial but also considers it strategically. Just before dialing, you
consciously recall that it is in that other city and retrieve your memory of
the city’s area code. And then you remember to dial “1” before the area
code.*
The frontal cortex is also concerned with focusing on a task. If you
step off the curb planning to jaywalk, you look at traffic, paying attention
to motion, calculating whether you can cross safely. If you step off
looking for a taxi, you pay attention to whether a car has one of those lit
taxicab thingies on top. In a great study, monkeys were trained to look at
a screen of dots of various colors moving in particular directions;
depending on a signal, a monkey had to pay attention to either color or
movement. Each signal indicating a shift in tasks triggered a burst of
PFC activity and, coupled with that, suppression of the stream of
information (color or movement) that was now irrelevant. This is the
PFC getting you to do the harder thing; remembering that the rule has
changed, don’t do the previous habitual response.39
The frontal cortex also mediates “executive function”—considering
bits of information, looking for patterns, and then choosing a strategic
action.40 Consider this truly frontally demanding test. The experimenter
tells a masochistic volunteer, “I’m going to the market and I’m going to
buy peaches, cornflakes, laundry detergent, cinnamon . . .” Sixteen items
recited, the volunteer is asked to repeat the list. Maybe they correctly
recall the first few, the last few, list some near misses—say, nutmeg
instead of cinnamon. Then the experimenter repeats the same list. This

51

time the volunteer remembers a few more, avoids repeating the nutmeg
incident. Now do it again and again.
This is more than a simple memory test. With repetition, subjects
notice that four of the items are fruits, four for cleaning, four spices, four
carbs. They come in categories. And this changes subjects’ encoding
strategy as they start clumping by semantic group—“Peaches. Apples.
Blueberries—no, I mean blackberries. There was another fruit, can’t
remember what. Okay, cornflakes, bread, doughnuts, muffins. Cumin,
nutmeg—argh, again!—I mean cinnamon, oregano . . .” And throughout,
the PFC imposes an overarching executive strategy for remembering
these sixteen factoids.*
The PFC is essential for categorical thinking, for organizing and
thinking about bits of information with different labels. The PFC groups
apples and peaches as closer to each other in a conceptual map than are
apples and toilet plungers. In a relevant study, monkeys were trained to
differentiate between pictures of a dog and of a cat. The PFC contained
individual neurons that responded to “dog” and others that responded to
“cat.” Now the scientists morphed the pictures together, creating hybrids
with varying percentages of dog and cat. “Dog” PFC neurons responded
about as much to hybrids that were 80 percent dog and 20 percent cat, or
60:40, as to 100 percent dog. But not to 40:60—“cat” neurons would
kick in there.41
The frontal cortex aids the underdog outcome, fueled by thoughts
supplied from influences that fill the rest of this book—stop, those aren’t
your cookies; you’ll go to hell; self-discipline is good; you’re happier
when you’re thinner—all giving some lone inhibitory motor neuron
more of a fighting chance.

Frontal Metabolism and an Implicit Vulnerability
This raises an important point, pertinent to the social as well as
cognitive functions of the frontal cortex.42 All this “I wouldn’t do that if
I were you”–ing by the frontal cortex is taxing. Other brain regions
respond to instances of some contingency; the frontal cortex tracks rules.
Just think how around age three, our frontal cortices learned a rule
followed for the rest of our lives—don’t pee whenever you feel like it—

52

and gained the means to enact that rule by increasing their influence over
neurons regulating the bladder.
Moreover, the frontal mantra of “self-discipline is good” when
cookies beckon is also invoked when economizing to increase retirement
savings. Frontal cortical neurons are generalists, with broad patterns of
projections, which makes for more work.43
All this takes energy, and when it is working hard, the frontal cortex
has an extremely high metabolic rate and rates of activation of genes
related to energy production.44 Willpower is more than just a metaphor;
self-control is a finite resource. Frontal neurons are expensive cells, and
expensive cells are vulnerable cells. Consistent with that, the frontal
cortex is atypically vulnerable to various neurological insults.
Pertinent to this is the concept of “cognitive load.” Make the frontal
cortex work hard—a tough working-memory task, regulating social
behavior, or making numerous decisions while shopping. Immediately
afterward performance on a different frontally dependent task declines.45
Likewise during multitasking, where PFC neurons simultaneously
participate in multiple activated circuits.
Importantly, increase cognitive load on the frontal cortex, and
afterward subjects become less prosocial*—less charitable or helpful,
more likely to lie.46 Or increase cognitive load with a task requiring
difficult emotional regulation, and subjects cheat more on their diets
afterward.*47
So the frontal cortex is awash in Calvinist self-discipline, a superego
with its nose to the grindstone.48 But as an important qualifier, soon after
we’re potty-trained, doing the harder thing with our bladder muscles
becomes automatic. Likewise with other initially demanding frontal
tasks. For example, you’re learning a piece of music on the piano, there’s
a difficult trill, and each time as you approach it, you think, “Here it
comes. Remember, tuck my elbow in, lead with my thumb.” A classic
working-memory task. And then one day you realize that you’re five
measures past the trill, it went fine, and you didn’t have to think about it.
And that’s when doing the trill is transferred from the frontal cortex to
more reflexive brain regions (e.g., the cerebellum). This transition to
automaticity also happens when you get good at a sport, when
metaphorically your body knows what to do without your thinking about
it.

53

The chapter on morality considers automaticity in a more important
realm. Is resisting lying a demanding task for your frontal cortex, or is it
effortless habit? As we’ll see, honesty often comes more easily thanks to
automaticity. This helps explain the answer typically given after
someone has been profoundly brave. “What were you thinking when you
dove into the river to save that drowning child?” “I wasn’t thinking—
before I knew it, I had jumped in.” Often the neurobiology of
automaticity mediates doing the hardest moral acts, while the
neurobiology of the frontal cortex mediates working hard on a term
paper about the subject.

The Frontal Cortex and Social Behavior
Things get interesting when the frontal cortex has to add social
factors to a cognitive mix. For example, one part of the monkey PFC
contains neurons that activate when the monkey makes a mistake on a
cognitive task or observes another monkey doing so; some activate only
when it’s a particular animal who made the mistake. In a neuroimaging
study humans had to choose something, balancing feedback obtained
from their own prior choices with advice from another person. Different
PFC circuits tracked “reward-driven” and “advice-driven” cogitating.49
Findings like these segue into the central role of the frontal cortex in
social behavior.50 This is appreciated when comparing various primates.
Across primate species, the bigger the size of the average social group,
the larger the relative size of the frontal cortex. This is particularly so
with “fission-fusion” species, where there are times when subgroups split
up and function independently for a while before regrouping. Such a
social structure is demanding, requiring the scaling of appropriate
behavior to subgroup size and composition. Logically, primates from
fission-fusion species (chimps, bonobos, orangutans, spider monkeys)
have better frontocortical inhibitory control over behavior than do nonfission-fusion primates (gorillas, capuchins, macaques).
Among humans, the larger someone’s social network (measured by
number of different people texted), the larger a particular PFC subregion
(stay tuned).51 That’s cool, but we can’t tell if the big brain region causes
the sociality or the reverse (assuming there’s causality). Another study
resolves this; if rhesus monkeys are randomly placed into social groups,

54

over the subsequent fifteen months, the bigger the group, the larger the
PFC becomes—social complexity expands the frontal cortex.
We utilize the frontal cortex to do the harder thing in social contexts
—we praise the hosts for the inedible dinner; refrain from hitting the
infuriating coworker; don’t make sexual advances to someone, despite
our fantasies; don’t belch loudly during the eulogy. A great way to
appreciate the frontal cortex is to consider what happens when it is
damaged.
The first “frontal” patient, the famous Phineas Gage, was identified
in 1848 in Vermont. Gage, the foreman on a railroad construction crew,
was injured when an accident with blasting powder blew a thirteenpound iron tamping rod through the left side of his face and out the top
front of his skull. It landed eighty feet away, along with much of his left
frontal cortex.52

The two known pictures of Gage, along with the tamping rod.

Remarkably, he survived and recovered his health. But the respected,
even-keeled Gage was transformed. In the words of the doctor who
followed him over the years:

55

The equilibrium or balance, so to speak, between his intellectual
faculties and animal propensities, seems to have been destroyed.
He is fitful, irreverent, indulging at times in the grossest profanity
(which was not previously his custom), manifesting but little
deference for his fellows, impatient of restraint or advice when it
conflicts with his desires, at times pertinaciously obstinate, yet
capricious and vacillating, devising many plans of future
operations, which are no sooner arranged than they are abandoned
in turn for others appearing more feasible.
Gage was described by friends as “no longer Gage,” was incapable of
resuming his job and was reduced to appearing (with his rod) as an
exhibit displayed by P. T. Barnum. Poignant as hell.

—
Amazingly, Gage got better. Within a few years of his injury, he could
resume work (mostly as a stagecoach driver) and was described as being
broadly appropriate in his behavior. His remaining right frontal cortical
tissue had taken on some of the functions lost in the injury. Such
malleability of the brain is the focus of chapter 5.

—
Another example of what happens when the frontal cortex is damaged is
observed in frontotemporal dementia (FTD), which starts by damaging
the frontal cortex; intriguingly, the first neurons killed are those
mysterious von Economo neurons that are unique to primates, elephants,
and cetaceans.53 What are people with FTD like? They exhibit
behavioral disinhibition and socially inappropriate behaviors. There’s
also an apathy and lack of initiating behavior that reflects the fact that
the “decider” is being destroyed.*
Something similar is seen in Huntington’s disease, a horrific disorder
due to a thoroughly weird mutation. Subcortical circuits that coordinate
signaling to muscles are destroyed, and the sufferer is progressively
incapacitated by involuntary writhing movements. Except that it turns
out that there is frontal damage as well, often before the subcortical
damage. In about half the patients there’s also behavioral disinhibition—
stealing, aggressiveness, hypersexuality, bursts of compulsive,
inexplicable gambling.* Social and behavioral disinhibition also occur in
56

individuals with stroke damage in the frontal cortex—for example,
sexually assaultive behavior in an octogenarian.
There’s another circumstance where the frontal cortex is
hypofunctional, producing similar behavioral manifestations—
hypersexuality, outbursts of emotion, flamboyantly illogical acts.54 What
disease is this? It isn’t. You’re dreaming. During REM sleep, when
dreaming occurs, the frontal cortex goes off-line, and dream scriptwriters
run wild. Moreover, if the frontal cortex is stimulated while people are
dreaming, the dreams become less dreamlike, with more self-awareness.
And there’s another nonpathological circumstance where the PFC
silences, producing emotional tsunamis: during orgasm.
One last realm of frontal damage. Adrian Raine of the University of
Pennsylvania and Kent Kiehl of the University of New Mexico report
that criminal psychopaths have decreased activity in the frontal cortex
and less coupling of the PFC to other brain regions (compared with
nonpsychopathic criminals and noncriminal controls). Moreover, a
shockingly large percentage of people incarcerated for violent crimes
have a history of concussive trauma to the frontal cortex.55 More to come
in chapter 16.

The Obligatory Declaration of the Falseness of the
Dichotomy Between Cognition and Emotion
The PFC consists of various parts, subparts, and sub-subparts,
enough to keep neuroanatomists off the dole. Two regions are crucial.
First there is the dorsal part of the PFC, especially the dorsolateral PFC
(dlPFC)—don’t worry about “dorsal” or “dorsolateral”; it’s just jargon.*
The dlPFC is the decider of deciders, the most rational, cognitive,
utilitarian, unsentimental part of the PFC. It’s the most recently evolved
part of the PFC and the last part to fully mature. It mostly hears from and
talks to other cortical regions.
In contrast to the dlPFC, there’s the ventral part of the PFC,
particularly the ventromedial PFC (vmPFC). This is the frontocortical
region that the visionary neuroanatomist Nauta made an honorary
member of the limbic system because of its interconnections with it.
Logically, the vmPFC is all about the impact of emotion on decision

57

making. And many of our best and worst behaviors involve interactions
of the vmPFC with the limbic system and dlPFC.*
The functions of the cognitive dlPFC are the essence of doing the
harder thing.56 It’s the most active frontocortical region when someone
forgoes an immediate reward for a bigger one later. Consider a classic
moral quandary—is it okay to kill one innocent person to save five?
When people ponder the question, greater dlPFC activation predicts a
greater likelihood of answering yes (but as we’ll see in chapter 13, it also
depends on how you ask the question).
Monkeys with dlPFC lesions can’t switch strategies in a task when
the rewards given for each strategy shift—they perseverate with the
strategy offering the most immediate reward.57 Similarly, humans with
dlPFC damage are impaired in planning or gratification postponement,
perseverate on strategies that offer immediate reward, and show poor
executive control over their behavior.* Remarkably, the technique of
transcranial magnetic stimulation can temporarily silence part of
someone’s cortex, as was done in a fascinating study by Ernst Fehr of the
University of Zurich.58 When the dlPFC was silenced, subjects playing
an economic game impulsively accepted lousy offers that they’d
normally reject in the hopes of getting better offers in the future.
Crucially, this was about sociality—silencing the dlPFC had no effect if
subjects thought the other player was a computer. Moreover, controls and
subjects with silenced dlPFCs rated lousy offers as being equally unfair;
thus, as concluded by the authors, “subjects [with the silenced dlPFC]
behave as if they can no longer implement their fairness goals.”
What are the functions of the emotional vmPFC?59 What you’d
expect, given its inputs from limbic structures. It activates if the person
you’re rooting for wins a game, or if you listen to pleasant versus
dissonant music (particularly if the music provokes a shiver-down-thespine moment).
What are the effects of vmPFC damage?60 Lots of things remain
normal—intelligence, working memory, making estimates. Individuals
can “do the harder thing” with purely cognitive frontal tasks (e.g.,
puzzles where you have to give up a step of progress in order to gain two
more).
The differences appear when it comes to making social/emotional
decisions—vmPFC patients just can’t decide.* They understand the
options and can sagely advise someone else in similar circumstances.
58

But the closer to home and the more emotional the scenario, the more
they have problems.
Damasio has produced an influential theory about emotion-laden
decision making, rooted in the philosophies of Hume and William James;
this will soon be discussed.61 Briefly, the frontal cortex runs “as if”
experiments of gut feelings—“How would I feel if this outcome
occurred?”—and makes choices with the answer in mind. Damaging the
vmPFC, thus removing limbic input to the PFC, eliminates gut feelings,
making decisions harder.
Moreover, eventual decisions are highly utilitarian. vmPFC patients
are atypically willing to sacrifice one person, including a family member,
to save five strangers.62 They’re more interested in outcomes than in
their underlying emotional motives, punishing someone who accidentally
kills but not one who tried to kill but failed, because, after all, no one
died in the second case.
It’s Mr. Spock, running on only the dlPFC. Now for a crucial point.
People who dichotomize between thought and emotion often prefer the
former, viewing emotion as suspect. It gums up decision making by
getting sentimental, sings too loudly, dresses flamboyantly, has
unsettling amounts of armpit hair. In this view, get rid of the vmPFC, and
we’d be more rational and function better.
But that’s not the case, as emphasized eloquently by Damasio. People
with vmPFC damage not only have trouble making decisions but also
make bad ones.63 They show poor judgment in choosing friends and
partners and don’t shift behavior based on negative feedback. For
example, consider a gambling task where reward rates for various
strategies change without subjects knowing it, and subjects can shift their
play strategy. Control subjects shift optimally, even if they can’t
verbalize how reward rates have changed. Those with vmPFC damage
don’t, even when they can verbalize. Without a vmPFC, you may know
the meaning of negative feedback, but you don’t know the feeling of it in
your gut and thus don’t shift behavior.
As we saw, without the dlPFC, the metaphorical superego is gone,
resulting in individuals who are now hyperaggressive, hypersexual ids.
But without a vmPFC, behavior is inappropriate in a detached way. This
is the person who, encountering someone after a long time, says, “Hello,
I see you’ve put on some weight.” And when castigated later by their
mortified spouse, they will say with calm puzzlement, “But it’s true.”
59

The vmPFC is not the vestigial appendix of the frontal cortex, where
emotion is something akin to appendicitis, inflaming a sensible brain.
Instead it’s essential.64 It wouldn’t be if we had evolved into Vulcans.
But as long as the world is filled with humans, evolution would never
have made us that way.
Activation of the dlPFC and vmPFC can be inversely correlated. In
an inspired study where a keyboard was provided to jazz pianists inside a
brain scanner, the vmPFC became more active and the dlPFC less so
when subjects improvised. In another study, subjects judged hypothetical
harmful acts. Pondering perpetrators’ responsibility activated the dlPFC;
deciding the amount of punishment activated the vmPFC.* When
subjects did a gambling task where reward probabilities for various
strategies shifted and they could always change strategies, decision
making reflected two factors: (a) the outcome of their most recent action
(the better that had turned out, the more vmPFC activation), and (b)
reward rates from all the previous rounds, something requiring a long
retrospective view (the better the long-term rewards, the more dlPFC
activation). Relative activation between the two regions predicted the
decision subjects made.65
A simplistic view is that the vmPFC and dlPFC perpetually battle for
domination by emotion versus cognition. But while emotion and
cognition can be somewhat separable, they’re rarely in opposition.
Instead they are intertwined in a collaborative relationship needed for
normal function, and as tasks with both emotive and cognitive
components become more difficult (making an increasingly complex
economic decision in a setting that is increasingly unfair), activity in the
two structures becomes more synchronized.

The Frontal Cortex and Its Relationship with the
Limbic System
We now have a sense of what different subdivisions of the PFC do
and how cognition and emotion interact neurobiologically. This leads us
to consider how the frontal cortex and limbic system interact.
In landmark studies Joshua Greene of Harvard and Princeton’s
Cohen showed how the “emotional” and “cognitive” parts of the brain
can somewhat dissociate.66 They used philosophy’s famous “runaway

60

trolley” problem, where a trolley is bearing down on five people and you
must decide if it’s okay to kill one person to save the five. Framing of the
problem is key. In one version you pull a lever, diverting the trolley onto
a side track. This saves the five, but the trolley kills someone who
happened to be on this other track; 70 to 90 percent of people say they
would do this. In the second scenario you push the person in front of the
trolley with your own hands. This stops the trolley, but the person is
killed; 70 to 90 percent say no way. The same numerical trade-off, but
utterly different decisions.
Greene and Cohen gave subjects the two versions while
neuroimaging them. Contemplating intentionally killing someone with
your own hands activates the decider dlPFC, along with emotion-related
regions that respond to aversive stimuli (including a cortical region
activated by emotionally laden words), the amygdala, and the vmPFC.
The more amygdaloid activation and the more negative emotions the
participant reported in deciding, the less likely they were to push.
And when people contemplate detachedly pulling a lever that
inadvertently kills someone? The dlPFC alone activates. As purely
cerebral a decision as choosing which wrench to use to fix a widget. A
great study.*
Other studies have examined interactions between “cognitive” and
“emotional” parts of the brain. A few examples:
Chapter 3 discusses some unsettling research—stick your
average person in a brain scanner, and show him a picture of
someone of another race for only a tenth of a second. This is too
fast for him to be aware of what he saw. But thanks to that
anatomical shortcut, the amygdala knows . . . and activates. In
contrast, show the picture for a longer time. Again the amygdala
activates, but then the cognitive dlPFC does as well, inhibiting
the amygdala—the effort to control what is for most people an
unpalatable initial response.
Chapter 6 discusses experiments where a subject plays a game
with two other people and is manipulated into feeling that she is
being left out. This activates her amygdala, periaqueductal gray
(that ancient brain region that helps process physical pain),
anterior cingulate, and insula, an anatomical picture of anger,
61

anxiety, pain, disgust, sadness. Soon afterward her PFC activates
as rationalizations kick in—“This is just a stupid game; I have
friends; my dog loves me.” And the amygdala et al. quiet down.
And what if you do the same to someone whose frontal cortex is
not fully functional? The amygdala is increasingly activated; the
person feels increasingly distressed. What neurological disease is
involved? None. This is a typical teenager.
Finally, the PFC mediates fear extinction. Yesterday the rat
learned, “That tone is followed by a shock,” so the sound of the
tone began to trigger freezing. Today there are no shocks, and the
rat has acquired another truth that takes precedence—“but not
today.” The first truth is still there; as proof, start coupling tone
with shock again, and freezing to tone is “reinstated” faster than
the association was initially learned.
Where is “but not today” consolidated? In the PFC, after receiving
information from the hippocampus.67 The medial PFC activates
inhibitory circuits in the BLA, and the rat stops freezing to the tone. In a
similar vein but reflecting cognition specific to humans, condition people
to associate a blue square on a screen with a shock, and the amygdala
will activate when seeing that square—but less so in subjects who
reappraise the situation, activating the medial PFC by thinking of, say, a
beautiful blue sky.
This segues into the subject of regulating emotion through thought.68
It’s hard to regulate thought (try not thinking about a hippo) but even
tougher with emotion; research by my Stanford colleague and close
friend James Gross has explored this. First off, “thinking differently”
about something emotional differs from simply suppressing the
expression of the emotions. For example, show someone graphic footage
of, say, an amputation. Subjects cringe, activate the amygdala and
sympathetic nervous system. Now one group is instructed to hide their
emotions (“I’m going to show you another film clip, and I want you to
hide your emotional reactions”). How to do so most effectively? Gross
distinguishes between “antecedent” and “response”-focused strategies.
Response-focused is dragging the emotional horse back to the barn after
it’s fled—you’re watching the next horrific footage, feeling queasy, and

62

you think, “Okay, sit still, breathe slowly.” Typically this causes even
greater activation of the amygdala and sympathetic nervous system.
Antecedent strategies generally work better, as they keep the barn
door closed from the start. These are about thinking/feeling about
something else (e.g., that great vacation), or thinking/feeling differently
about what you’re seeing (reappraisals such as “That isn’t real; those are
just actors”). And when done right, the PFC, particularly the dlPFC,
activates, the amygdala and sympathetic nervous system are damped,
and subjective distress decreases.*
Antecedent reappraisal is why placebos work.69 Thinking, “My
finger is about to be pricked by a pin,” activates the amygdala along with
a circuit of pain-responsive brain regions, and the pin hurts. Be told
beforehand that the hand cream being slathered on your finger is a
powerful analgesic cream, and you think, “My finger is about to be
pricked by a pin, but this cream will block the pain.” The PFC activates,
blunting activity in the amygdala and pain circuitry, as well as pain
perception.
Thought processes like these, writ large, are the core of a particularly
effective type of psychotherapy—cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)—
for the treatment of disorders of emotion regulation.70 Consider someone
with a social anxiety disorder caused by a horrible early experience with
trauma. To simplify, CBT is about providing the tools to reappraise
circumstances that evoke the anxiety—remember that in this social
situation those awful feelings you’re having are about what happened
back then, not what is happening now.*
Controlling emotional responses with thought like this is very top
down; the frontal cortex calms the overwrought amygdala. But the
PFC/limbic relationship can be bottom up as well, when a decision
involves a gut feeling. This is the backbone of Damasio’s somatic marker
hypothesis. Choosing among options can involve a cerebral cost-benefit
analysis. But it also involves “somatic markers,” internal simulations of
what each outcome would feel like, run in the limbic system and
reported to the vmPFC. The process is not a thought experiment; it’s an
emotion experiment, in effect an emotional memory of a possible future.
A mild somatic marker activates only the limbic system.71 “Should I
do behavior A? Maybe not—the possibility of outcome B feels scary.” A
more vivid somatic marker activates the sympathetic nervous system as
well. “Should I do behavior A? Definitely not—I can feel my skin
63

getting clammy at the possibility of outcome B.” Experimentally
boosting the strength of that sympathetic signal strengthens the aversion.
This is a picture of normal collaboration between the limbic system
and frontal cortex.72 Naturally, things are not always balanced. Anger,
for example, makes people less analytical and more reflexive in
decisions about punishment. Stressed people often make hideously bad
decisions, marinated in emotion; chapter 4 examines what stress does to
the amygdala and frontal cortex.*
The effects of stress on the frontal cortex are dissected by the late
Harvard psychologist Daniel Wegner in an aptly titled paper, “How to
Think, Say or Do Precisely the Worst Thing on Any Occasion.”73 He
considers what Edgar Allan Poe called the “imp of the perverse”:
We see a rut coming up in the road ahead and proceed to steer our
bike right into it. We make a mental note not to mention a sore
point in conversation and then cringe in horror as we blurt out
exactly that thing. We carefully cradle the glass of red wine as we
cross the room, all the while thinking “don’t spill,” and then
juggle it onto the carpet under the gaze of our host.
Wegner demonstrated a two-step process of frontocortical regulation:
(A) one stream identifies X as being very important; (B) the other stream
tracks whether the conclusion is “Do X” or “Never do X.” And during
stress, distraction, or heavy cognitive load, the two streams can
dissociate; the A stream exerts its presence without the B stream saying
which fork in the road to take. The chance that you will do precisely the
wrong thing rises not despite your best efforts but because of a stressboggled version of them.

—
This concludes our overview of the frontal cortex; the mantra is that it
makes you do the harder thing when that is the right thing. Five final
points:
“Doing the harder thing” effectively is not an argument
for valuing either emotion or cognition more than the
other. For example, as discussed in chapter 11, we are

64

our most prosocial concerning in-group morality when
our rapid, implicit emotions and intuitions dominate, but
are most prosocial concerning out-group morality when
cognition holds sway.
It’s easy to conclude that the PFC is about preventing
imprudent behaviors (“Don’t do it; you’ll regret it”). But
that isn’t always the case. For example, in chapter 17
we’ll consider the surprising amount of frontocortical
effort it can take to pull a trigger.
Like everything about the brain, the structure and
function of the frontal cortex vary enormously among
individuals; for example, resting metabolic rate in the
PFC varies approximately thirtyfold among people.*
What causes such individual differences? See the rest of
this book.74
“Doing the harder thing when it’s the right thing to do.”
“Right” in this case is used in a neurobiological and
instrumental sense, rather than a moral one.
Consider lying. Obviously, the frontal cortex aids the
hard job of resisting the temptation. But it is also a
major frontocortical task, particularly a dlPFC task, to
lie competently, to control the emotional content of a
signal, to generate an abstract distance between message
and meaning. Interestingly, pathological liars have
atypically large amounts of white matter in the PFC,
indicating more complex wiring.75
But again, the “right thing,” in the setting of the frontal cortically
assisted lying, is amoral. An actor lies to an audience about having the
feelings of a morose Danish prince. A situationally ethical child lies,
telling Grandma how excited she is about her present, concealing the fact
that she already has that toy. A leader tells bold-faced lies, starting a war.
A financier with Ponzi in his blood defrauds investors. A peasant woman
lies to a uniformed thug, telling him she does not know the whereabouts
of the refugees she knows are hiding in her attic. As with much about the
frontal cortex, it’s context, context, context.

—
65

Where does the frontal cortex get the metaphorical motivation to do the
harder thing? For this we now look at our final branch, the dopaminergic
“reward” system in the brain.

66

THE MESOLIMBIC/MESOCORTICAL
DOPAMINE SYSTEM

R

eward, pleasure, and happiness are complex, and the motivated
pursuit of them occurs in at least a rudimentary form in many
species. The neurotransmitter dopamine is central to understanding this.

Nuclei, Inputs, and Outputs
Dopamine is synthesized in multiple brain regions. One such region
helps initiate movement; damage there produces Parkinson’s disease.
Another regulates the release of a pituitary hormone. But the
dopaminergic system that concerns us arises from an ancient,
evolutionarily conserved region near the brain stem called the ventral
tegmental area (henceforth the “tegmentum”).
A key target of these dopaminergic neurons is the last multisyllabic
brain region to be introduced in this chapter, the nucleus accumbens
(henceforth the “accumbens”). There’s debate as to whether the
accumbens should count as part of the limbic system, but at the least it’s
highly limbic-ish.
Here’s our first pass at the organization of this circuitry:76
a. The tegmentum sends projections to the accumbens and
(other) limbic areas such as the amygdala and
hippocampus. This is collectively called the
“mesolimbic dopamine pathway.”
b. The tegmentum also projects to the PFC (but,
significantly, not other cortical areas). This is called the
“mesocortical dopamine pathway.” I’ll be lumping the
mesolimbic plus mesocortical pathways together as the
“dopaminergic system,” ignoring their not always being
activated simultaneously.*

67

c. The accumbens projects to regions associated with
movement.
d. Naturally, most areas getting projections from the
tegmentum and/or accumbens project back to them.
Most interesting will be the projections from the
amygdala and PFC.

Reward
As a first pass, the dopaminergic system is about reward—various
pleasurable stimuli activate tegmental neurons, triggering their release of
dopamine.77 Some supporting evidence: (a) drugs like cocaine, heroin,
and alcohol release dopamine in the accumbens; (b) if tegmental release
of dopamine is blocked, previously rewarding stimuli become aversive;
(c) chronic stress or pain depletes dopamine and decreases the sensitivity
of dopamine neurons to stimulation, producing the defining symptom of
depression—“anhedonia,” the inability to feel pleasure.
Some rewards, such as sex, release dopamine in every species
examined.78 For humans, just thinking about sex suffices.*79 Food
evokes dopamine release in hungry individuals of all species, with an
added twist in humans. Show a picture of a milkshake to someone after
they’ve consumed one, and there’s rarely dopaminergic activation—
there’s satiation. But with subjects who have been dieting, there’s further
activation. If you’re working to restrict your food intake, a milkshake
just makes you want another one.
The mesolimbic dopamine system also responds to pleasurable
aesthetics.80 In one study people listened to new music; the more
accumbens activation, the more likely subjects were to buy the music
afterward. And then there is dopaminergic activation for artificial
cultural inventions—for example, when typical males look at pictures of
sports cars.
Patterns of dopamine release are most interesting when concerning
social interactions.81 Some findings are downright heartwarming. In one
study a subject would play an economic game with someone, where a
player is rewarded under two circumstances: (a) if both players
cooperate, each receives a moderate reward, and (b) stabbing the other
person in the back gets the subject a big reward, while the other person

68

gets nothing. While both outcomes increased dopaminergic activity, the
bigger increase occurred after cooperation.*
Other research examined the economic behavior of punishing jerks.82
In one study subjects played a game where player B could screw over
player A for a profit. Depending on the round, player A could either (a)
do nothing, (b) punish player B by having some of player B’s money
taken (at no cost to player B), or (c) pay one unit of money to have two
units taken from player B. Punishment activated the dopamine system,
especially when subjects had to pay to punish; the greater the dopamine
increase during no-cost punishment, the more willing someone was to
pay to punish. Punishing norm violations is satisfying.
Another great study, carried out by Elizabeth Phelps of New York
University, concerns “overbidding” in auctions, where people bid more
money than anticipated.83 This is interpreted as reflecting the additional
reward of besting someone in the competitive aspect of bidding. Thus,
“winning” an auction is intrinsically socially competitive, unlike
“winning” a lottery. Winning a lottery and winning a bid both activated
dopaminergic signaling in subjects; losing a lottery had no effect, while
losing a bidding war inhibited dopamine release. Not winning the lottery
is bad luck; not winning an auction is social subordination.
This raises the specter of envy. In one neuroimaging study subjects
read about a hypothetical person’s academic record, popularity,
attractiveness, and wealth.84 Descriptions that evoked self-reported envy
activated cortical regions involved in pain perception. Then the
hypothetical individual was described as experiencing a misfortune (e.g.,
they were demoted). More activation of pain pathways at the news of the
person’s good fortune predicted more dopaminergic activation after
learning of their misfortune. Thus there’s dopaminergic activation during
schadenfreude—gloating over an envied person’s fall from grace.
The dopamine system gives insights into jealousy, resentment, and
invidiousness, leading to another depressing finding.85 A monkey has
learned that when he presses a lever ten times, he gets a raisin as a
reward. That’s just happened, and as a result, ten units of dopamine are
released in the accumbens. Now—surprise!—the monkey presses the
lever ten times and gets two raisins. Whoa: twenty units of dopamine are
released. And as the monkey continues to get paychecks of two raisins,
the size of the dopamine response returns to ten units. Now reward the
monkey with only a single raisin, and dopamine levels decline.
69

Why? This is our world of habituation, where nothing is ever as good
as that first time.
Unfortunately, things have to work this way because of our range of
rewards.86 After all, reward coding must accommodate the rewarding
properties of both solving a math problem and having an orgasm.
Dopaminergic responses to reward, rather than being absolute, are
relative to the reward value of alternative outcomes. In order to
accommodate the pleasures of both mathematics and orgasms, the
system must constantly rescale to accommodate the range of intensity
offered by particular stimuli. The response to any reward must habituate
with repetition, so that the system can respond over its full range to the
next new thing.
This was shown in a beautiful study by Wolfram Schultz of
Cambridge University.87 Depending on the circumstance, monkeys were
trained to expect either two or twenty units of reward. If they
unexpectedly got either four or forty units, respectively, there’d be an
identical burst of dopamine release; giving one or ten units produced an
identical decrease. It was the relative, not absolute, size of the surprise
that mattered over a tenfold range of reward.
These studies show that the dopamine system is bidirectional.88 It
responds with scale-free increases for unexpected good news and
decreases for bad. Schultz demonstrated that following a reward, the
dopamine system codes for discrepancy from expectation—get what you
expected, and there’s a steady-state dribble of dopamine. Get more
reward and/or get it sooner than expected, and there’s a big burst; less
and/or later, a decrease. Some tegmental neurons respond to positive
discrepancy from expectation, others to negative; appropriately, the latter
are local neurons that release the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA.
Those same neurons participate in habituation, where the reward that
once elicited a big dopamine response becomes less exciting.*
Logically, these different types of coding neurons in the tegmentum
(as well as the accumbens) get projections from the frontal cortex—that’s
where all the expectancy/discrepancy calculations take place—“Okay, I
thought I was going to get 5.0 but got 4.9. How big of a bummer is
that?”
Additional cortical regions weigh in. In one study subjects were
shown an item to purchase, with the degree of accumbens activation
predicting how much a person would pay.89 Then they were told the
70

price; if it was less than what they were willing to spend, there was
activation of the emotional vmPFC; more expensive, and there’d be
activation of that disgust-related insular cortex. Combine all the
neuroimaging data, and you could predict whether the person would buy
the item.
Thus, in typical mammals the dopamine system codes in a scale-free
manner over a wide range of experience for both good and bad surprises
and is constantly habituating to yesterday’s news. But humans have
something in addition, namely that we invent pleasures far more intense
than anything offered by the natural world.
Once, during a concert of cathedral organ music, as I sat getting
gooseflesh amid that tsunami of sound, I was struck with a thought: for a
medieval peasant, this must have been the loudest human-made sound
they ever experienced, awe-inspiring in now-unimaginable ways. No
wonder they signed up for the religion being proffered. And now we are
constantly pummeled with sounds that dwarf quaint organs. Once,
hunter-gatherers might chance upon honey from a beehive and thus
briefly satisfy a hardwired food craving. And now we have hundreds of
carefully designed commercial foods that supply a burst of sensation
unmatched by some lowly natural food. Once, we had lives that, amid
considerable privation, also offered numerous subtle, hard-won
pleasures. And now we have drugs that cause spasms of pleasure and
dopamine release a thousandfold higher than anything stimulated in our
old drug-free world.
An emptiness comes from this combination of over-the-top
nonnatural sources of reward and the inevitability of habituation; this is
because unnaturally strong explosions of synthetic experience and
sensation and pleasure evoke unnaturally strong degrees of habituation.90
This has two consequences. First, soon we barely notice the fleeting
whispers of pleasure caused by leaves in autumn, or by the lingering
glance of the right person, or by the promise of reward following a
difficult, worthy task. And the other consequence is that we eventually
habituate to even those artificial deluges of intensity. If we were
designed by engineers, as we consumed more, we’d desire less. But our
frequent human tragedy is that the more we consume, the hungrier we
get. More and faster and stronger. What was an unexpected pleasure
yesterday is what we feel entitled to today, and what won’t be enough
tomorrow.

71

The Anticipation of Reward
Thus, dopamine is about invidious, rapidly habituating reward. But
dopamine is more interesting than that. Back to our well-trained monkey
working for a reward. A light comes on in his room, signaling the start of
a reward trial. He goes over to the lever, presses ten times, and gets the
raisin reward; this has happened often enough that there’s only a small
increase in dopamine with each raisin.
However, importantly, lots of dopamine is released when the light
first comes on, signaling the start of the reward trial, before the monkey
starts lever pressing.

Visit bit.ly/2ovJngg for a larger version of this graph.

In other words, once reward contingencies are learned, dopamine is
less about reward than about its anticipation. Similarly, work by my
Stanford colleague Brian Knutson has shown dopamine pathway
activation in people in anticipation of a monetary reward.91 Dopamine is
about mastery and expectation and confidence. It’s “I know how things
work; this is going to be great.” In other words, the pleasure is in the
anticipation of reward, and the reward itself is nearly an afterthought
(unless, of course, the reward fails to arrive, in which case it’s the most
important thing in the world). If you know your appetite will be sated,
pleasure is more about the appetite than about the sating.* This is hugely
important.
Anticipation requires learning.92 Learn Warren G. Harding’s middle
name, and synapses in the hippocampus become more excitable. Learn
72

that when the light comes on it’s reward time, and it’s hippocampal
amygdaloid and frontal cortical neurons projecting to dopamine neurons
that become more excitable.
This explains context-dependent craving in addiction.93 Suppose an
alcoholic has been clean and sober for years. Return him to where the
alcohol consumption used to occur (e.g., that rundown street corner, that
fancy men’s club), and those potentiated synapses, those cues that were
learned to be associated with alcohol, come roaring back into action,
dopamine surges with anticipation, and the craving inundates.
Can a reliable cue of an impending reward eventually become
rewarding itself? This has been shown by Huda Akil of the University of
Michigan. A light in the left side of a rat’s cage signals that lever
pressing will produce a reward from a food chute on the right side.
Remarkably, rats eventually will work for the chance to hang around on
the left side of the cage, just because it feels so nice to be there. The
signal has gained the dopaminergic power of what is being signaled.
Similarly, rats will work to be exposed to a cue that signals that some
kind of reward is likely, without knowing what or when. This is what
fetishes are, in both the anthropological and sexual sense.94
Schultz’s group has shown that the magnitude of an anticipatory
dopamine rise reflects two variables. First is the size of the anticipated
reward. A monkey has learned that a light means that ten lever presses
earns one unit of reward, while a tone means ten presses earns ten units.
And soon a tone provokes more anticipatory dopamine than does a light.
It’s “This is going to be great” versus “This is going to be great.”
The second variable is extraordinary. The rule is that the light comes
on, you press the lever, you get the reward. Now things change. Light
comes on, press the lever, get the reward . . . only 50 percent of the time.
Remarkably, once that new scenario is learned, far more dopamine is
released. Why? Because nothing fuels dopamine release like the
“maybe” of intermittent reinforcement.95
This additional dopamine is released at a distinctive time. The light
comes on in the 50 percent scenario, producing the usual anticipatory
dopamine rise before the lever pressing starts. Back in the predictable
days when lever pressing always earned a reward, once the pressing was
finished, dopamine levels remained low until the reward arrived,
followed by a little dopamine blip. But in this 50 percent scenario, once

73

the pressing is finished, dopamine levels start rising, driven by the
uncertainty of “maybe yes, maybe no.”

Visit bit.ly/2o3Zvcq for a larger version of this graph.

Modify things further; reward now occurs 25 or 75 percent of the
time. A shift from 50 to 25 percent and a shift from 50 to 75 percent are
exactly opposite, in terms of the likelihood of reward, and work from
Knutson’s group shows that the greater the probability of reward, the
more activation in the medial PFC.96 But switches from 50 to 25 percent
and from 50 to 75 percent both reduce the magnitude of uncertainty. And
the secondary rise of dopamine for a 25 or 75 percent likelihood of
reward is smaller than for 50 percent. Thus, anticipatory dopamine
release peaks with the greatest uncertainty as to whether a reward will
occur.* Interestingly, in circumstances of uncertainty, enhanced
anticipatory dopamine release is mostly in the mesocortical rather than
mesolimbic pathway, implying that uncertainty is a more cognitively
complex state than is anticipation of predictable reward.
None of this is news to the honorary psychologists running Las
Vegas. Logically, gambling shouldn’t evoke much anticipatory
dopamine, given the astronomical odds against winning. But the
behavioral engineering—the 24-7 activity and lack of time cues, the
cheap alcohol pickling frontocortical judgment, the manipulations to
make you feel like today is your lucky day—distorts and shifts the
perception of the odds into a range where dopamine pours out and, oh,
why not, let’s try again.

74

The interaction between “maybe” and the propensity for addictive
gambling is seen in a study of “near misses”—when two out of three
reels line up in a slot machine. In control subjects there was minimal
dopaminergic activation after misses of any sort; among pathological
gamblers, a near miss activated the dopamine system like crazy. Another
study concerned two betting situations with identical probabilities of
reward but different levels of information about reward contingencies.
The circumstance with less information (i.e., that was more about
ambiguity than risk) activated the amygdala and silenced dopaminergic
signaling; what is perceived to be well-calibrated risk is addictive, while
ambiguity is just agitating.97

Pursuit
So dopamine is more about anticipation of reward than about reward
itself. Time for one more piece of the picture. Consider that monkey
trained to respond to the light cue with lever pressing, and out comes the
reward; as we now know, once that relationship is established, most
dopamine release is anticipatory, occurring right after the cue.
What happens if the post–light cue release of dopamine doesn’t
occur?98 Crucially, the monkey doesn’t press the lever. Similarly, if you
destroy its accumbens, a rat makes impulsive choices, instead of holding
out for a delayed larger reward. Conversely, back to the monkey—if
instead of flashing the light cue you electrically stimulate the tegmentum
to release dopamine, the monkey presses the lever. Dopamine is not just
about reward anticipation; it fuels the goal-directed behavior needed to
gain that reward; dopamine “binds” the value of a reward to the resulting
work. It’s about the motivation arising from those dopaminergic
projections to the PFC that is needed to do the harder thing (i.e., to
work).
In other words, dopamine is not about the happiness of reward. It’s
about the happiness of pursuit of reward that has a decent chance of
occurring.*99
This is central to understanding the nature of motivation, as well as
its failures (e.g., during depression, where there is inhibition of dopamine
signaling thanks to stress, or in anxiety, where such inhibition is caused
by projections from the amygdala).100 It also tells us about the source of

75

the frontocortical power behind willpower. In a task where one chooses
between an immediate and a (larger) delayed reward, contemplating the
immediate reward activates limbic targets of dopamine (i.e., the
mesolimbic pathway), whereas contemplating the delayed reward
activates frontocortical targets (i.e., the mesocortical pathway). The
greater the activation of the latter, the more likely there’ll be gratification
postponement.
These studies involved scenarios of a short burst of work soon
followed by reward.101 What about when the work required is prolonged,
and reward is substantially delayed? In that scenario there is a secondary
rise of dopamine, a gradual increase that fuels the sustained work; the
extent of the dopamine ramp-up is a function of the length of the delay
and the anticipated size of the reward:

Visit bit.ly/2ngTC7V for a larger version of this graph.

This reveals how dopamine fuels delayed gratification. If waiting X
amount of time for a reward has value Z; waiting 2X should logically
have value ½Z; instead we “temporally discount”—the value is smaller,
e.g., ¼Z. We don’t like waiting.
Dopamine and the frontal cortex are in the thick of this phenomenon.
Discounting curves—a value of ¼Z instead of ½Z—are coded in the
accumbens, while dlPFC and vmPFC neurons code for time delay.102
This generates some complex interactions. For example, activate the
vmPFC or inactivate the dlPFC, and short-term reward becomes more
alluring. And a cool neuroimaging study of Knutson’s gives insight into
impatient people with steep temporal discounting curves; their

76

accumbens, in effect, underestimates the magnitude of the delayed
reward, and their dlPFC overestimates the length of the delay.103
Collectively these studies show that our dopaminergic system, frontal
cortex, amygdala, insula, and other members of the chorus code for
differing aspects of reward magnitude, delay, and probability with
varying degrees of accuracy, all influencing whether we manage to do
the harder, more correct thing.104
Individual differences among people in the capacity for gratification
postponement arise from variation in the volume of these individual
neural voices.105 For example, there are abnormalities in dopamine
response profiles during temporal discounting tasks in people with the
maladaptive impulsiveness of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Similarly, addictive drugs bias the dopamine system toward
impulsiveness.
Phew. One more complication: These studies of temporal discounting
typically involve delays on the order of seconds. Though the dopamine
system is similar across numerous species, humans do something utterly
novel: we delay gratification for insanely long times. No warthog
restricts calories to look good in a bathing suit next summer. No gerbil
works hard at school to get good SAT scores to get into a good college to
get into a good grad school to get a good job to get into a good nursing
home. We do something even beyond this unprecedented gratification
delay: we use the dopaminergic power of the happiness of pursuit to
motivate us to work for rewards that come after we are dead—depending
on your culture, this can be knowing that your nation is closer to winning
a war because you’ve sacrificed yourself in battle, that your kids will
inherit money because of your financial sacrifices, or that you will spend
eternity in paradise. It is extraordinary neural circuitry that bucks
temporal discounting enough to allow (some of) us to care about the
temperature of the planet that our great-grandchildren will inherit.
Basically, it’s unknown how we humans do this. We may merely be a
type of animal, mammal, primate, and ape, but we’re a profoundly
unique one.

A Final Small Topic: Serotonin

77

This lengthy section has concerned dopamine, but an additional
neurotransmitter, serotonin, plays a clear role in some behaviors that
concern us.
Starting with a 1979 study, low levels of serotonin in the brain were
shown to be associated with elevated levels of human aggression, with
end points ranging from psychological measures of hostility to overt
violence.106 A similar serotonin/aggression relationship was observed in
other mammals and, remarkably, even crickets, mollusks, and
crustaceans.
As work continued, an important qualifier emerged. Low serotonin
didn’t predict premeditated, instrumental violence. It predicted impulsive
aggression, as well as cognitive impulsivity (e.g., steep temporal
discounting or trouble inhibiting a habitual response). Other studies
linked low serotonin to impulsive suicide (independent of severity of the
associated psychiatric illness).107
Moreover, in both animals and humans pharmacologically decreasing
serotonin signaling increases behavioral and cognitive impulsivity (e.g.,
impulsively torpedoing a stable, cooperative relationship with a player in
an economic game).108 Importantly, while increasing serotonin signaling
did not lessen impulsiveness in normal subjects, it did in subjects prone
toward impulsivity, such as adolescents with conduct disorder.
How does serotonin do this? Nearly all serotonin is synthesized in
one brain region,* which projects to the usual suspects—the tegmentum,
accumbens, PFC, and amygdala, where serotonin enhances dopamine’s
effects on goal-directed behavior.109
This is as dependable a finding as you get in this business.110 Until
we get to chapter 8 and look at genes related to serotonin, at which point
everything becomes a completely contradictory mess. Just as a hint of
what’s to come, one gene variant has even been referred to, straight
faced, by some scientists as the “warrior gene,” and its presence has been
used successfully in some courtrooms to lessen sentences for impulsive
murders.

78

CONCLUSIONS

T

his completes our introduction to the nervous system and its role in
pro- and antisocial behaviors. It was organized around three
themes: the hub of fear, aggression, and arousal centered in the
amygdala; the hub of reward, anticipation, and motivation of the
dopaminergic system; and the hub of frontal cortical regulation and
restraint of behavior. Additional brain regions and neurotransmitters will
be introduced in subsequent chapters. Amid this mountain of
information, be assured that the key brain regions, circuits, and
neurotransmitters will become familiar as the book progresses.
Hang on. So what does this all mean? It’s useful to start with three
things that this information doesn’t mean:
1. First, there’s the lure of needing neurobiology to
confirm the obvious. Someone claims that, for example,
their crappy, violent neighborhood leaves them so
anxious that they can’t function effectively. Toss them in
a brain scanner and flash pictures of various
neighborhoods; when their own appears, the amygdala
explodes into activity. “Ah,” it is tempting to conclude,
“we’ve now proven that the person really does feel
frightened.”
It shouldn’t require neuroscience to validate
someone’s internal state. An example of this
fallacy was reports of atrophy of the hippocampus in
combat vets suffering from PTSD; this was in
accord with basic research (including from my lab)
showing that stress can damage the hippocampus.
The hippocampal atrophy in PTSD got a lot of play
in Washington, helping to convince skeptics that
PTSD is an organic disorder rather than neurotic
malingering. It struck me that if it took brain scans
to convince legislators that there’s something

79

tragically, organically damaged in combat vets with
PTSD, then these legislators have some neurological
problems of their own. Yet it required precisely this
to “prove” to many that PTSD was an organic brain
disorder.
The notion that “if a neuroscientist can
demonstrate it, we know that the person’s
problem is for real” has a corollary—the fancier
the neurobiology utilized, the more reliable the
verification. That’s simply not true; for example, a
good neuropsychologist can discern more of what’s
happening to someone with subtle but pervasive
memory problems than can a gazillion-dollar brain
scanner.
It shouldn’t take neuroscience to “prove”
what we think and feel.
2. There’s been a proliferation of “neuro-” fields. Some,
like neuroendocrinology and neuroimmunology, are
stodgy old institutions by now. Others are relatively new
—neuroeconomics, neuromarketing, neuroethics, and, I
kid you not, neuroliterature and neuroexistentialism. In
other words, a hegemonic neuroscientist might conclude
that their field explains everything. And with that comes
the danger, raised by the New Yorker writer Adam
Gopnik under the sardonic banner of “neuroskepticism,”
that explaining everything leads to forgiving
everything.111 This premise is at the heart of debates in
the new field of “neurolaw.” In chapter 16 I will argue
that it is wrong to think that understanding must lead to
forgiveness—mainly because I think that a term like
“forgiveness,” and others related to criminal justice
(e.g., “evil,” “soul,” “volition,” and “blame”), are
incompatible with science and should be discarded.
3. Finally, there is the danger of thinking that neuroscience
supports a tacit sort of dualism. A guy does something
impulsive and awful, and neuroimaging reveals that,
unexpectedly, he’s missing all his PFC neurons. There’s
a dualist temptation now to view his behavior as more

80

“biological” or “organic” in some nebulous manner than
if he had committed the same act with a normal PFC.
However, the guy’s awful, impulsive act is equally
“biological” with or without a PFC. The sole difference
is that the workings of the PFC-less brain are easier to
understand with our primitive research tools.

So What Does All of This Tell Us?
Sometimes these studies tell us what different brain regions do. They
are getting fancier, telling us about circuits, thanks to the growing time
resolution of neuroimaging, transitioning from “This stimulus activates
brain regions A, B, C” to “This stimulus activates both A and B, and
then C, and C activates only if B does”. And identifying what specific
regions/circuits do gets harder as studies become subtler. Consider, for
example, the fusiform face area. As discussed in the next chapter, it is a
cortical region that responds to faces in humans and other primates. We
primates sure are social creatures.
But work by Isabel Gauthier of Vanderbilt University demonstrates
something more complicated. Show pictures of different cars, and the
fusiform activates—in automobile aficionados.112 Show pictures of
birds, and ditto among bird-watchers. The fusiform isn’t about faces; it’s
about recognizing examples of things from categories that are
emotionally salient to each individual.
Thus, studying behavior is useful for understanding the nature of the
brain—ah, isn’t it interesting that behavior A arises from the coupling of
brain regions X and Y. And sometimes studying the brain is useful for
understanding the nature of behavior—ah, isn’t it interesting that brain
region A is central to both behavior X and behavior Y. For example, to
me the most interesting thing about the amygdala is its dual involvement
in both aggression and fear; you can’t understand the former without
recognizing the relevance of the latter.

—
A final point related to the core of this book: While this neurobiology is
mighty impressive, the brain is not where a behavior “begins.” It’s
merely the final common pathway by which all the factors in the
chapters to come converge and create behavior.
81

Three

Seconds to Minutes
Before

N

othing comes from nothing. No brain is an island.
Thanks to messages bouncing around your brain, a command
has been sent to your muscles to pull that trigger or touch that arm. Odds
are that a short time earlier, something outside your brain prompted this
to happen, raising this chapter’s key questions: (a) What outside
stimulus, acting through what sensory channel and targeting which parts
of the brain, prompted this? (b) Were you aware of that environmental
stimulus? (c) What stimuli had your brain made you particularly
sensitive to? And, of course, (d) what does this tell us about our best and
worst behaviors?
Varied sensory information can prompt the brain into action. This can
be appreciated by considering this variety in other species. Often we’re
clueless about this because animals can sense things in ranges that we
can’t, or with sensory modalities we didn’t know exist. Thus, you must
think like the animal to learn what is happening. We’ll begin by seeing
how this pertains to the field of ethology, the science of interviewing an
animal in its own language.

82

UNIVERSAL RULES VERSUS KNOBBY
KNEES

E

thology formed in Europe in the early twentieth century in response
to an American brand of psychology, “behaviorism.” Behaviorism
descended from the introduction’s John Watson; the field’s famed
champion was B. F. Skinner. Behaviorists cared about universalities of
behavior across species. They worshipped a doozy of a seeming
universal concerning stimulus and response: rewarding an organism for a
behavior makes the organism more likely to repeat that behavior, while
failure to get rewarded or, worse, punishment for it, makes the organism
less likely to repeat it. Any behavior can be made more or less common
through “operant conditioning” (a term Skinner coined), the process of
controlling the rewards and punishments in the organism’s environment.
Thus, for behaviorists (or “Skinnerians,” a term Skinner labored to
make synonymous) virtually any behavior could be “shaped” into greater
or lesser frequency or even “extinguished” entirely.
If all behaving organisms obeyed these universal rules, you might as
well study a convenient species. Most behaviorist research was done on
rats or, Skinner’s favorite, pigeons. Behaviorists loved data, no-nonsense
hard numbers; these were generated by animals pressing or pecking
away at levers in “operant conditioning boxes” (aka “Skinner boxes”).
And anything discovered applied to any species. A pigeon is a rat is a
boy, Skinner preached. Soulless droid.*
Behaviorists were often right about behavior but wrong in really
important ways, as many interesting behaviors don’t follow behaviorist
rules.*1 Raise an infant rat or monkey with an abusive mother, and it
becomes more attached to her. And behaviorist rules have failed when
humans love the wrong abusive person.
Meanwhile, ethology was emerging in Europe. In contrast with
behaviorism’s obsession with uniformity and universality of behavior,
ethologists loved behavioral variety. They’d emphasize how every
species evolves unique behaviors in response to unique demands, and
how one had to open-mindedly observe animals in their natural habitats

83

to understand them (“Studying rat social behavior in a cage is like
studying dolphin swimming behavior in a bathtub” is an ethology
adage). They’d ask, What, objectively, is the behavior? What triggered
it? Did it have to be learned? How did it evolve? What is the behavior’s
adaptive value? Nineteenth-century parsons went into nature to collect
butterflies, revel in the variety of wing colors, and marvel at what God
had wrought. Twentieth-century ethologists went into nature to collect
behavior, revel in its variety, and marvel at what evolution had wrought.
In contrast to lab coat–clad behaviorists, ethologists tromped around
fields in hiking shoes and had fetching knobby knees.*

Sensory Triggers of Behavior in Some Other
Species
Using an ethological framework, we now consider sensory triggers of
behavior in animals.*2 First there’s the auditory channel. Animals
vocalize to intimidate, proclaim, and seduce. Birds sing, stags roar,
howler monkeys howl, orangutans give territorial calls audible for miles.
As a subtle example of information being communicated, when female
pandas ovulate, their vocalizations get higher, something preferred by
males. Remarkably, the same shift and preference happens in humans.
There are also visual triggers of behavior. Dogs crouch to invite play,
birds strut their plumage, monkeys display their canines menacingly with
“threat yawns.” And there are visual cues of cute baby–ness (big eyes,
shortened muzzle, round forehead) that drive mammals crazy, motivating
them to care for the kid. Stephen Jay Gould noted that the unsung
ethologist Walt Disney understood exactly what alterations transformed
rodents into Mickey and Minnie.*3
Then there are animals signaling in ways we can’t detect, requiring
creativity to interview an animal in its own language.4 Scads of
mammals scent mark with pheromones—odors that carry information
about sex, age, reproductive status, health, and genetic makeup. Some
snakes see in infrared, electric eels court with electric songs, bats
compete by jamming one another’s feeding echolocation signals, and
spiders identify intruders by vibration patterns on their webs. How about
this: tickle a rat and it chirps ultrasonically as its mesolimbic dopamine
system is activated.

84

Back to the rhinencephalon/limbic system war and the resolution
ethologists already knew: for a rodent, emotion is typically triggered by
olfaction. Across species the dominant sensory modality—vision,
sounds, whichever—has the most direct access to the limbic system.

Under the Radar: Subliminal and Unconscious
Cuing
It’s easy to see how the sight of a knife, the sound of a voice calling
your name, a touch on your hand can rapidly alter your brain.5 But
crucially, tons of subliminal sensory triggers occur—so fleeting or
minimal that we don’t consciously note them, or of a type that, even if
noted, seems irrelevant to a subsequent behavior.
Subliminal cuing and unconscious priming influence numerous
behaviors unrelated to this book. People think potato chips taste better
when hearing crunching sounds. We like a neutral stimulus more if, just
before seeing it, a picture of a smiling face is flashed for a twentieth of a
second. The more expensive a supposed (placebo) painkiller, the more
effective people report the placebo to be. Ask subjects their favorite
detergent; if they’ve just read a paragraph containing the word “ocean,”
they’re more likely to choose Tide—and then explain its cleaning
virtues.6
Thus, over the course of seconds sensory cues can shape your
behavior unconsciously.
A hugely unsettling sensory cue concerns race.7 Our brains are
incredibly attuned to skin color. Flash a face for less than a tenth of a
second (one hundred milliseconds), so short a time that people aren’t
even sure they’ve seen something. Have them guess the race of the
pictured face, and there’s a better-than-even chance of accuracy. We may
claim to judge someone by the content of their character rather than by
the color of their skin. But our brains sure as hell note the color, real fast.
By one hundred milliseconds, brain function already differs in two
depressing ways, depending on the race of the face (as shown with
neuroimaging). First, in a widely replicated finding, the amygdala
activates. Moreover, the more racist someone is in an implicit test of race
bias (stay tuned), the more activation there is.8

85

Similarly, repeatedly show subjects a picture of a face accompanied
by a shock; soon, seeing the face alone activates the amygdala.9 As
shown by Elizabeth Phelps of NYU, such “fear conditioning” occurs
faster for other-race than same-race faces. Amygdalae are prepared to
learn to associate something bad with Them. Moreover, people judge
neutral other-race faces as angrier than neutral same-race faces.
So if whites see a black face shown at a subliminal speed, the
amygdala activates.10 But if the face is shown long enough for conscious
processing, the anterior cingulate and the “cognitive” dlPFC then
activate and inhibit the amygdala. It’s the frontal cortex exerting
executive control over the deeper, darker amygdaloid response.
Second depressing finding: subliminal signaling of race also affects
the fusiform face area, the cortical region that specializes in facial
recognition.11 Damaging the fusiform, for example, selectively produces
“face blindness” (aka prosopagnosia), an inability to recognize faces.
Work by John Gabrieli at MIT demonstrates less fusiform activation for
other-race faces, with the effect strongest in the most implicitly racist
subjects. This isn’t about novelty—show a face with purple skin and the
fusiform responds as if it’s same-race. The fusiform isn’t fooled
—“That’s not an Other; it’s just a ‘normal’ Photoshopped face.”
In accord with that, white Americans remember white better than
black faces; moreover, mixed-race faces are remembered better if
described as being of a white rather than a black person. Remarkably, if
mixed-race subjects are told they’ve been assigned to one of the two
races for the study, they show less fusiform response to faces of the
arbitrarily designated “other” race.12
Our attunement to race is shown in another way, too.13 Show a video
of someone’s hand being poked with a needle, and subjects have an
“isomorphic sensorimotor” response—hands tense in empathy. Among
both whites and blacks, the response is blunted for other-race hands; the
more the implicit racism, the more blunting. Similarly, among subjects of
both races, there’s more activation of the (emotional) medial PFC when
considering misfortune befalling a member of their own race than of
another race.
This has major implications. In work by Joshua Correll at the
University of Colorado, subjects were rapidly shown pictures of people
holding either a gun or a cell phone and were told to shoot (only) gun
toters. This is painfully reminiscent of the 1999 killing of Amadou
86

Diallo. Diallo, a West African immigrant in New York, matched a
description of a rapist. Four white officers questioned him, and when the
unarmed Diallo started to pull out his wallet, they decided it was a gun
and fired forty-one shots. The underlying neurobiology concerns “eventrelated potentials” (ERPs), which are stimulus-induced changes in
electrical activity of the brain (as assessed by EEG—
electroencephalography). Threatening faces produce a distinctive change
(called the P200 component) in the ERP waveform in under two hundred
milliseconds. Among white subjects, viewing someone black evokes a
stronger P200 waveform than viewing someone white, regardless of
whether the person is armed. Then, a few milliseconds later, a second,
inhibitory waveform (the N200 component) appears, originating from
the frontal cortex—“Let’s think a sec about what we’re seeing before we
shoot.” Viewing a black individual evokes less of an N200 waveform
than does seeing someone white. The greater the P200/N200 ratio (i.e.,
the greater the ratio of I’m-feeling-threatened to Hold-on-a-sec), the
greater the likelihood of shooting an unarmed black individual. In
another study subjects had to identify fragmented pictures of objects.
Priming white subjects with subliminal views of black (but not white)
faces made them better at detecting pictures of weapons (but not cameras
or books).14
Finally, for the same criminal conviction, the more stereotypically
African a black individual’s facial features, the longer the sentence.15 In
contrast, juries view black (but not white) male defendants more
favorably if they’re wearing big, clunky glasses; some defense attorneys
even exploit this “nerd defense” by accessorizing their clients with fake
glasses, and prosecuting attorneys ask whether those dorky glasses are
real. In other words, when blind, impartial justice is supposedly being
administered, jurors are unconsciously biased by racial stereotypes of
someone’s face.
This is so depressing—are we hardwired to fear the face of someone
of another race, to process their face less as a face, to feel less empathy?
No. For starters, there’s tremendous individual variation—not everyone’s
amygdala activates in response to an other-race face, and those
exceptions are informative. Moreover, subtle manipulations rapidly
change the amygdaloid response to the face of an Other. This will be
covered in chapter 11.

87

Recall the shortcut to the amygdala discussed in the previous chapter,
when sensory information enters the brain. Most is funneled through that
sensory way station in the thalamus and then to appropriate cortical
region (e.g., the visual or auditory cortex) for the slow, arduous process
of decoding light pixels, sound waves, and so on into something
identifiable. And finally information about it (“It’s Mozart”) is passed to
the limbic system.
As we saw, there’s that shortcut from the thalamus directly to the
amygdala, such that while the first few layers of, say, the visual cortex
are futzing around with unpacking a complex image, the amygdala is
already thinking, “That’s a gun!” and reacting. And as we saw, there’s
the trade-off: information reaches the amygdala fast but is often
inaccurate.16 The amygdala thinks it knows what it’s seeing before the
frontal cortex slams on the brakes; an innocent man reaches for his
wallet and dies.
Other types of subliminal visual information influence the brain.17
For example, the gender of a face is processed within 150 milliseconds.
Ditto with social status. Social dominance looks the same across cultures
—direct gaze, open posture (e.g., leaning back with arms behind the
head), while subordination is signaled with averted gaze, arms sheltering
the torso. After a mere 40-millisecond exposure, subjects accurately
distinguish high- from low-status presentations. As we’ll see in chapter
12, when people are figuring out stable status relations, logical areas of
the frontal cortex (the vmPFC and dlPFC) activate; but in the case of
unstable, flip-flopping relations, the amygdala also activates. It’s
unsettling when we’re unsure who gets ulcers and who gives them.
There’s also subliminal cuing about beauty.18 From an early age, in
both sexes and across cultures, attractive people are judged to be smarter,
kinder, and more honest. We’re more likely to vote for attractive people
or hire them, less likely to convict them of crimes, and, if they are
convicted, more likely to dole out shorter sentences. Remarkably, the
medial orbitofrontal cortex assesses both the beauty of a face and the
goodness of a behavior, and its level of activity during one of those tasks
predicts the level during the other. The brain does similar things when
contemplating beautiful minds, hearts, and cheekbones. And assumes
that cheekbones tell something about minds and hearts. This will be
covered in chapter 12.

88

Though we derive subliminal information from bodily cues, such as
posture, we get the most information from faces.19 Why else evolve the
fusiform? The shape of women’s faces changes subtly during their
ovulatory cycle, and men prefer female faces at the time of ovulation.
Subjects guess political affiliation or religion at above-chance levels just
by looking at faces. And for the same transgression, people who look
embarrassed—blushing, eyes averted, face angled downward and to the
side—are more readily forgiven.
Eyes give the most information.20 Take pictures of two faces with
different emotions, and switch different facial parts between the two with
cutting and pasting. What emotion is detected? The one in the eyes.*21
Eyes often have an implicit censorious power.22 Post a large picture
of a pair of eyes at a bus stop (versus a picture of flowers), and people
become more likely to clean up litter. Post a picture of eyes in a
workplace coffee room, and the money paid on the honor system triples.
Show a pair of eyes on a computer screen and people become more
generous in online economic games.
Subliminal auditory cues also alter behavior.23 Back to amygdaloid
activation in whites subliminally viewing black faces. Chad Forbes of
the University of Delaware shows that the amygdala activation increases
if loud rap music—a genre typically associated more with African
Americans than with whites—plays in the background. The opposite
occurs when evoking negative white stereotypes with death metal music
blaring.
Another example of auditory cuing explains a thoroughly poignant
anecdote told by my Stanford colleague Claude Steele, who has done
seminal research on stereotyping.24 Steele recounts how an African
American male grad student of his, knowing the stereotypes that a young
black man evokes on the genteel streets of Palo Alto, whistled Vivaldi
when walking home at night, hoping to evoke instead “Hey, that’s not
Snoop Dogg. That’s a dead white male composer [exhale].”
No discussion of subliminal sensory cuing is complete without
considering olfaction, a subject marketing people have salivated over
since we were projected to watch Smell-O-Vision someday. The human
olfactory system is atrophied; roughly 40 percent of a rat’s brain is
devoted to olfactory processing, versus 3 percent in us. Nonetheless, we
still have unconscious olfactory lives, and as in rodents, our olfactory
system sends more direct projections to the limbic system than other
89

sensory systems. As noted, rodent pheromones carry information about
sex, age, reproductive status, health, and genetic makeup, and they alter
physiology and behavior. Similar, if milder, versions of the same are
reported in some (but not all) studies of humans, ranging from the
Wellesley effect, discussed in the introduction, to heterosexual women
preferring the smell of high-testosterone men.
Importantly, pheromones signal fear. In one study researchers got
armpit swabs from volunteers under two conditions—either after
contentedly sweating during a comfortable run, or after sweating in
terror during their first tandem skydive (note—in tandem skydives
you’re yoked to the instructor, who does the physical work; so if you’re
sweating, it’s from panic, not physical effort). Subjects sniffed each type
of sweat and couldn’t consciously distinguish between them. However,
sniffing terrified sweat (but not contented sweat) caused amygdaloid
activation, a bigger startle response, improved detection of subliminal
angry faces, and increased odds of interpreting an ambiguous face as
looking fearful. If people around you smell scared, your brain tilts
toward concluding that you are too.25
Finally, nonpheromonal odors influence us as well. As we’ll see in
chapter 12, if people sit in a room with smelly garbage, they become
more conservative about social issues (e.g., gay marriage) without
changing their opinions about, say, foreign policy or economics.

Interoceptive Information
In addition to information about the outside world, our brains
constantly receive “interoceptive” information about the body’s internal
state. You feel hungry, your back aches, your gassy intestine twinges,
your big toe itches. And such interoceptive information influences our
behavior as well.
This brings us to the time-honored James-Lange theory, named for
William James, a grand mufti in the history of psychology, and an
obscure Danish physician, Carl Lange. In the 1880s they independently
concocted the same screwy idea. How do your feelings and your body’s
automatic (i.e., “autonomic”) function interact? It seems obvious—a lion
chases you, you feel terrified, and thus your heart speeds up. James and
Lange suggested the opposite: you subliminally note the lion, speeding
up your heart; then your conscious brain gets this interoceptive
90

information, concluding, “Wow, my heart is racing; I must be terrified.”
In other words, you decide what you feel based on signals from your
body.
There’s support for the idea—three of my favorites are that (a)
forcing depressed people to smile makes them feel better; (b) instructing
people to take on a more “dominant” posture makes them feel more so
(lowers stress hormone levels); and (c) muscle relaxants decrease anxiety
(“Things are still awful, but if my muscles are so relaxed that I’m
dribbling out of this chair, things must be improving”). Nonetheless, a
strict version of James-Lange doesn’t work, because of the issue of
specificity—hearts race for varying reasons, so how does your brain
decide if it’s reacting to a lion or an exciting come-hither look?
Moreover, many autonomic responses are too slow to precede conscious
awareness of an emotion.26
Nonetheless, interoceptive information influences, if not determines,
our emotions. Some brain regions with starring roles in processing social
emotions—the PFC, insular cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and
amygdala—receive lots of interoceptive information. This helps explain
a reliable trigger of aggression, namely pain, which activates most of
those regions. As a repeating theme, pain does not cause aggression; it
amplifies preexisting tendencies toward aggression. In other words, pain
makes aggressive people more aggressive, while doing the opposite to
unaggressive individuals.27
Interoceptive information can alter behavior more subtly than in the
pain/aggression link.28 One example concerns how much the frontal
cortex has to do with willpower, harking back to material covered in the
last chapter. Various studies, predominantly by Roy Baumeister of
Florida State University, show that when the frontal cortex labors hard
on some cognitive task, immediately afterward individuals are more
aggressive and less empathic, charitable, and honest. Metaphorically, the
frontal cortex says, “Screw it. I’m tired and don’t feel like thinking about
my fellow human.”
This seems related to the metabolic costs of the frontal cortex doing
the harder thing. During frontally demanding tasks, blood glucose levels
drop, and frontal function improves if subjects are given a sugary drink
(with control subjects consuming a drink with a nonnutritive sugar
substitute). Moreover, when people are hungry, they become less
charitable and more aggressive (e.g., choosing more severe punishment
91

for an opponent in a game).* There’s debate as to whether the decline in
frontal regulation in these circumstances represents impaired capacity for
self-control or impaired motivation for it. But either way, over the course
of seconds to minutes, the amount of energy reaching the brain and the
amount of energy the frontal cortex needs have something to do with
whether the harder, more correct thing happens.
Thus, sensory information streaming toward your brain from both the
outside world and your body can rapidly, powerfully, and automatically
alter behavior. In the minutes before our prototypical behavior occurs,
more complex stimuli influence us as well.

Unconscious Language Effects
Words have power. They can save, cure, uplift, devastate, deflate,
and kill. And unconscious priming with words influences pro- and
antisocial behaviors.
One of my favorite examples concerns the Prisoner’s Dilemma, the
economic game where participants decide whether to cooperate or
compete at various junctures.29 And behavior is altered by “situational
labels”—call the game the “Wall Street Game,” and people become less
cooperative. Calling it the “Community Game” does the opposite.
Similarly, have subjects read seemingly random word lists before
playing. Embedding warm fuzzy prosocial words in the list—“help,”
“harmony,” “fair,” “mutual”—fosters cooperation, while words like
“rank,” “power,” “fierce,” and “inconsiderate” foster the opposite. Mind
you, this isn’t subjects reading either Christ’s Sermon on the Mount or
Ayn Rand. Just an innocuous string of words. Words unconsciously shift
thoughts and feelings. One person’s “terrorist” is another’s “freedom
fighter”; politicians jockey to commandeer “family values,” and
somehow you can’t favor both “choice” and “life.”*30
There are more examples. In Nobel Prize–winning research, Daniel
Kahneman and Amos Tversky famously showed word framing altering
decision making. Subjects decide whether to administer a hypothetical
drug. If they’re told, “The drug has a 95 percent survival rate,” people,
including doctors, are more likely to approve it than when told, “The
drug has a 5 percent death rate.”*31 Embed “rude” or “aggressive”
(versus “considerate” or “polite”) in word strings, and subjects interrupt

92

people more immediately afterward. Subjects primed with “loyalty”
(versus “equality”) become more biased toward their team in economic
games.32
Verbal primes also impact moral decision making.33 As every trial
lawyer knows, juries decide differently depending on how colorfully you
describe someone’s act. Neuroimaging studies show that more colorful
wording engages the anterior cingulate more. Moreover, people judge
moral transgressions more harshly when they are described as “wrong”
or “inappropriate” (versus “forbidden” or “blameworthy”).

Even Subtler Types of Unconscious Cuing
In the minutes before a behavior is triggered, subtler things than
sights and smells, gas pain, and choice of words unconsciously influence
us.
In one study, subjects filling out a questionnaire expressed stronger
egalitarian principles if there was an American flag in the room. In a
study of spectators at English football matches, a researcher planted in
the crowd slips, seemingly injuring his ankle. Does anyone help him? If
the plant wore the home team’s sweatshirt, he received more help than
when he wore a neutral sweatshirt or one of the opposing team. Another
study involved a subtle group-membership manipulation—for a number
of days, pairs of conservatively dressed Hispanics stood at train stations
during rush hour in predominately white Boston suburbs, conversing
quietly in Spanish. The consequence? White commuters expressed more
negative, exclusionary attitudes toward Hispanic (but not other)
immigrants.34
Cuing about group membership is complicated by people belonging
to multiple groups. Consider a famous study of Asian American women
who took a math test.35 Everyone knows that women are worse at math
than men (we’ll see in chapter 9 how that’s not really so) and Asian
Americans are better at it than other Americans. Subjects primed
beforehand to think about their racial identity performed better than did
those primed to think about their gender.
Another realm of rapid group influences on behavior is usually
known incorrectly. This is the “bystander effect” (aka the “Genovese
syndrome”).36 This refers to the notorious 1964 case of Kitty Genovese,

93

the New Yorker who was raped and stabbed to death over the course of
an hour outside an apartment building, while thirty-eight people heard
her shrieks for help and didn’t bother calling the police. Despite that
being reported by the New York Times, and the collective indifference
becoming emblematic of all that’s wrong with people, the facts differed:
the number was less than thirty-eight, no one witnessed the entire event,
apartment windows were closed on that winter’s night, and most
assumed they were hearing the muffled sounds of a lover’s quarrel.*
The mythic elements of the Genovese case prompt the quasi myth
that in an emergency requiring brave intervention, the more people
present, the less likely anyone is to help—“There’s lots of people here;
someone else will step forward.” The bystander effect does occur in
nondangerous situations, where the price of stepping forward is
inconvenience. However, in dangerous situations, the more people
present, the more likely individuals are to step forward. Why? Perhaps
elements of reputation, where a larger crowd equals more witnesses to
one’s heroics.
Another rapid social-context effect shows men in some of their
lamest moments.37 Specifically, when women are present, or when men
are prompted to think about women, they become more risk-taking, show
steeper temporal discounting in economic decisions, and spend more on
luxury items (but not on mundane expenses).* Moreover, the allure of
the opposite sex makes men more aggressive—for example, more likely
in a competitive game to punish the opposing guy with loud blasts of
noise. Crucially, this is not inevitable—in circumstances where status is
achieved through prosocial routes, the presence of women makes men
more prosocial. As summarized in the title of one paper demonstrating
this, this seems a case of “Male generosity as a mating signal.” We’ll
return to this theme in the next chapter.
Thus, our social environment unconsciously shapes our behavior
over the course of minutes. As does our physical environment.
Now we come to the “broken window” theory of crime of James Q.
Wilson and George Kelling.38 They proposed that small signs of urban
disarray—litter, graffiti, broken windows, public drunkenness—form a
slippery slope leading to larger signs of disarray, leading to increased
crime. Why? Because litter and graffiti as the norm mean people don’t
care or are powerless to do anything, constituting an invitation to litter or
worse.

94

Broken-window thinking shaped Rudy Giuliani’s mayoralty in the
1990s, when New York was turning into a Hieronymus Bosch painting.
Police commissioner William Bratton instituted a zero-tolerance policy
toward minor infractions—targeting subway fare evaders, graffiti artists,
vandals, beggars, and the city’s maddening infestation of squeegee men.
Which was followed by a steep drop in rates of serious crime. Similar
results occurred elsewhere; in Lowell, Massachusetts, zero-tolerance
measures were experimentally applied in only one part of the city;
serious crime dropped only in that area. Critics questioned whether the
benefits of broken-window policing were inflated, given that the
approach was tested when crime was already declining throughout the
United States (in other words, in contrast to the commendable Lowell
example, studies often lacked control groups).
In a test of the theory, Kees Keizer of the University of Groningen in
the Netherlands asked whether cues of one type of norm violation made
people prone to violating other norms.39 When bicycles were chained to
a fence (despite a sign forbidding it), people were more likely to take a
shortcut through a gap in the fence (despite a sign forbidding it); people
littered more when walls were graffitied; people were more likely to
steal a five-euro note when litter was strewn around. These were big
effects, with doubling rates of crummy behaviors. A norm violation
increasing the odds of that same norm being violated is a conscious
process. But when the sound of fireworks makes someone more likely to
litter, more unconscious processes are at work.

A Wonderfully Complicating Piece of the Story
We’ve now seen how sensory and interoceptive information
influence the brain to produce a behavior within seconds to minutes. But
as a complication, the brain can alter the sensitivity of those sensory
modalities, making some stimuli more influential.
As an obvious one, dogs prick up their ears when they’re alert—the
brain has stimulated ear muscles in a way that enables the ears to more
easily detect sounds, which then influences the brain.40 During acute
stress, all of our sensory systems become more sensitive. More
selectively, if you’re hungry, you become more sensitive to the smell of
food. How does something like this work? A priori, it seems as if all

95

sensory roads lead to the brain. But the brain also sends neuronal
projections to sensory organs. For example, low blood sugar might
activate particular hypothalamic neurons. These, in turn, project to and
stimulate receptor neurons in the nose that respond to food smells. The
stimulation isn’t enough to give those receptor neurons action potentials,
but it now takes fewer food odorant molecules to trigger one. Something
along these lines explains how the brain alters the selective sensitivity of
sensory systems.
This certainly applies to the behaviors that fill this book. Recall how
eyes carry lots of information about emotional state. It turns out that the
brain biases us toward preferentially looking at eyes. This was shown by
Damasio, studying a patient with Urbach-Wiethe disease, which
selectively destroys the amygdala. As expected, she was poor at
accurately detecting fearful faces. But in addition, while control subjects
spent about half their face-gazing time looking at eyes, she spent half
that. When instructed to focus on the eyes, she improved at recognizing
fearful expressions. Thus, not only does the amygdala detect fearful
faces, but it also biases us toward obtaining information about fearful
faces.41
Psychopaths are typically poor at recognizing fearful expressions
(though they accurately recognize other types).42 They also look less at
eyes than normal and improve at fear recognition when directed to focus
on eyes. This makes sense, given the amygdaloid abnormalities in
psychopaths noted in chapter 2.
Now an example foreshadowing chapter 9’s focus on culture. Show
subjects a picture of an object embedded in a complex background.
Within seconds, people from collectivist cultures (e.g., China) tend to
look more at, and remember better, the surrounding “contextual”
information, while people from individualistic cultures (e.g., the United
States) do the same with the focal object. Instruct subjects to focus on the
domain that their culture doesn’t gravitate toward, and there’s frontal
cortical activation—this is a difficult perceptual task. Thus, culture
literally shapes how and where you look at the world.*43

96

CONCLUSIONS

N

o brain operates in a vacuum, and over the course of seconds to
minutes, the wealth of information streaming into the brain
influences the likelihood of pro- or antisocial acts. As we’ve seen,
pertinent information ranges from something as simple and
unidimensional as shirt color to things as complex and subtle as cues
about ideology. Moreover, the brain also constantly receives
interoceptive information. And most important, much of these varied
types of information is subliminal. Ultimately, the most important point
of this chapter is that in the moments just before we decide upon some of
our most consequential acts, we are less rational and autonomous
decision makers than we like to think.

97

Four

Hours to Days Before

W

e now take the next step back in our chronology, considering
events from hours to days before a behavior occurs. To do so,
we enter the realm of hormones. What are the effects of hormones on the
brain and sensory systems that filled the last two chapters? How do
hormones influence our best and worst behaviors?
While this chapter examines various hormones, the most attention is
paid to one inextricably tied to aggression, namely testosterone. And as
the punch line, testosterone is far less relevant to aggression than usually
assumed. At the other end of the spectrum, the chapter also considers a
hormone with cult status for fostering warm, fuzzy prosociality, namely
oxytocin. As we’ll see, it’s not quite as groovy as assumed.
Those who are unfamiliar with hormones and endocrinology, please
see the primer in appendix 2.

98

TESTOSTERONE’S BUM RAP

T

estosterone is secreted by the testes as the final step in the
“hypothalamic/pituitary/testicular” axis; it has effects on cells
throughout the body (including neurons, of course). And testosterone is
everyone’s usual suspect when it comes to the hormonal causes of
aggression.

Correlation and Causality
Why is it that throughout the animal kingdom, and in every human
culture, males account for most aggression and violence? Well, what
about testosterone and some related hormones (collectively called
“androgens,” a term that, unless otherwise noted, I will use simplistically
as synonymous with “testosterone”)? In nearly all species males have
more circulating testosterone than do females (who secrete small
amounts of androgens from the adrenal glands). Moreover, male
aggression is most prevalent when testosterone levels are highest
(adolescence, and during mating season in seasonal breeders).
Thus, testosterone and aggression are linked. Furthermore, there are
particularly high levels of testosterone receptors in the amygdala, in the
way station by which it projects to the rest of the brain (the bed nucleus
of the stria terminalis), and in its major targets (the hypothalamus, the
central gray of the midbrain, and the frontal cortex). But these are merely
correlative data. Showing that testosterone causes aggression requires a
“subtraction” plus a “replacement” experiment. Subtraction—castrate a
male. Do levels of aggression decrease? Yes (including in humans). This
shows that something coming from the testes causes aggression. Is it
testosterone? Replacement—give that castrated individual replacement
testosterone. Do precastration levels of aggression return? Yes (including
in humans).
Thus, testosterone causes aggression. Time to see how wrong that is.
The first hint of a complication comes after castration, when average
levels of aggression plummet in every species. But, crucially, not to zero.

99

Well, maybe the castration wasn’t perfect, you missed some bits of
testes. Or maybe enough of the minor adrenal androgens are secreted to
maintain the aggression. But no—even when testosterone and androgens
are completely eliminated, some aggression remains. Thus, some male
aggression is testosterone independent.*
This point is driven home by castration of some sexual offenders, a
legal procedure in a few states.1 This is accomplished with “chemical
castration,” administration of drugs that either inhibit testosterone
production or block testosterone receptors.* Castration decreases sexual
urges in the subset of sex offenders with intense, obsessive, and
pathological urges. But otherwise castration doesn’t decrease recidivism
rates; as stated in one meta-analysis, “hostile rapists and those who
commit sex crimes motivated by power or anger are not amenable to
treatment with [the antiandrogenic drugs].”
This leads to a hugely informative point: the more experience a male
had being aggressive prior to castration, the more aggression continues
afterward. In other words, the less his being aggressive in the future
requires testosterone and the more it’s a function of social learning.
On to the next issue that lessens the primacy of testosterone: What do
individual levels of testosterone have to do with aggression? If one
person has higher testosterone levels than another, or higher levels this
week than last, are they more likely to be aggressive?
Initially the answer seemed to be yes, as studies showed correlation
between individual differences in testosterone levels and levels of
aggression. In a typical study, higher testosterone levels would be
observed in those male prisoners with higher rates of aggression. But
being aggressive stimulates testosterone secretion; no wonder more
aggressive individuals had higher levels. Such studies couldn’t
disentangle chickens and eggs.
Thus, a better question is whether differences in testosterone levels
among individuals predict who will be aggressive. And among birds,
fish, mammals, and especially other primates, the answer is generally no.
This has been studied extensively in humans, examining a variety of
measures of aggression. And the answer is clear. To quote the British
endocrinologist John Archer in a definitive 2006 review, “There is a
weak and inconsistent association between testosterone levels and
aggression in [human] adults, and . . . administration of testosterone to
volunteers typically does not increase their aggression.” The brain

100

doesn’t pay attention to fluctuations of testosterone levels within the
normal range.2
(Things differ when levels are made “supraphysiological”—higher
than the body normally generates. This is the world of athletes and
bodybuilders abusing high-dose testosterone-like anabolic steroids; in
that situation risk of aggression does increase. Two complications: it’s
not random who would choose to take these drugs, and abusers are often
already predisposed toward aggression; supraphysiological levels of
androgens generate anxiety and paranoia, and increased aggression may
be secondary to that.)3
Thus, aggression is typically more about social learning than about
testosterone, and differing levels of testosterone generally can’t explain
why some individuals are more aggressive than others. So what does
testosterone actually do to behavior?

Subtleties of Testosterone Effects
When looking at faces expressing strong emotions, we tend to make
microexpressions that mimic them; testosterone decreases such empathic
mimicry.*4 Moreover, testosterone makes people less adept at identifying
emotions by looking at people’s eyes, and faces of strangers activate the
amygdala more than familiar ones and are rated as less trustworthy.
Testosterone also increases confidence and optimism, while
decreasing fear and anxiety.5 This explains the “winner” effect in lab
animals, where winning a fight increases an animal’s willingness to
participate in, and its success in, another such interaction. Part of the
increased success probably reflects the fact that winning stimulates
testosterone secretion, which increases glucose delivery and metabolism
in the animal’s muscles and makes his pheromones smell scarier.
Moreover, winning increases the number of testosterone receptors in the
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (the way station through which the
amygdala communicates with the rest of the brain), increasing its
sensitivity to the hormone. Success in everything from athletics to chess
to the stock market boosts testosterone levels.
Confident and optimistic. Well, endless self-help books urge us to be
precisely that. But testosterone makes people overconfident and overly
optimistic, with bad consequences. In one study, pairs of subjects could

101

consult each other before making individual choices in a task.
Testosterone made subjects more likely to think their opinion was correct
and to ignore input from their partner. Testosterone makes people cocky,
egocentric, and narcissistic.6
Testosterone boosts impulsivity and risk taking, making people do
the easier thing when it’s the dumb-ass thing to do.7 Testosterone does
this by decreasing activity in the prefrontal cortex and its functional
coupling to the amygdala and increasing amygdaloid coupling with the
thalamus—the source of that shortcut path of sensory information into
the amygdala. Thus, more influence by split-second, low-accuracy inputs
and less by the let’s-stop-and-think-about-this frontal cortex.
Being fearless, overconfident, and delusionally optimistic sure feels
good. No surprise, then, that testosterone can be pleasurable. Rats will
work (by pressing levers) to be infused with testosterone and show
“conditioned place preference,” returning to a random corner of the cage
where infusions occur. “I don’t know why, but I feel good whenever I
stand there.”8,9
The underlying neurobiology fits perfectly. Dopamine is needed for
place-preference conditioning to occur, and testosterone increases
activity in the ventral tegmentum, the source of those mesolimbic and
mesocortical dopamine projections. Moreover, conditioned place
preference is induced when testosterone is infused directly into the
nucleus accumbens, the ventral tegmentum’s main projection target.
When a rat wins a fight, the number of testosterone receptors increases in
the ventral tegmentum and accumbens, increasing sensitivity to the
hormone’s feel-good effects.10
So testosterone does subtle things to behavior. Nonetheless, this
doesn’t tell us much because everything can be interpreted every which
way. Testosterone increases anxiety—you feel threatened and become
more reactively aggressive. Testosterone decreases anxiety—you feel
cocky and overconfident, become more preemptively aggressive.
Testosterone increases risk taking—“Hey, let’s gamble and invade.”
Testosterone increases risk taking—“Hey, let’s gamble and make a peace
offer.” Testosterone makes you feel good—“Let’s start another fight,
since the last one went swell.” Testosterone makes you feel good
—“Let’s all hold hands.”
It’s a crucial unifying concept that testosterone’s effects are hugely
context dependent.
102

Contingent Testosterone Effects
This context dependency means that rather than causing X,
testosterone amplifies the power of something else to cause X.
A classic example comes from a 1977 study of groups of male
talapoin monkeys.11 Testosterone was administered to the middleranking male in each group (say, rank number 3 out of five), increasing
their levels of aggression. Does this mean that these guys, stoked on
’roids, started challenging numbers 1 and 2 in the hierarchy? No. They
became aggressive jerks to poor numbers 4 and 5. Testosterone did not
create new social patterns of aggression; it exaggerated preexisting ones.
In human studies testosterone didn’t raise baseline activity in the
amygdala; it boosted the amygdala’s response and heart-rate reactivity to
angry faces (but not to happy or neutral ones). Similarly, testosterone did
not make subjects more selfish and uncooperative in an economic game;
it made them more punitive when provoked by being treated poorly,
enhancing “vengeful reactive aggression.”12
The context dependency also occurs on the neurobiological level, in
that the hormone shortens the refractory period of neurons in the
amygdala and amygdaloid targets in the hypothalamus.13 Recall that the
refractory period comes in neurons after action potentials. This is when
the neuron’s resting potential is hyperpolarized (i.e., when it is more
negatively charged than usual), making the neuron less excitable,
producing a period of silence after the action potential. Thus, shorter
refractory periods mean a higher rate of action potentials. So is
testosterone causing action potentials in these neurons? No. It’s causing
them to fire at a faster rate if they are stimulated by something else.
Similarly, testosterone increases amygdala response to angry faces, but
not to other sorts. Thus, if the amygdala is already responding to some
realm of social learning, testosterone ups the volume.

A Key Synthesis: The Challenge Hypothesis
Thus, testosterone’s actions are contingent and amplifying,
exacerbating preexisting tendencies toward aggression rather than
creating aggression out of thin air. This picture inspired the “challenge
hypothesis,” a wonderfully unifying conceptualization of testosterone’s
actions.14 As proposed in 1990 by the superb behavioral endocrinologist
103

John Wingfield of the University of California at Davis, and colleagues,
the idea is that rising testosterone levels increase aggression only at the
time of a challenge. Which is precisely how things work.
The explains why basal levels of testosterone have little to do with
subsequent aggression, and why increases in testosterone due to puberty,
sexual stimulation, or the start of mating season don’t increase
aggression either.15
But things are different during challenges.16 Among various
primates, testosterone levels rise when a dominance hierarchy first forms
or undergoes reorganization. Testosterone rises in humans in both
individual and team sports competition, including basketball, wrestling,
tennis, rugby, and judo; there’s generally a rise in anticipation of the
event and a larger one afterward, especially among winners.*
Remarkably, watching your favorite team win raises testosterone levels,
showing that the rise is less about muscle activity than about the
psychology of dominance, identification, and self-esteem.
Most important, the rise in testosterone after a challenge makes
aggression more likely.17 Think about this. Testosterone levels rise,
reaching the brain. If this occurs because someone is challenging you,
you head in the direction of aggression. If an identical rise occurs
because days are lengthening and mating season is approaching, you
decide to fly a thousand miles to your breeding grounds. And if the same
occurs because of puberty, you get stupid and giggly around that girl
who plays clarinet in the band. The context dependency is
remarkable.*18
The challenge hypothesis has a second part to it. When testosterone
rises after a challenge, it doesn’t prompt aggression. Instead it prompts
whatever behaviors are needed to maintain status. This changes things
enormously.
Well, maybe not, since maintaining status for, say, male primates
consists mostly of aggression or threats of it—from slashing your
opponent to giving a “You have no idea who you’re screwing with”
stare.19
And now for some flabbergastingly important research. What
happens if defending your status requires you to be nice? This was
explored in a study by Christoph Eisenegger and Ernst Fehr of the
University of Zurich.20 Participants played the Ultimatum Game
(introduced in chapter 2), where you decide how to split money between
104

you and another player. The other person can accept the split or reject it,
in which case neither of you gets anything. Prior research had shown that
when someone’s offer is rejected, they feel dissed, subordinated,
especially if news of that carries into future rounds with other players. In
other words, in this scenario status and reputation rest on being fair.
And what happens when subjects were given testosterone
beforehand? People made more generous offers. What the hormone
makes you do depends on what counts as being studly. This requires
some fancy neuroendocrine wiring that is sensitive to social learning.
You couldn’t ask for a finding more counter to testosterone’s reputation.
The study contained a slick additional finding that further separated
testosterone myth from reality. As per usual, subjects got either
testosterone or saline, without knowing which. Subjects who believed it
was testosterone (independent of whether it actually was) made less
generous offers. In other words, testosterone doesn’t necessarily make
you behave in a crappy manner, but believing that it does and that you’re
drowning in the stuff makes you behave in a crappy manner.
Additional studies show that testosterone promotes prosociality in the
right setting. In one, under circumstances where someone’s sense of
pride rides on honesty, testosterone decreased men’s cheating in a game.
In another, subjects decided how much of a sum of money they would
keep and how much they would publicly contribute to a common pool
shared by all the players; testosterone made most subjects more
prosocial.21
What does this mean? Testosterone makes us more willing to do
what it takes to attain and maintain status. And the key point is what it
takes. Engineer social circumstances right, and boosting testosterone
levels during a challenge would make people compete like crazy to do
the most acts of random kindness. In our world riddled with male
violence, the problem isn’t that testosterone can increase levels of
aggression. The problem is the frequency with which we reward
aggression.

105

OXYTOCIN AND VASOPRESSIN: A
MARKETING DREAM

I

f the point of the preceding section is that testosterone has gotten a
bum rap, the point of this one is that oxytocin (and the closely related
vasopressin) is coasting in a Teflon presidency. According to lore,
oxytocin makes organisms less aggressive, more socially attuned,
trusting, and empathic. Individuals treated with oxytocin become more
faithful partners and more attentive parents. It makes lab rats more
charitable and better listeners, makes fruit flies sing like Joan Baez.
Naturally, things are more complicated, and oxytocin has an informative
dark side.

Basics
Oxytocin and vasopressin are chemically similar hormones; the DNA
sequences that constitute their genes are similar, and the two genes occur
close to each other on the same chromosome. There was a single
ancestral gene that, a few hundred million years ago, was accidentally
“duplicated” in the genome, and the DNA sequences in the two copies of
the gene drifted independently, evolving into two closely related genes
(stay tuned for more in chapter 8). This gene duplication occurred as
mammals were emerging; other vertebrates have only the ancestral
version, called vasotocin, which is structurally between the two separate
mammalian hormones.
For twentieth-century neurobiologists, oxytocin and vasopressin
were pretty boring. They were made in hypothalamic neurons that sent
axons to the posterior pituitary. There they would be released into
circulation, thereby attaining hormone status, and have nothing to do
with the brain ever again. Oxytocin stimulated uterine contraction during
labor and milk letdown afterward. Vasopressin (aka “antidiuretic
hormone”) regulated water retention in the kidneys. And reflecting their
similar structures, each also had mild versions of the other one’s effects.
End of story.
106

Neurobiologists Take Notice
Things became interesting with the discovery that those
hypothalamic neurons that made oxytocin and vasopressin also sent
projections throughout the brain, including the dopamine-related ventral
tegmentum and nucleus accumbens, hippocampus, amygdala, and frontal
cortex, all regions with ample levels of receptors for the hormones.
Moreover, oxytocin and vasopressin turned out to be synthesized and
secreted elsewhere in the brain. These two boring, classical peripheral
hormones affected brain function and behavior. They started being called
“neuropeptides”—neuroactive messengers with a peptide structure—
which is a fancy way of saying they are small proteins (and, to avoid
writing “oxytocin and vasopressin” endlessly, I will refer to them as
neuropeptides; note though that there are other neuropeptides).
The initial findings about their behavioral effects made sense.22
Oxytocin prepares the body of a female mammal for birth and lactation;
logically, oxytocin also facilitates maternal behavior. The brain boosts
oxytocin production when a female rat gives birth, thanks to a
hypothalamic circuit with markedly different functions in females and
males. Moreover, the ventral tegmentum increases its sensitivity to the
neuropeptide by increasing levels of oxytocin receptors. Infuse oxytocin
into the brain of a virgin rat, and she’ll act maternally—retrieving,
grooming, and licking pups. Block the actions of oxytocin in a rodent
mother,*23 and she’ll stop maternal behaviors, including nursing.
Oxytocin works in the olfactory system, helping a new mom learn the
smell of her offspring. Meanwhile, vasopressin has similar but milder
effects.
Soon other species were heard from. Oxytocin lets sheep learn the
smell of their offspring and facilitates female monkeys grooming their
offspring. Spray oxytocin up a woman’s nose (a way to get the
neuropeptide past the blood-brain barrier and into the brain), and she’ll
find babies to look more appealing. Moreover, women with variants of
genes that produce higher levels of oxytocin or oxytocin receptors
average higher levels of touching their infants and more synchronized
gazing with them.
So oxytocin is central to female mammals nursing, wanting to nurse
their child, and remembering which one is their child. Males then got
into the act, as vasopressin plays a role in paternal behavior. A female

107

rodent giving birth increases vasopressin and vasopressin receptor levels
throughout the body, including the brain, of the nearby father. Among
monkeys, experienced fathers have more dendrites in frontal cortical
neurons containing vasopressin receptors. Moreover, administering
vasopressin enhances paternal behaviors. However, an ethological
caveat: this occurs only in species where males are paternal (e.g., prairie
voles and marmoset monkeys).24*
Then, dozens of millions of years ago, some rodent and primate
species independently evolved monogamous pair-bonding, along with
the neuropeptides central to the process.25 Among marmoset and titi
monkeys, which both pair-bond, oxytocin strengthens the bond,
increasing a monkey’s preference for huddling with her partner over
huddling with a stranger. Then there was a study that is embarrassingly
similar to stereotypical human couples. Among pair-bonding tamarin
monkeys, lots of grooming and physical contact predicted high oxytocin
levels in female members of a pair. What predicted high levels of
oxytocin in males? Lots of sex.
Beautiful, pioneering work by Thomas Insel of the National Institute
of Mental Health, Larry Young of Emory University, and Sue Carter of
the University of Illinois has made a species of vole arguably the most
celebrated rodent on earth.26 Most voles (e.g., montane voles) are
polygamous. In contrast, prairie voles, in a salute to Garrison Keillor,
form monogamous mating pairs for life. Naturally, this isn’t quite the
case—while they are “social pair-bonders” with their permanent
relationships, they’re not quite perfect “sexual pair-bonders,” as males
might mess around on the side. Nonetheless, prairie voles pair-bond
more than other voles, prompting Insel, Young, and Carter to figure out
why.
First finding: sex releases oxytocin and vasopressin in the nucleus
accumbens of female and male voles, respectively. Obvious theory:
prairie voles release more of the stuff during sex than do polygamous
voles, causing a more rewarding buzz, encouraging the individuals to
stick with their partner. But prairie voles don’t release more
neuropeptides than montane voles. Instead, prairie voles have more of
the pertinent receptors in the nucleus accumbens than do polygamous
voles.* Moreover, male prairie voles with a variant of the vasopressin
receptor gene that produced more receptors in the nucleus accumbens
were stronger pair-bonders. Then the scientists conducted two tour de
108

force studies. First they engineered the brains of male mice to express
the prairie vole version of the vasopressin receptor in their brains, and
they groomed and huddled more with familiar females (but not with
strangers). Then the scientists engineered the brains of male montane
voles to have more vasopressin receptors in the nucleus accumbens; the
males became more socially affiliative with individual females.*
What about versions of vasopressin receptor genes in other species?
When compared with chimps, bonobos have a variant associated with
more receptor expression and far more social bonding between females
and males (although, in contrast to prairie voles, bonobos are anything
but monogamous).27
How about humans? This is tough to study, because you can’t
measure these neuropeptides in tiny brain regions in humans and instead
have to examine levels in the circulation, a fairly indirect measure.
Nevertheless, these neuropeptides appear to play a role in human
pair-bonding.28 For starters, circulating oxytocin levels are elevated in
couples when they’ve first hooked up. Furthermore, the higher the levels,
the more physical affection, the more behaviors are synchronized, the
more long-lasting the relationship, and the happier interviewers rate
couples to be.
Even more interesting were studies where oxytocin (or a control
spray) was administered intranasally. In one fun study, couples had to
discuss one of their conflicts; oxytocin up their noses, and they’d be
rated as communicating more positively and would secrete less stress
hormones. Another study suggests that oxytocin unconsciously
strengthens the pair-bond. Heterosexual male volunteers, with or without
an oxytocin spritz, interacted with an attractive female researcher, doing
some nonsense task. Among men in stable relationships, oxytocin
increased their distance from the woman an average of four to six inches.
Single guys, no effect. (Why didn’t oxytocin make them stand closer?
The researchers indicated that they were already about as close as one
could get away with.) If the experimenter was male, no effect. Moreover,
oxytocin caused males in relationships to spend less time looking at
pictures of attractive women. Importantly, oxytocin didn’t make men rate
these women as less attractive; they were simply less interested.29
Thus, oxytocin and vasopressin facilitate bonding between parent
and child and between couples.* Now for something truly charming that
evolution has cooked up recently. Sometime in the last fifty thousand
109

years (i.e., less than 0.1 percent of the time that oxytocin has existed), the
brains of humans and domesticated wolves evolved a new response to
oxytocin: when a dog and its owner (but not a stranger) interact, they
secrete oxytocin.30 The more of that time is spent gazing at each other,
the bigger the rise. Give dogs oxytocin, and they gaze longer at their
humans . . . which raises the humans’ oxytocin levels. So a hormone that
evolved for mother-infant bonding plays a role in this bizarre,
unprecedented form of bonding between species.
In line with its effects on bonding, oxytocin inhibits the central
amygdala, suppresses fear and anxiety, and activates the “calm,
vegetative” parasympathetic nervous system. Moreover, people with an
oxytocin receptor gene variant associated with more sensitive parenting
also have less of a cardiovascular startle response. In the words of Sue
Carter, exposure to oxytocin is “a physiological metaphor for safety.”
Furthermore, oxytocin reduces aggression in rodents, and mice whose
oxytocin system was silenced (by deleting the gene for oxytocin or its
receptor) were abnormally aggressive.31
Other studies showed that people rate faces as more trustworthy, and
are more trusting in economic games, when given oxytocin (oxytocin
had no effect when someone thought they were playing with a computer,
showing that this was about social behavior).32 This increased trust was
interesting. Normally, if the other player does something duplicitous in
the game, subjects are less trusting in subsequent rounds; in contrast,
oxytocin-treated investors didn’t modify their behavior in this way.
Stated scientifically, “oxytocin inoculated betrayal aversion among
investors”; stated caustically, oxytocin makes people irrational dupes;
stated more angelically, oxytocin makes people turn the other cheek.
More prosocial effects of oxytocin emerged. It made people better at
detecting happy (versus angry, fearful, or neutral) faces or words with
positive (versus negative) social connotations, when these were
displayed briefly. Moreover, oxytocin made people more charitable.
People with the version of the oxytocin receptor gene associated with
more sensitive parenting were rated by observers as more prosocial
(when discussing a time of personal suffering), as well as more sensitive
to social approval. And the neuropeptide made people more responsive
to social reinforcement, enhancing performance in a task where correct
or wrong answers elicited a smile or frown, respectively (while having

110

no effect when right and wrong answers elicited different-colored
lights).33
So oxytocin elicits prosocial behavior, and oxytocin is released when
we experience prosocial behavior (being trusted in a game, receiving a
warm touch, and so on). In other words, a warm and fuzzy positive
feedback loop.34
Obviously, oxytocin and vasopressin are the grooviest hormones in
the universe.* Pour them into the water supply, and people will be more
charitable, trusting, and empathic. We’d be better parents and would
make love, not war (mostly platonic love, though, since people in
relationships would give wide berths to everyone else). Best of all, we’d
buy all sorts of useless crap, trusting the promotional banners in stores
once oxytocin starts spraying out of the ventilation system.
Okay, time to settle down a bit.

Prosociality Versus Sociality
Are oxytocin and vasopressin about prosociality or social
competence? Do these hormones make us see happy faces everywhere or
become more interested in gathering accurate social information about
faces? The latter isn’t necessarily prosocial; after all, accurate
information about someone’s emotions makes them easier to manipulate.
The Groovy Neuropeptide School supports the idea of ubiquitous
prosociality.35 But the neuropeptides also foster social interest and
competence. They make people look at eyes longer, increasing accuracy
in reading emotions. Moreover, oxytocin enhances activity in the
temporoparietal juncture (that region involved in Theory of Mind) when
people do a social-recognition task. The hormone increases the accuracy
of assessments of other people’s thoughts, with a gender twist—women
improve at detecting kinship relations, while men improve at detecting
dominance relations. In addition, oxytocin increases accuracy in
remembering faces and their emotional expressions, and people with the
“sensitive parenting” oxytocin receptor gene variant are particularly
adept at assessing emotions. Similarly, the hormones facilitate rodents’
learning of an individual’s smell, but not nonsocial odors.
Neuroimaging research shows that these neuropeptides are about
social competence, as well as prosociality.36 For example, variants of a

111

gene related to oxytocin signaling* are associated with differing degrees
of activation of the fusiform face area when looking at faces.
Findings like these suggest that abnormalities in these neuropeptides
increase the risk of disorders of impaired sociality, namely autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) (strikingly, people with ASD show blunted
fusiform responses to faces).37 Remarkably, ASD has been linked to
gene variants related to oxytocin and vasopressin, to nongenetic
mechanisms for silencing the oxytocin receptor gene, and to lower levels
of the receptor itself. Moreover, the neuropeptides improve social skills
in some individuals with ASD—e.g., enhancing eye contact.
Thus, sometimes oxytocin and vasopressin make us more prosocial,
but sometimes they make us more avid and accurate social information
gatherers. Nonetheless, there is a happy-face bias, since accuracy is most
enhanced for positive emotions.38
Time for more complications.

Contingent Effects of Oxytocin and Vasopressin
Recall testosterone’s contingent effects (e.g., making a monkey more
aggressive, but only toward individuals he already dominates). Naturally,
these neuropeptides’ effects are also contingent.39
One factor already mentioned is gender: oxytocin enhances different
aspects of social competence in women and men. Moreover, oxytocin’s
calming effects on the amygdala are more consistent in men than in
women. Predictably, neurons that make these neuropeptides are regulated
by both estrogen and testosterone.40
As a really interesting contingent effect, oxytocin enhances
charitability—but only in people who are already so. This mirrors
testosterone’s only raising aggression in aggression-prone people.
Hormones rarely act outside the context of the individual and his or her
environment.41
Finally, a fascinating study shows cultural contingencies in
oxytocin’s actions.42 During stress, Americans seek emotional support
(e.g., telling a friend about their problem) more readily than do East
Asians. In one study oxytocin receptor gene variants were identified in
American and Korean subjects. Under unstressful circumstances, neither
cultural background nor receptor variant affected support-seeking

112

behavior. During stressful periods, support seeking rose among subjects
with the receptor variant associated with enhanced sensitivity to social
feedback and approval—but only among the Americans (including
Korean Americans). What does oxytocin do to support-seeking
behavior? It depends on whether you’re stressed. And on the genetic
variant of your oxytocin receptor. And on your culture. More to come in
chapters 8 and 9.

And the Dark Side of These Neuropeptides
As we saw, oxytocin (and vasopressin) decreases aggression in
rodent females. Except for aggression in defense of one’s pups, which
the neuropeptide increases via effects in the central amygdala (with its
involvement in instinctual fear).43
This readily fits with these neuropeptides enhancing maternalism,
including snarling don’t-get-one-step-closer maternalism. Similarly,
vasopressin enhances aggression in paternal prairie vole males. This
finding comes with a familiar additional contingency. The more
aggressive the male prairie vole, the less that aggression decreases after
blocking of his vasopressin system—just as in the case of testosterone,
with increased experience, aggression is maintained by social learning
rather than by a hormone/neuropeptide. Moreover, vasopressin increases
aggression most in male rodents who are already aggressive—yet
another biological effect depending on individual and social context.44
And now to really upend our view of these feel-good neuropeptides.
For starters, back to oxytocin enhancing trust and cooperation in an
economic game—but not if the other player is anonymous and in a
different room. When playing against strangers, oxytocin decreases
cooperation, enhances envy when luck is bad, and enhances gloating
when it’s good.45
Finally, beautiful studies by Carsten de Dreu of the University of
Amsterdam showed just how unwarm and unfuzzy oxytocin can be.46 In
the first, male subjects formed two teams; each subject chose how much
of his money to put into a pot shared with teammates. As usual, oxytocin
increased such generosity. Then participants played the Prisoner’s
Dilemma with someone from the other team.* When financial stakes
were high, making subjects more motivated, oxytocin made them more

113

likely to preemptively stab the other player in the back. Thus, oxytocin
makes you more prosocial to people like you (i.e., your teammates) but
spontaneously lousy to Others who are a threat. As emphasized by De
Dreu, perhaps oxytocin evolved to enhance social competence to make
us better at identifying who is an Us.
In De Dreu’s second study, Dutch student subjects took the Implicit
Association Test of unconscious bias.* And oxytocin exaggerated biases
against two out-groups, namely Middle Easterners and Germans.47
Then came the study’s truly revealing second part. Subjects had to
decide whether it was okay to kill one person in order to save five. In the
scenario the potential sacrificial lamb’s name was either stereotypically
Dutch (Dirk or Peter), German (Markus or Helmut), or Middle Eastern
(Ahmed or Youssef); the five people in danger were unnamed.
Remarkably, oxytocin made subjects less likely to sacrifice good ol’ Dirk
or Peter, rather than Helmut or Ahmed.
Oxytocin, the luv hormone, makes us more prosocial to Us and
worse to everyone else. That’s not generic prosociality. That’s
ethnocentrism and xenophobia. In other words, the actions of these
neuropeptides depend dramatically on context—who you are, your
environment, and who that person is. As we will see in chapter 8, the
same applies to the regulation of genes relevant to these neuropeptides.

114

THE ENDOCRINOLOGY OF
AGGRESSION IN FEMALES

H

elp!
This topic confuses me. Here’s why:
This is a domain where the ratios of two hormones can
matter more than their absolute levels, where the brain
responds the same way to (a) two units of estrogen plus
one unit of progesterone and (b) two gazillion units of
estrogen plus one gazillion units of progesterone. This
requires some complex neurobiology.
Hormone levels are extremely dynamic, with
hundredfold changes in some within hours—no male’s
testes ever had to navigate the endocrinology of
ovulation or childbirth. Among other things, re-creating
such endocrine fluctuations in lab animals is tough.
There’s dizzying variability across species. Some breed
year-round, others only in particular seasons; nursing
inhibits ovulation in some, stimulates it in others.
Progesterone rarely works in the brain as itself. Instead
it’s usually converted into various “neurosteroids” with
differing actions in different brain regions. And
“estrogen” describes a soup of related hormones, none
of which work identically.
Finally, one must debunk the myth that females are
always nice and affiliative (unless, of course, they’re
aggressively protecting their babies, which is cool and
inspirational).

Maternal Aggression

115

Levels of aggression rise in rodents during pregnancy, peaking
around parturition.*48 Appropriately, the highest levels occur in species
and breeds with the greatest threat of infanticide.49
During late pregnancy, estrogen and progesterone increase maternal
aggression by increasing oxytocin release in certain brain regions,
bringing us back to oxytocin promoting maternal aggression.50
Two complications illustrate some endocrine principles.* Estrogen
contributes to maternal aggression. But estrogen can also reduce
aggression and enhance empathy and emotional recognition. It turns out
there are two different types of receptors for estrogen in the brain,
mediating these opposing effects and with their levels independently
regulated. Thus, same hormone, same levels, different outcome if the
brain is set up to respond differently.51
The other complication: As noted, progesterone, working with
estrogen, promotes maternal aggression. However, on its own it
decreases aggression and anxiety. Same hormone, same levels,
diametrically opposite outcomes depending on the presence of a second
hormone.52
Progesterone decreases anxiety through a thoroughly cool route.
When it enters neurons, it is converted to another steroid;* this binds to
GABA receptors, making them more sensitive to the inhibitory effects of
GABA, thereby calming the brain. Thus, direct cross-talk between
hormones and neurotransmitters.

Bare-Knuckled Female Aggression
The traditional view is that other than maternal aggression, any
female-female competition is passive, covert. As noted by the pioneering
primatologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy of the University of California at
Davis, before the 1970s hardly anyone even researched competition
among females.53
Nevertheless, there is plenty of female-female aggression. This is
often dismissed with a psychopathology argument—if, say, a female
chimp is murderous, it’s because, well, she’s crazy. Or female aggression
is viewed as endocrine “spillover.”54 Females synthesize small amounts
of androgens in the adrenals and ovaries; in the spillover view, the
process of synthesizing “real” female steroid hormones is somewhat

116

sloppy, and some androgenic steroids are inadvertently produced; since
evolution is lazy and hasn’t eliminated androgen receptors in female
brains, there’s some androgen-driven aggression.
These views are wrong for a number of reasons.
Female brains don’t contain androgen receptors simply because they
come from a similar blueprint as male brains. Instead, androgen
receptors are distributed differently in the brains of females and males,
with higher levels in some regions in females. There has been active
selection for androgen effects in females.55
Even more important, female aggression makes sense—females can
increase their evolutionary fitness with strategic, instrumental
aggression.56 Depending on the species, females compete aggressively
for resources (e.g., food or nesting places), harass lower-ranking
reproductive competitors into stress-induced infertility, or kill each
other’s infants (as in chimps). And in the bird and (rare) primate species
where males are actually paternal, females compete aggressively for such
princes.
Remarkably, there are even species—primates (bonobos, lemurs,
marmosets, and tamarins), rock hyraxes, and rodents (the California
mouse, Syrian golden hamsters, and naked mole rats)—where females
are socially dominant and more aggressive (and often more muscular)
than males.57 The most celebrated example of a sex-reversal system is
the spotted hyena, shown by Laurence Frank of UC Berkeley and
colleagues.* Among typical social carnivores (e.g., lions), females do
most of the hunting, after which males show up and eat first. Among
hyenas it’s the socially subordinate males who hunt; they are then booted
off the kill by females so that the kids eat first. Get this: In many
mammals erections are a sign of dominance, of a guy strutting his stuff.
Among hyenas it’s reversed—when a female is about to terrorize a male,
he gets an erection. (“Please don’t hurt me! Look, I’m just a
nonthreatening male.”)*
What explains female competitive aggression (in sex-reversal species
or “normal” animals)? Those androgens in females are obvious suspects,
and in some sex-reversal species females have androgen levels that equal
or even trump those in males.58 Among hyenas, where this occurs,
spending fetal life awash in Mom’s plentiful androgens produces a
“pseudo-hermaphrodite”*—female hyenas have a fake scrotal sack, no
external vagina, and a clitoris that is as large as a penis and gets erect as
117

well.* Moreover, some of the sex differences in the brain seen in most
mammals don’t occur in hyenas or naked mole rats, reflecting their fetal
androgenization.
This suggests that elevated female aggression in sex-reversal species
arises from the elevated androgen exposure and, by extension, that the
diminished aggression among females of other species comes from their
low androgen levels.
But complications emerge. For starters, there are species (e.g.,
Brazilian guinea pigs) where females have high androgen levels but
aren’t particularly aggressive or dominant toward males. Conversely,
there are sex-reversal bird species without elevated androgen levels in
females. Moreover, as with males, individual levels of androgens in
females, whether in conventional or sex-reversal species, do not predict
individual levels of aggression. And most broadly, androgen levels don’t
tend to rise around periods of female aggression.59
This makes sense. Female aggression is mostly related to
reproduction and infant survival—maternal aggression, obviously, but
also female competition for mates, nesting places, and much-needed
food during pregnancy or lactation. Androgens disrupt aspects of
reproduction and maternal behavior in females. As emphasized by Hrdy,
females must balance the proaggression advantages of androgens with
their antireproductive disadvantages. Ideally, then, androgens in females
should affect the “aggression” parts of the brain but not the
“reproduction/maternalism” parts. Which is precisely what has evolved,
as it turns out.*60

Perimenstrual Aggression and Irritability
Inevitably we turn to premenstrual syndrome (PMS)*—the
symptoms of negative mood and irritability that come around the time of
menstruation (along with the bloating of water retention, cramps,
acne . . .). There’s a lot of baggage and misconceptions about PMS
(along with PMDD—premenstrual dysphoric disorder, where symptoms
are severe enough to impair normal functioning; it effects 2 to 5 percent
of women).61
The topic is mired in two controversies—what causes PMS/PMDD,
and how is it relevant to aggression? The first is a doozy. Is PMS/PMDD

118

a biological disease or a social construct?
In the extreme “It’s just a social construct” school, PMS is entirely
culture specific, meaning it occurs only in certain societies. Margaret
Mead started this by asserting in 1928 in Coming of Age in Samoa that
Samoan women don’t have mood or behavioral changes when
menstruating. Since the Samoans were enshrined by Mead as the coolest,
most peaceful and sexually free primates east of bonobos, this started
trendy anthropological claims that women in other hip, minimal-clothing
cultures had no PMS either.* And naturally, cultures with rampant PMS
(e.g., American primates) were anti-Samoans, where symptoms arose
from mistreatment and sexual repression of women. This view even had
room for a socioeconomic critique, with howlers like “PMS [is] a mode
for the expression of women’s anger resulting from her oppressed
position in American capitalist society.”*62
An offshoot of this view is the idea that in such repressive societies,
it’s the most repressed women who have the worst PMS. Thus,
depending on the paper, women with bad PMS must be anxious,
depressed, neurotic, hypochondriacal, sexually repressed, toadies of
religious repression, or more compliant with gender stereotypes and must
respond to challenge by withdrawing, rather than by tackling things head
on. In other words, not a single cool Samoan among them.
Fortunately, this has mostly subsided. Numerous studies show
normal shifts in the brain and behavior over the course of the
reproductive cycle, with as many behavioral correlates of ovulation as of
menses.*63 PMS, then, is simply a disruptively extreme version of those
shifts. While PMS is real, symptoms vary by culture. For example,
perimenstrual women in China report less negative affect than do
Western women (raising the issue of whether they experience less and/or
report less). Given the more than one hundred symptoms linked to PMS,
it’s not surprising if different symptoms predominate in different
populations.
As strong evidence that perimenstrual mood and behavioral changes
are biological, they occur in other primates.64 Both female baboons and
female vervet monkeys become more aggressive and less social before
their menses (without, to my knowledge, having issues with American
capitalism). Interestingly, the baboon study showed increased
aggressiveness only in dominant females; presumably, subordinate
females simply couldn’t express increased aggressiveness.
119

All these findings suggest that the mood and behavioral shifts are
biologically based. What is a social construct is medicalizing and
pathologizing these shifts as “symptoms,” a “syndrome,” or “disorder.”
Thus, what is the underlying biology? A leading theory points to the
plunging levels of progesterone as menses approaches and thus the loss
of its anxiolytic and sedating effects. In this view, PMS arises from too
extreme of a decline. However, there’s not much actual support for this
idea.
Another theory, backed by some evidence, concerns the hormone
beta-endorphin, famed for being secreted during exercise and inducing a
gauzy, euphoric “runner’s high.” In this model PMS is about abnormally
low levels of beta-endorphin. There are plenty more theories but very
little certainty.
Now for the question of how much PMS is associated with
aggression. In the 1960s, studies by Katharina Dalton, who coined the
term “premenstrual syndrome” in 1953, reported that female criminals
committed their crimes disproportionately during their perimenstrual
period (which may tell less about committing a crime than about getting
caught).65 Other studies of a boarding school showed a disproportionate
share of “bad marks” for behavioral offenses going to perimenstrual
students. However, the prison studies didn’t distinguish between violent
and nonviolent crimes, and the school study didn’t distinguish between
aggressive acts and infractions like tardiness. Collectively, there is little
evidence that women tend toward aggression around their menses or that
violent women are more likely to have committed their acts around their
menses.
Nevertheless, defense pleas of PMS-related “diminished
responsibility” have been successful in courtrooms.66 A notable 1980
case concerned Sandie Craddock, who murdered a coworker and had a
long rap sheet with more than thirty convictions for theft, arson, and
assault. Incongruously but fortuitously, Craddock was a meticulous
diarist, having years of records of not just when she was having her
period but also when she was out about town on a criminal spree. Her
criminal acts and times of menses matched so closely that she was put on
probation plus progesterone treatment. And making the case stranger,
Craddock’s doctor later reduced her progesterone dose; by her next
period, she had been arrested for attempting to knife someone. Probation
again, plus a wee bit more progesterone.

120

These studies suggest that a small number of women do show
perimenstrual behavior that qualifies as psychotic and should be
mitigating in a courtroom.* Nevertheless, normal garden-variety
perimenstrual shifts in mood and behavior are not particularly associated
with increased aggression.

121

STRESS AND IMPRUDENT BRAIN
FUNCTION

T

he time before some of our most important, consequential
behaviors can be filled with stress. Which is too bad, since stress
influences the decisions we make, rarely for the better.

The Basic Dichotomy of the Acute and the Chronic
Stress Response
We begin with a long-forgotten term from ninth-grade biology.
Remember “homeostasis”? It means having an ideal body temperature,
heart rate, glucose level, and so on. A “stressor” is anything that disrupts
homeostatic balance—say, being chased by a lion if you’re a zebra, or
chasing after a zebra if you’re a hungry lion. The stress response is the
array of neural and endocrine changes that occur in that zebra or lion,
designed to get them through that crisis and reestablish homeostasis.*67
Critical events in the brain mediate the start of the stress response.
(Warning: the next two paragraphs are technical and not essential.) The
sight of the lion activates the amygdala; amygdaloid neurons stimulate
brain-stem neurons, which then inhibit the parasympathetic nervous
system and mobilize the sympathetic nervous system, releasing
epinephrine and norepinephrine throughout the body.
The amygdala also mediates the other main branch of the stress
response, activating the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) in the
hypothalamus. And the PVN sends projections to the base of the
hypothalamus, where it secretes corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH);
this triggers the pituitary to release adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), which stimulates glucocorticoid secretion from the adrenals.
Glucocorticoids plus the sympathetic nervous system enable an
organism to survive a physical stressor by activating the classical “fight
or flight” response. Whether you are that zebra or that lion, you’ll need
energy for your muscles, and the stress response rapidly mobilizes
energy into circulation from storage sites in your body. Furthermore,
122

heart rate and blood pressure increase, delivering that circulating energy
to exercising muscles faster. Moreover, during stress, long-term building
projects—growth, tissue repair, and reproduction—are postponed until
after the crisis; after all, if a lion is chasing you, you have better things to
do with your energy than, say, thicken your uterine walls. Betaendorphin is secreted, the immune system is stimulated, and blood
clotting is enhanced, all useful following painful injury. Moreover,
glucocorticoids reach the brain, rapidly enhancing aspects of cognition
and sensory acuity.
This is wonderfully adaptive for the zebra or lion; try sprinting
without epinephrine and glucocorticoids, and you’ll soon be dead.
Reflecting its importance, this basic stress response is ancient
physiology, found in mammals, birds, fish, and reptiles.
What is not ancient is how stress works in smart, socially
sophisticated, recently evolved primates. For primates the definition of a
stressor expands beyond merely a physical challenge to homeostasis. In
addition, it includes thinking you’re going to be thrown out of
homeostasis. An anticipatory stress response is adaptive if there really is
a physical challenge coming. However, if you’re constantly but
incorrectly convinced that you’re about to be thrown out of balance,
you’re being an anxious, neurotic, paranoid, or hostile primate who is
psychologically stressed. And the stress response did not evolve for
dealing with this recent mammalian innovation.
Mobilizing energy while sprinting for your life helps save you. Do
the same thing chronically because of a stressful thirty-year mortgage,
and you’re at risk for various metabolic problems, including adult-onset
diabetes. Likewise with blood pressure: increase it to sprint across the
savanna—good thing. Increase it because of chronic psychological
stress, and you’ve got stress-induced hypertension. Chronically impair
growth and tissue repair, and you’ll pay the price. Ditto for chronically
inhibiting reproductive physiology; you’ll disrupt ovulatory cycles in
women and cause plummeting erections and testosterone levels in men.
Finally, while the acute stress response involves enhanced immunity,
chronic stress suppresses immunity, increasing vulnerability to some
infectious diseases.*
We have a dichotomy—if you’re stressed like a normal mammal in
an acute physical crisis, the stress response is lifesaving. But if instead
you chronically activate the stress response for reasons of psychological

123

stress, your health suffers. It is a rare human who sickens because they
can’t activate the stress response when it is needed. Instead, we get sick
from activating the stress response too often, too long, and for purely
psychological reasons. Crucially, the beneficial effects of the stress
response for sprinting zebras and lions play out over the course of
seconds to minutes. But once you take stress to the time course of this
chapter (henceforth referred to as “sustained” stress), you’ll be dealing
with adverse consequences. Including some unwelcome effects on the
behaviors that fill this book.

A Brief Digression: Stress That We Love
Either running from a lion or dealing with years of traffic jams is a
drag. Which contrasts with stress that we love.68
We love stress that is mild and transient and occurs in a benevolent
context. The stressful menace of a roller-coaster ride is that it will make
us queasy, not that it will decapitate us; it lasts for three minutes, not
three days. We love that kind of stress, clamor for it, pay to experience it.
What do we call that optimal amount of stress? Being engaged,
engrossed, and challenged. Being stimulated. Playing. The core of
psychological stress is loss of control and predictability. But in
benevolent settings we happily relinquish control and predictability to be
challenged by the unexpected—a dip in the roller-coaster tracks, a plot
twist, a difficult line drive heading our way, an opponent’s unexpected
chess move. Surprise me—this is fun.
This brings up a key concept, namely the inverted U. The complete
absence of stress is aversively boring. Moderate, transient stress is
wonderful—various aspects of brain function are enhanced;
glucocorticoid levels in that range enhance dopamine release; rats work
at pressing levers in order to be infused with just the right amount of
glucocorticoids. And as stress becomes more severe and prolonged,
those good effects disappear (with, of course, dramatic individual
differences as to where the transition from stress as stimulatory to
overstimulatory occurs; one person’s nightmare is another’s hobby).*

124

Visit bit.ly/2ngw6bq for a larger version of this graph.

We love the right amount of stress, would wither without it. But back
now to sustained stress and the right side of the inverted U.

Sustained Stress and the Neurobiology of Fear
For starters, sustained stress makes people implicitly (i.e., not
consciously) look more at angry faces. Moreover, during stress, that
sensory shortcut from the thalamus to the amygdala becomes more
active, with more excitable synapses; we know the resulting trade-off
between speed and accuracy. Compounding things further,
glucocorticoids decrease activation of the (cognitive) medial PFC during
processing of emotional faces. Collectively, stress or glucocorticoid
administration decreases accuracy when rapidly assessing emotions of
faces.69

125

Meanwhile, during stress things aren’t going great in the amygdala.
The region is highly sensitive to glucocorticoids, with lots of
glucocorticoid receptors; stress and glucocorticoids increase excitability
of amygdaloid neurons,* particularly in the basolateral amygdala (the
BLA), with its role in learning fear. Thus, this is another contingent
hormone action—glucocorticoids don’t cause action potentials in
amygdaloid neurons, don’t invent excitation. Instead they amplify
preexisting excitation. Stress and glucocorticoids also increase levels of
CRH in the BLA, and of a growth factor that builds new dendrites and
synapses (brain-derived neurotrophic factor, or BDNF).70
Recall from chapter 2 how during a fearful situation the amygdala
recruits the hippocampus into remembering contextual information about
the event (e.g., the amygdala remembers the thief’s knife, whereas the
hippocampus remembers where the robbery occurred).71 Stress
strengthens this recruitment, making the hippocampus a temporary fearladen suburb of the amygdala. Thanks to these glucocorticoid actions in
the amygdala,* stress makes it easier to learn a fear association and to
consolidate it into a long-term memory.
This sets us up for a positive feedback loop. As noted, with the onset
of stress, the amygdala indirectly activates the glucocorticoid stress
response. And in turn glucocorticoids increase amygdala excitability.
Stress also makes it harder to unlearn fear, to “extinguish” a
conditioned fear association. This involves the prefrontal cortex, which
causes fear extinction by inhibiting the BLA (as covered in chapter 2);
stress weakens the PFC’s hold over the amygdala.72
Recall what fear extinction is about. You’ve learned to fearfully
associate a light with a shock, but today the light keeps coming on with
no shock. Extinction is not passively forgetting that light equals shock. It
is the BLA actively learning that light no longer equals shock. Thus
stress facilitates learning fear associations but impairs learning fear
extinction.

Sustained Stress, Executive Function, and
Judgment
Stress compromises other aspects of frontal cortical function.
Working memory is disrupted; in one study, prolonged administration of

126

high glucocorticoid levels to healthy subjects impaired working memory
into the range seen after frontal cortical damage. Glucocorticoids
accomplish this by enhancing norepinephrine signaling in the PFC so
much that, instead of causing aroused focus, it induces chicken-with-itshead-cut-off cognitive tumult, and by enhancing disruptive signaling
from the amygdala to the PFC. Stress also desynchronizes activation in
different frontocortical regions, which impairs the ability to shift
attention between tasks.73
These stress effects on frontal function also make us perseverative—
in a rut, set in our ways, running on automatic, being habitual. We all
know this—what do we typically do during a stressful time when
something isn’t working? The same thing again, many more times, faster
and more intensely—it becomes unimaginable that the usual isn’t
working. This is precisely where the frontal cortex makes you do the
harder but more correct thing—recognize that it’s time for a change.
Except for a stressed frontal cortex, or one that’s been exposed to a lot of
glucocorticoids. In rats, monkeys, and humans, stress weakens frontal
connections with the hippocampus—essential for incorporating the new
information that should prompt shifting to a new strategy—while
strengthening frontal connections with more habitual brain circuits.74
Finally, the decreased frontal function and increased amygdaloid
function during stress alter risk-taking behavior. For example, the stress
of sleep deprivation or of public speaking, or the administration of high
glucocorticoid levels, shifts people from protecting against losses to
seeking bigger gains when gambling. This involves an interesting gender
difference—in general, major stressors make people of both genders
more risk taking. But moderate stressors bias men toward, and women
away from, risk taking. In the absence of stress, men tend toward more
risk taking than women; thus, once again, hormones enhance a
preexisting tendency.75
Whether one becomes irrationally risk taking (failing to shift strategy
in response to a declining reward rate) or risk averse (failing to respond
to the opposite), one is incorporating new information poorly. Stated
most broadly, sustained stress impairs risk assessment.76

Sustained Stress and Pro- and Antisociality

127

During sustained stress, the amygdala processes emotional sensory
information more rapidly and less accurately, dominates hippocampal
function, and disrupts frontocortical function; we’re more fearful, our
thinking is muddled, and we assess risks poorly and act impulsively out
of habit, rather than incorporating new data.77 This is a prescription for
rapid, reactive aggression; stress and acute administration of
glucocorticoids increase such aggression in both rodents and humans.
We have two familiar qualifications: (a) rather than creating aggression,
stress and glucocorticoids increase sensitivity to social triggers of
aggression; (b) this occurs most readily in individuals already
predisposed toward aggression. As we will see in the next chapter, stress
over the course of weeks to months produces a less nuanced picture.
There’s an additional depressing reason why stress fosters aggression
—because it reduces stress. Shock a rat and its glucocorticoid levels and
blood pressure rise; with enough shocks, it’s at risk for a “stress” ulcer.
Various things can buffer the rat during shocks—running on a running
wheel, eating, gnawing on wood in frustration. But a particularly
effective buffer is for the rat to bite another rat. Stress-induced (aka
frustration-induced) displacement aggression is ubiquitous in various
species. Among baboons, for example, nearly half of aggression is this
type—a high-ranking male loses a fight and chases a subadult male, who
promptly bites a female, who then lunges at an infant. My research
shows that within the same dominance rank, the more a baboon tends to
displace aggression after losing a fight, the lower his glucocorticoid
levels.78
Humans excel at stress-induced displacement aggression—consider
how economic downturns increase rates of spousal and child abuse. Or
consider a study of family violence and pro football. If the local team
unexpectedly loses, spousal/partner violence by men increases 10
percent soon afterward (with no increase when the team won or was
expected to lose). And as the stakes get higher, the pattern is
exacerbated: a 13 percent increase after upsets when the team was in
playoff contention, a 20 percent increase when the upset is by a rival.79
Little is known concerning the neurobiology of displacement
aggression blunting the stress response. I’d guess that lashing out
activates dopaminergic reward pathways, a surefire way to inhibit CRH
release.*80 Far too often, giving an ulcer helps avoid getting one.

128

More bad news: stress biases us toward selfishness. In one study
subjects answered questions about moral decision-making scenarios after
either a social stressor or a neutral situation.* Some scenarios were of
low emotional intensity (“In the supermarket you wait at the meat
counter and an elderly man pushes to the front. Would you complain?”),
others high intensity (“You meet the love of your life, but you are
married and have children. Would you leave your family?”). Stress made
people give more egoistic answers about emotionally intense moral
decisions (but not milder ones); the more glucocorticoid levels rose, the
more egoistic the answers. Moreover, in the same paradigm, stress
lessened how altruistic people claimed they’d be concerning personal
(but not impersonal) moral decisions.81
We have another contingent endocrine effect: stress makes people
more egoistic, but only in the most emotionally intense and personal
circumstances.* This resembles another circumstance of poor frontal
function—recall from chapter 2 how individuals with frontal cortical
damage make reasonable judgments about someone else’s issues, but the
more personal and emotionally potent the issue, the more they are
impaired.
Feeling better by abusing someone innocent, or thinking more about
your own needs, is not compatible with feeling empathy. Does stress
decrease empathy? Seemingly yes, in both mice and humans. A
remarkable 2006 paper in Science by Jeffrey Mogil of McGill University
showed the rudiments of mouse empathy—a mouse’s pain threshold is
lowered when it is near another mouse in pain, but only if the other
mouse is its cagemate.82
This prompted a follow-up study that I did with Mogil’s group
involving the same paradigm. The presence of a strange mouse triggers a
stress response. But when glucocorticoid secretion is temporarily
blocked, mice show the same “pain empathy” for a strange mouse as for
a cagemate. In other words, to personify mice, glucocorticoids narrow
who counts as enough of an “Us” to evoke empathy. Likewise in humans
—pain empathy was not evoked for a stranger unless glucocorticoid
secretion was blocked (either after administration of a short-acting drug
or after the subject and stranger interacted socially). Recall from chapter
2 the involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in pain empathy. I bet
that glucocorticoids do some disabling, atrophying things to neurons
there.

129

Thus, sustained stress has some pretty unappealing behavioral
effects. Nonetheless there are circumstances where stress brings out the
magnificent best in some people. Work by Shelley Taylor of UCLA
shows that “fight or flight” is the typical response to stress in males, and
naturally, the stress literature is predominantly studies of males by
males.83 Things often differ in females. Showing that she can match the
good old boys when it comes to snappy sound bites, Taylor framed the
female stress response as being more about “tend and befriend”—caring
for your young and seeking social affiliation. This fits with striking sex
differences in stress management styles, and tend-and-befriend most
likely reflects the female stress response involving a stronger component
of oxytocin secretion.
Naturally, things are subtler than “male = fight/flight and female =
tend/befriend.” There are frequent counterexamples to each; stress elicits
prosociality in more males than just pair-bonded male marmosets, and
we saw that females are plenty capable of aggression. Then there’s
Mahatma Gandhi and Sarah Palin.* Why are some people exceptions to
these gender stereotypes? That’s part of what the rest of this book is
about.
Stress can disrupt cognition, impulse control, emotional regulation,
decision making, empathy, and prosociality. One final point. Recall from
chapter 2 how the frontal cortex making you do the harder thing when
it’s the right thing is value free—“right thing” is purely instrumental.
Same with stress. Its effects on decision making are “adverse” only in a
neurobiological sense. During a stressful crisis, an EMT may become
perseverative, making her ineffectual at saving lives. A bad thing.
During a stressful crisis, a sociopathic warlord may become
perseverative, making him ineffectual at ethnically cleansing a village.
Not a bad thing.

130

SOME IMPORTANT DEBUNKING:
ALCOHOL

N

o review of the biological events in the minutes to hours prior to a
behavior can omit alcohol. As everyone knows, alcohol lessens
inhibitions, making people more aggressive. Wrong, and in a familiar
way—alcohol only evokes aggression only in (a) individuals prone to
aggression (for example, mice with lower levels of serotonin signaling in
the frontal cortex and men with the oxytocin receptor gene variant less
responsive to oxytocin are preferentially made aggressive by alcohol)
and (b) those who believe that alcohol makes you more aggressive, once
more showing the power of social learning to shape biology.84 Alcohol
works differently in everyone else—for example, a drunken stupor has
caused many a quickie Vegas wedding that doesn’t seem like a great idea
with the next day’s sunrise.

131

SUMMARY AND SOME CONCLUSIONS
Hormones are great; they run circles around
neurotransmitters, in terms of the versatility and
duration of their effects. And this includes affecting the
behaviors pertinent to this book.
Testosterone has far less to do with aggression than most
assume. Within the normal range, individual differences
in testosterone levels don’t predict who will be
aggressive. Moreover, the more an organism has been
aggressive, the less testosterone is needed for future
aggression. When testosterone does play a role, it’s
facilitatory—testosterone does not “invent” aggression.
It makes us more sensitive to triggers of aggression,
particularly in those most prone to aggression. Also,
rising testosterone levels foster aggression only during
challenges to status. Finally, crucially, the rise in
testosterone during a status challenge does not
necessarily increase aggression; it increases whatever is
needed to maintain status. In a world in which status is
awarded for the best of our behaviors, testosterone
would be the most prosocial hormone in existence.
Oxytocin and vasopressin facilitate mother-infant bond
formation and monogamous pair-bonding, decrease
anxiety and stress, enhance trust and social affiliation,
and make people more cooperative and generous. But
this comes with a huge caveat—these hormones increase
prosociality only toward an Us. When dealing with
Thems, they make us more ethnocentric and
xenophobic. Oxytocin is not a universal luv hormone.
It’s a parochial one.
Female aggression in defense of offspring is typically
adaptive and is facilitated by estrogen, progesterone, and
oxytocin. Importantly, females are aggressive in many
other evolutionarily adaptive circumstances. Such
132

aggression is facilitated by the presence of androgens in
females and by complex neuroendocrine tricks for
generating androgenic signals in “aggressive,” but not
“maternal” or “affiliative,” parts of the female brain.
Mood and behavioral changes around the time of
menses are a biological reality (albeit poorly understood
on a nuts-and-bolts level); in contrast, pathologizing
these shifts is a social construct. Finally, except for rare,
extreme cases, the link between PMS and aggression is
minimal.
Sustained stress has numerous adverse effects. The
amygdala becomes overactive and more coupled to
pathways of habitual behavior; it is easier to learn fear
and harder to unlearn it. We process emotionally salient
information more rapidly and automatically, but with
less accuracy. Frontal function—working memory,
impulse control, executive decision making, risk
assessment, and task shifting—is impaired, and the
frontal cortex has less control over the amygdala. And
we become less empathic and prosocial. Reducing
sustained stress is a win-win for us and those stuck
around us.
“I’d been drinking” is no excuse for aggression.
Over the course of minutes to hours, hormonal effects
are predominantly contingent and facilitative. Hormones
don’t determine, command, cause, or invent behaviors.
Instead they make us more sensitive to the social
triggers of emotionally laden behaviors and exaggerate
our preexisting tendencies in those domains. And where
do those preexisting tendencies come from? From the
contents of the chapters ahead of us.

133

Five

Days to Months Before

O

ur act has occurred—the pulling of a trigger or the touching of an
arm that can mean such different things in different contexts.
Why did that just happen? We’ve seen how, seconds before, that
behavior was the product of the nervous system, whose actions were
shaped by sensory cues minutes to hours before, and how the brain’s
sensitivity to those cues was shaped by hormonal exposure in the
preceding hours to days. What events in the prior days to months shaped
that outcome?
Chapter 2 introduced the plasticity of neurons, the fact that things
alter in them. The strength of a dendritic input, the axon hillock’s set
point for initiating an action potential, the duration of the refractory
period. The previous chapter showed that, for example, testosterone
increases the excitability of amygdaloid neurons, and glucocorticoids
decrease excitability of prefrontal cortical neurons. We even saw how
progesterone boosts the efficacy with which GABA-ergic neurons
decrease the excitability of other neurons.
Those versions of neural plasticity occur over hours. We now
examine more dramatic plasticity occurring over days to months. A few
months is enough time for an Arab Spring, for a discontented winter, or
for STDs to spread a lot during a Summer of Love. As we’ll see, this is
also sufficient time for enormous changes in the brain’s structure.

134

NONLINEAR EXCITATION

W

e start small. How can events from months ago produce a
synapse with altered excitability today? How do synapses
“remember”?
When neuroscientists first approached the mystery of memory at the
start of the twentieth century, they asked that question on a more macro
level—how does a brain remember? Obviously, a memory was stored in
a single neuron, and a new memory required a new neuron.
The discovery that adult brains don’t make new neurons trashed that
idea. Better microscopes revealed neuronal arborization, the breathtaking
complexity of branches of dendrites and axon terminals. Maybe a new
memory requires a neuron to grow a new axonal or dendritic branch.
Knowledge emerged about synapses, neurotransmitter-ology was
born, and this idea was modified—a new memory requires the formation
of a new synapse, a new connection between an axon terminal and a
dendritic spine.
These speculations were tossed on the ash heap of history in 1949,
because of the work of the Canadian neurobiologist Donald Hebb, a man
so visionary that even now, nearly seventy years later, neuroscientists
still own bobblehead dolls of him. In his seminal book, The Organization
of Behaviour, Hebb proposed what became the dominant paradigm.
Forming memories doesn’t require new synapses (let alone new branches
or neurons); it requires the strengthening of preexisting synapses.1
What does “strengthening” mean? In circuitry terms, if neuron A
synapses onto neuron B, it means that an action potential in neuron A
more readily triggers one in neuron B. They are more tightly coupled;
they “remember.” Translated into cellular terms, “strengthening” means
that the wave of excitation in a dendritic spine spreads farther, getting
closer to the distant axon hillock.
Extensive research shows that experience that causes repeated firing
across a synapse “strengthens” it, with a key role played by the
neurotransmitter glutamate.
Recall from chapter 2 how an excitatory neurotransmitter binds to its
receptor in the postsynaptic dendritic spine, causing a sodium channel to
135

open; some sodium flows in, causing a blip of excitation, which then
spreads.
Glutamate signaling works in a fancier way that is essential to
learning.2 To simplify considerably, while dendritic spines typically
contain only one type of receptor, those responsive to glutamate contain
two. The first (the “non-NMDA”) works in a conventional way—for
every little smidgen of glutamate binding to these receptors, a smidgen
of sodium flows in, causing a smidgen of excitation. The second (the
“NMDA”) works in a nonlinear, threshold manner. It is usually
unresponsive to glutamate. It’s not until the non-NMDA has been
stimulated over and over by a long train of glutamate release, allowing
enough sodium to flow in, that this activates the NMDA receptor. It
suddenly responds to all that glutamate, opening its channels, allowing
an explosion of excitation.
This is the essence of learning. The lecturer says something, and it
goes in one ear and out the other. The factoid is repeated; same thing. It’s
repeated enough times and—aha!—the lightbulb goes on and suddenly
you get it. At a synaptic level, the axon terminal having to repeatedly
release glutamate is the lecturer droning on repetitively; the moment
when the postsynaptic threshold is passed and the NMDA receptors first
activate is the dendritic spine finally getting it.

136

“AHA” VERSUS ACTUALLY
REMEMBERING

B

ut this has only gotten us to first base. The lightbulb going on in
the middle of the lecture doesn’t mean it’ll still be on in an hour, let
alone during the final exam. How can we make that burst of excitation
persist, so that NMDA receptors “remember,” are more easily activated
in the future? How does the potentiated excitation become long term?
This is our cue to introduce the iconic concept of LTP—“long-term
potentiation.” LTP, first demonstrated in 1966 by Terje Lømo at the
University of Oslo, is the process by which the first burst of NMDA
receptor activation causes a prolonged increase in excitability of the
synapse.* Hundreds of productive careers have been spent figuring out
how LTP works, and the key is that when NMDA receptors finally
activate and open their channels, it is calcium, rather than sodium, that
flows in. This causes an array of changes; here are a few:
The calcium tidal wave causes more copies of glutamate
receptors to be inserted into the dendritic spine’s
membrane, making the neuron more responsive to
glutamate thereafter.*
The calcium also alters glutamate receptors that are
already on the front lines of that dendritic spine; each
will now be more sensitive to glutamate signals.*
The calcium also causes the synthesis of peculiar
neurotransmitters in the dendritic spine, which are
released and travel backward across the synapse; there
they increase the amount of glutamate released from the
axon terminal after future action potentials.
In other words, LTP arises from a combination of the presynaptic
axon terminal yelling “glutamate” more loudly and the postsynaptic
dendritic spine listening more attentively.

137

As I said, additional mechanisms underlie LTP, and neuroscientists
debate which is most important (the one they study, naturally) in neurons
in organisms when they are actually learning. In general, the debate has
been whether pre- or the postsynaptic changes are more crucial.
After LTP came a discovery that suggests a universe in balance. This
is LTD—long-term “depression”—experience-dependent, long-term
decreases in synaptic excitability (and, interestingly, the mechanisms
underlying LTD are not merely the opposite of LTP). LTD is not the
functional opposite of LTP either—rather than being the basis of generic
forgetting, it sharpens a signal by erasing what’s extraneous.
A final point about LTP. There’s long term and there’s long term. As
noted, one mechanism underlying LTP is an alteration in glutamate
receptors so that they are more responsive to glutamate. That change
might persist for the lifetime of the copies of that receptor that were in
that synapse at the time of the LTPing. But that’s typically only a few
days, until those copies accumulate bits of oxygen-radical damage and
are degraded and replaced with new copies (similar updating of all
proteins constantly occurs). Somehow LTP-induced changes in the
receptor are transferred to the next generation of copies. How else can
octogenarians remember kindergarten? The mechanism is elegant but
beyond the scope of this chapter.
All this is cool, but LTP and LDP are what happens in the
hippocampus when you learn explicit facts, like someone’s phone
number. But we’re interested in other types of learning—how we learn to
be afraid, to control our impulses, to feel empathy, or to feel nothing for
someone else.
Synapses utilizing glutamate occur throughout the nervous system,
and LTP isn’t exclusive to the hippocampus. This was a traumatic
discovery for many LTP/hippocampus researchers—after all, LTP is
what occurred in Schopenhauer’s hippocampus when he read Hegel, not
what the spinal cord does to make you more coordinated at twerking.*
Nonetheless, LTP occurs throughout the nervous system.*3 For
example, fear conditioning involves synapses LTPing in the basolateral
amygdala. LTP underlies the frontal cortex learning to control the
amygdala. It’s how dopaminergic systems learn to associate a stimulus
with a reward—for example, how addicts come to associate a location
with a drug, feeling cravings when in that setting.

138

Let’s add hormones to this, translating some of our stress concepts
into the language of neural plasticity. Moderate, transient stress (i.e., the
good, stimulatory stress) promotes hippocampal LTP, while prolonged
stress disrupts it and promotes LTD—one reason why cognition tanks at
such times. This is the inverted-U concept of stress writ synaptic.4
Moreover, sustained stress and glucocorticoid exposure enhance LTP
and suppress LTD in the amygdala, boosting fear conditioning, and
suppress LTP in the frontal cortex. Combining these effects—more
excitable synapses in the amygdala, fewer ones in the frontal cortex—
helps explain stress-induced impulsivity and poor emotional regulation.5

Rescued from the Trash
The notion of memory resting on the strengthening of preexisting
synapses dominates the field. But ironically, the discarded idea that
memory requires the formation of new synapses has been resuscitated.
Techniques for counting all of a neuron’s synapses show that housing
rats in a rich, stimulatory environment increases their number of
hippocampal synapses.
Profoundly fancy techniques let you follow one dendritic branch of a
neuron over time as a rat learns something. Astonishingly, over minutes
to hours a new dendritic spine emerges, followed by an axon terminal
hovering nearby; over the next weeks, they form a functioning synapse
that stabilizes the new memory (and in other circumstances, dendritic
spines retract, eliminating synapses).
Such “activity-dependent synaptogenesis” is coupled to LTP—when
a synapse undergoes LTP, the tsunami of calcium rushing into the spine
can diffuse and trigger the formation of a new spine in the adjacent
stretch of the dendritic branch.
New synapses form throughout the brain—in motor-cortex neurons
when you learn a motoric task, or in the visual cortex after lots of visual
stimulation. Stimulate a rat’s whiskers a lot, and ditto in the “whisker
cortex.”6
Moreover, when enough new synapses form in a neuron, the length
and number of branches in its dendritic “tree” often expand as well,
increasing the strength and number of the neurons that can talk to it.

139

Stress and glucocorticoids have inverted-U effects here as well.
Moderate, transient stress (or exposure to the equivalent glucocorticoid
levels) increases spine number in the hippocampus; sustained stress or
glucocorticoid exposure does the opposite.7 Moreover, major depression
or anxiety—two disorders associated with elevated glucocorticoid levels
—can reduce hippocampal dendrite and spine number. This arises from
decreased levels of that key growth factor mentioned earlier this chapter,
BDNF.
Sustained stress and glucocorticoids also cause dendritic retraction
and synapse loss, lower levels of NCAM (a “neural cell adhesion
molecule” that stabilizes synapses), and less glutamate release in the
frontal cortex. The more of these changes, the more attentional and
decision-making impairments.8
Recall from chapter 4 how acute stress strengthens connectivity
between the frontal cortex and motoric areas, while weakening frontalhippocampal connections; the result is decision making that is habitual,
rather than incorporating new information. Similarly, chronic stress
increases spine number in frontal-motor connections and decreases it in
frontal-hippocampal ones.9
Continuing the theme of the amygdala differing from the frontal
cortex and hippocampus, sustained stress increases BDNF levels and
expands dendrites in the BLA, persistently increasing anxiety and fear
conditioning.10 The same occurs in that way station by which the
amygdala talks to the rest of the brain (the BNST—bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis). Recall that while the BLA mediates fear conditioning,
the central amygdala is more involved in innate phobias. Interestingly,
stress seems not to increase the force of phobias or spine number in the
central amygdala.
There’s wonderful context dependency to these effects. When a rat
secretes tons of glucocorticoids because it’s terrified, dendrites atrophy
in the hippocampus. However, if it secretes the same amount by
voluntarily running on a running wheel, dendrites expand. Whether the
amygdala is also activated seems to determine whether the hippocampus
interprets the glucocorticoids as good or bad stress.11
Spine number and branch length in the hippocampus and frontal
cortex are also increased by estrogen.12 Remarkably, the size of neurons’
dendritic trees in the hippocampus expands and contracts like an

140

accordion throughout a female rat’s ovulatory cycle, with the size (and
her cognitive skills) peaking when estrogen peaks.*
Thus, neurons can form new dendritic branches and spines,
increasing the size of their dendritic tree or, in other circumstances, do
the opposite; hormones frequently mediate these effects.

Axonal Plasticity
Meanwhile, there’s plasticity at the other end of the neuron, where
axons can sprout offshoots that head off in novel directions. As a
spectacular example, when a blind person adept at Braille reads in it,
there’s the same activation of the tactile cortex as in anyone else; but
amazingly, uniquely, there is also activation of the visual cortex.13 In
other words, neurons that normally send axons to the fingertipprocessing part of the cortex instead have gone miles off course, growing
projections to the visual cortex. One extraordinary case concerned a
congenitally blind woman, adept at Braille, who had a stroke in her
visual cortex. And as a result, she lost the ability to read Braille—the
bumps on the page felt flattened, imprecise—while other tactile
functions remained. In another study, blind subjects were trained to
associate letters with distinctive tones, to the point where they could hear
a sequence of tones as letters and words. When these individuals would
“read with sound,” they’d activate the part of the visual cortex activated
in sighted individuals when reading. Similarly, when a person who is
deaf and adept at American Sign Language watches someone signing,
there is activation of the part of their auditory cortex normally activated
by speech.
The injured nervous system can “remap” in similar ways. Suppose
there is stroke damage to the part of your cortex that receives tactile
information from your hand. The tactile receptors in your hand work fine
but have no neurons to talk to; thus you lose sensation in your hand. In
the subsequent months to years, axons from those receptors can sprout
off in new directions, shoehorning their way into neighboring parts of the
cortex, forming new synapses there. An imprecise sense of touch may
slowly return to the hand (along with a less precise sense of touch in the
part of the body projecting to the cortical region that accommodated
those refugee axon terminals).

141

Suppose, instead, that tactile receptors in the hand are destroyed, no
longer projecting to those sensory cortical neurons. Neurons abhor a
vacuum, and tactile neurons in the wrist may sprout collateral axonal
branches and expand their territory into that neglected cortical region.
Consider blindness due to retinal degeneration, where the projections to
the visual cortex are silenced. As described, fingertip tactile neurons
involved in reading Braille sprout projections into the visual cortex,
setting up camp there. Or suppose there is a pseudoinjury: after merely
five days of subjects being blindfolded, auditory projections start to
remap into the visual cortex (and retract once the blindfolds come off).14
Consider how fingertip tactile neurons carrying information about
Braille remap to the visual cortex in someone blind. The sensory cortex
and visual cortex are far away from each other. How do those tactile
neurons “know” (a) that there’s vacant property in the visual cortex; (b)
that hooking up with those unoccupied neurons helps turn fingertip
information into “reading”; and (c) how to send axonal projections to
this new cortical continent? All are matters of ongoing research.
What happens in a blind person when auditory projection neurons
expand their target range into the inactive visual cortex? More acute
hearing—the brain can respond to deficits in one realm with
compensations in another.
So sensory projection neurons can remap. And once, say, visual
cortex neurons are processing Braille in a blind person, those neurons
need to remap where they project to, triggering further downstream
remapping. Waves of plasticity.
Remapping occurs regularly throughout the brain in the absence of
injury. My favorite examples concern musicians, who have larger
auditory cortical representation of musical sounds than do nonmusicians,
particularly for the sound of their own instrument, as well as for
detecting pitch in speech; the younger the person begins being a
musician, the stronger the remapping.15
Such remapping does not require decades of practice, as shown in
beautiful work by Alvaro Pascual-Leone at Harvard.16 Nonmusician
volunteers learned a five-finger exercise on the piano, which they
practiced for two hours a day. Within a few days the amount of motor
cortex devoted to the movement of that hand expanded, but the
expansion lasted less than a day without further practice. This expansion
was probably “Hebbian” in nature, meaning preexisting connections
142

transiently strengthened after repeated use. However, if subjects did the
daily exercise for a crazed four weeks, the remapping persisted for many
days afterward. This expansion probably involved axonal sprouting and
the formation of new connections. Remarkably, remapping also occurred
in volunteers who spent two hours a day imagining playing the finger
exercise.
As another example of remapping, after female rats give birth, there
is expansion of the tactile map representing the skin around the nipples.
As a rather different example, spend three months learning how to
juggle, and there is expansion of the cortical map for visual processing of
movement.*17
Thus, experience alters the number and strength of synapses, the
extent of dendritic arbor, and the projection targets of axons. Time for
the biggest revolution in neuroscience in years.

143

DIGGING DEEPER IN THE ASH HEAP OF
HISTORY

R

ecall the crude, Neanderthal-ish notion that new memories require
new neurons, an idea discarded when Hebb was in diapers. The
adult brain does not make new neurons. You’ve got your maximal
number of neurons around birth, and it’s downhill from there, thanks to
aging and imprudence.
You see where we’re heading—adult brains, including aged human
brains, do make new neurons. The finding is truly revolutionary, its
discovery epic.
In 1965 an untenured associate professor at MIT named Joseph
Altman (along with a longtime collaborator, Gopal Das) found the first
evidence for adult neurogenesis, using a then-novel technique. A newly
made cell contains newly made DNA. So, find a molecule unique to
DNA. Get a test tube full of the stuff and attach a miniscule radioactive
tag to each molecule. Inject it into an adult rat, wait awhile, and examine
its brain. If any neurons contain that radioactive tag, it means they were
born during the waiting period, with the radioactive marker incorporated
into the new DNA.
This is what Altman saw in a series of studies.18 As even he notes,
the work was initially well received, being published in good journals,
generating excitement. But within a few years something shifted, and
Altman and his findings were rejected by leaders in the field—it couldn’t
be true. He failed to get tenure, spent his career at Purdue University, lost
funding for his adult neurogenesis work.
Silence reigned for a decade until an assistant professor at the
University of New Mexico named Michael Kaplan extended Altman’s
findings with some new techniques. Again this caused mostly crushing
rejection by senior figures in the field, including one of the most
established men in neuroscience, Pasko Rakic of Yale.19
Rakic publicly rejected Kaplan’s (and tacitly Altman’s) work, saying
he had looked for new neurons himself, they weren’t there, and Kaplan
was mistaking other cell types for neurons. At a conference he

144

notoriously told Kaplan, “Those may look like neurons in New Mexico,
but they don’t in New Haven.” Kaplan soon left research (and a quarter
century later, amid the excitement of the rediscovery of adult
neurogenesis, wrote a short memoir entitled “Environmental Complexity
Stimulates Visual Cortex Neurogenesis: Death of a Dogma and a
Research Career”).
The field lay dormant for another decade until unexpected evidence
of adult neurogenesis emerged from the lab of Fernando Nottebohm of
Rockefeller University. Nottebohm, a highly accomplished and esteemed
neuroscientist, as good an old boy as you get, studied the neuroethology
of birdsong. He demonstrated something remarkable, using new, more
sensitive techniques: new neurons are made in the brains of birds that
learn a new territorial song each year.
The quality of the science and Nottebohm’s prestige silenced those
who doubted that neurogenesis occurred. Instead they questioned its
relevance—oh, that’s nice for Fernando and his birdies, but what about
in real species, in mammals?
But this was soon convincingly shown in rats, using newer, fancier
techniques. Much of this was the work of two young scientists, Elizabeth
Gould of Princeton, and Fred “Rusty” Gage of the Salk Institute.
Soon lots of other people were finding adult neurogenesis with these
new techniques, including, lo and behold, Rakic.20 A new flavor of
skepticism emerged, led by Rakic. Yes, the adult brain makes new
neurons, but only a few, they don’t live long, and it doesn’t happen
where it really counts (i.e., the cortex); moreover, this has been shown
only in rodents, not in primates. Soon it was shown in monkeys.*21
Yeah, said the skeptics, but not humans, and besides, there’s no evidence
that these new neurons are integrated into preexisting circuits and
actually function.
All of that was eventually shown—there’s considerable adult
neurogenesis in the hippocampus (where roughly 3 percent of neurons
are replaced each month) and lesser amounts in the cortex.22 It happens
in humans throughout adult life. Hippocampal neurogenesis, for
example, is enhanced by learning, exercise, estrogen, antidepressants,
environmental enrichment, and brain injury* and inhibited by various
stressors.*23 Moreover, the new hippocampal neurons integrate into
preexisting circuits, with the perky excitability of young neurons in the
perinatal brain. Most important, new neurons are essential for integrating
145

new information into preexisting schemas, something called “pattern
separation.” This is when you learn that two things you previously
thought were the same are, in fact, different—dolphins and porpoises,
baking soda and baking powder, Zooey Deschanel and Katy Perry.
Adult neurogenesis is the trendiest topic in neuroscience. In the five
years after Altman’s 1965 paper was published, it was cited (a
respectable) twenty-nine times in the literature; in the last five, more than
a thousand. Current work examines how exercise stimulates the process
(probably by increasing levels of certain growth factors in the brain),
how new neurons know where to migrate, whether depression is caused
by a failure of hippocampal neurogenesis, and whether the neurogenesis
stimulated by antidepressants is required for such medications to work.24
Why did it take so long for adult neurogenesis to be accepted? I’ve
interacted with many of the principals and am struck by their differing
takes. At one extreme is the view that while skeptics like Rakic were
ham-handed, they provided quality control and that, counter to how pathof-the-hero epics go, some early work in the field was not all that solid.
At the other extreme is the view that Rakic et al., having failed to find
adult neurogenesis, couldn’t accept that it existed. This psychohistorical
view, of the old guard clinging to dogma in the face of changing winds,
is weakened a bit by Altman’s not having been a young anarchist running
amok in the archives; in fact, he is a bit older than Rakic and other
principal skeptics. All of this needs to be adjudicated by historians,
screenwriters, and soon, I hope, by the folks in Stockholm.
Altman, who at the time of this writing is eighty-nine, published a
2011 memoir chapter.25 Parts of it have a plaintive, confused tone—
everyone was so excited at first; what happened? Maybe he spent too
much time in the lab and too little marketing the discovery, he suggests.
There’s the ambivalence of someone who spent a long time as a scorned
prophet who at least got to be completely vindicated. He’s philosophical
about it—hey, I’m a Hungarian Jew who escaped from a Nazi camp; you
take things in stride after that.

146

SOME OTHER DOMAINS OF
NEUROPLASTICITY

W

e’ve seen how in adults experience can alter the number of
synapses and dendritic branches, remap circuitry, and stimulate
neurogenesis.26 Collectively, these effects can be big enough to actually
change the size of brain regions. For example, postmenopausal estrogen
treatment increases the size of the hippocampus (probably through a
combination of more dendritic branches and more neurons). Conversely,
the hippocampus atrophies (producing cognitive problems) in prolonged
depression, probably reflecting its stressfulness and the typically
elevated glucocorticoid levels of the disease. Memory problems and loss
of hippocampal volume also occur in individuals with severe chronic
pain syndromes, or with Cushing’s syndrome (an array of disorders
where a tumor causes extremely elevated glucocorticoid levels).
Moreover, post-traumatic stress disorder is associated with increased
volume (and, as we know, hyperreactivity) of the amygdala. In all of
these instances it is unclear how much the stress/glucocorticoid effects
are due to changes in neuron number or to changes in amounts of
dendritic processes.*
One cool example of the size of a brain region changing with
experience concerns the back part of the hippocampus, which plays a
role in memory of spatial maps. Cab drivers use spatial maps for a living,
and one renowned study showed enlargement of that part of the
hippocampus in London taxi drivers. Moreover, a follow-up study
imaged the hippocampus in people before and after the grueling
multiyear process of working and studying for the London cabbie license
test (called the toughest test in the world by the New York Times). The
hippocampus enlarged over the course of the process—in those who
passed the test.27
Thus, experience, health, and hormone fluctuations can change the
size of parts of the brain in a matter of months. Experience can also
cause long-lasting changes in the numbers of receptors for
neurotransmitters and hormones, in levels of ion channels, and in the

147

state of on/off switches on genes in the brain (to be covered in chapter
8).28
With chronic stress the nucleus accumbens is depleted of dopamine,
biasing rats toward social subordination and biasing humans toward
depression. As we saw in the last chapter, if a rodent wins a fight on his
home territory, there are long-lasting increases in levels of testosterone
receptors in the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmentum, enhancing
testosterone’s pleasurable effects. There’s even a parasite called
Toxoplasma gondii that can infect the brain; over the course of weeks to
months, it makes rats less fearful of the smell of cats and makes humans
less fearful and more impulsive in subtle ways. Basically, most anything
you can measure in the nervous system can change in response to a
sustained stimulus. And importantly, these changes are often reversible
in a different environment.*

148

SOME CONCLUSIONS

T

he discovery of adult neurogenesis is revolutionary, and the general
topic of neuroplasticity, in all its guises, is immensely important—
as is often the case when something the experts said couldn’t be turns out
to be.29 The subject is also fascinating because of the nature of the
revisionism—neuroplasticity radiates optimism. Books on the topic are
entitled The Brain That Changes Itself, Train Your Mind, Change Your
Brain, and Rewire Your Brain: Think Your Way to a Better Life, hinting at
the “new neurology” (i.e., no more need for neurology once we can fully
harness neuroplasticity). There’s can-do Horatio Alger spirit every which
way you look.
Amid that, some cautionary points:
One recalls caveats aired in other chapters—the ability
of the brain to change in response to experience is value
free. Axonal remapping in blind or deaf individuals is
great, exciting, and moving. It’s cool that your
hippocampus expands if you drive a London cab. Ditto
about the size and specialization of the auditory cortex
in the triangle player in the orchestra. But at the other
end, it’s disastrous that trauma enlarges the amygdala
and atrophies the hippocampus, crippling those with
PTSD. Similarly, expanding the amount of motor cortex
devoted to finger dexterity is great in neurosurgeons but
probably not a societal plus in safe crackers.
The extent of neuroplasticity is most definitely finite.
Otherwise, grievously injured brains and severed spinal
cords would ultimately heal. Moreover, the limits of
neuroplasticity are quotidian. Malcolm Gladwell has
explored how vastly skilled individuals have put in vast
amounts of practice—ten thousand hours is his magic
number. Nevertheless, the reverse doesn’t hold: ten
thousand hours of practice does not guarantee the

149

neuroplasticity needed to make any of us a Yo-Yo Ma or
LeBron James.
Manipulating neuroplasticity for recovery of function does have
enormous, exciting potential in neurology. But this domain is far from
the concerns of this book. Despite neuroplasticity’s potential, it’s
unlikely that we’ll ever be able to, say, spritz neuronal growth factors up
people’s noses to make them more open-minded or empathic, or to target
neuroplasticity with gene therapy to blunt some jerk’s tendency to
displace aggression.
So what’s the subject good for in the realm of this book? I think the
benefits are mostly psychological. This recalls a point from chapter 2, in
the discussion of the neuroimaging studies demonstrating loss of volume
in the hippocampus of people with PTSD (certainly an example of the
adverse effects of neuroplasticity). I sniped that it was ridiculous that
many legislators needed pictures of the brain to believe that there was
something desperately, organically wrong with veterans with PTSD.
Similarly, neuroplasticity makes the functional malleability of the
brain tangible, makes it “scientifically demonstrated” that brains change.
That people change. In the time span considered in this chapter, people
throughout the Arab world went from being voiceless to toppling tyrants;
Rosa Parks went from victim to catalyst, Sadat and Begin from enemies
to architects of peace, Mandela from prisoner to statesman. And you’d
better bet that changes along the lines of those presented in this chapter
occurred in the brains of anyone transformed by these transformations. A
different world makes for a different worldview, which means a different
brain. And the more tangible and real the neurobiology underlying such
change seems, the easier it is to imagine that it can happen again.

150

Six

Adolescence; or, Dude,
Where’s My Frontal
Cortex?

T

his chapter is the first of two focusing on development. We’ve
established our rhythm: a behavior has just occurred; what events
in the prior seconds, minutes, hours, and so on helped bring it about? The
next chapter extends this into the developmental domain—what
happened during that individual’s childhood and fetal life that
contributed to the behavior?
The present chapter breaks this rhythm in focusing on adolescence.
Does the biology introduced in the preceding chapters work differently
in an adolescent than in an adult, producing different behaviors? Yes.
One fact dominates this chapter. Chapter 5 did in the dogma that
adult brains are set in stone. Another dogma was that brains are pretty
much wired up early in childhood—after all, by age two, brains are
already about 85 percent of adult volume. But the developmental
trajectory is much slower than that. This chapter’s key fact is that the
final brain region to fully mature (in terms of synapse number,
myelination, and metabolism) is the frontal cortex, not going fully online
until the midtwenties.1
This has two screamingly important implications. First, no part of the
adult brain is more shaped by adolescence than the frontal cortex.
Second, nothing about adolescence can be understood outside the context
of delayed frontocortical maturation. If by adolescence limbic,
autonomic, and endocrine systems are going full blast while the frontal
cortex is still working out the assembly instructions, we’ve just
151

explained why adolescents are so frustrating, great, asinine, impulsive,
inspiring, destructive, self-destructive, selfless, selfish, impossible, and
world changing. Think about this—adolescence and early adulthood are
the times when someone is most likely to kill, be killed, leave home
forever, invent an art form, help overthrow a dictator, ethnically cleanse
a village, devote themselves to the needy, become addicted, marry
outside their group, transform physics, have hideous fashion taste, break
their neck recreationally, commit their life to God, mug an old lady, or be
convinced that all of history has converged to make this moment the
most consequential, the most fraught with peril and promise, the most
demanding that they get involved and make a difference. In other words,
it’s the time of life of maximal risk taking, novelty seeking, and
affiliation with peers. All because of that immature frontal cortex.

152

THE REALITY OF ADOLESCENCE

I

s adolescence real? Is there something qualitatively different
distinguishing it from before and after, rather than being part of a
smooth progression from childhood to adulthood? Maybe “adolescence”
is just a cultural construct—in the West, as better nutrition and health
resulted in earlier puberty onset, and the educational and economic
forces of modernity pushed for childbearing at later ages, a
developmental gap emerged between the two. Voilà! The invention of
adolescence.*2
As we’ll see, neurobiology suggests that adolescence is for real, that
the adolescent brain is not merely a half-cooked adult brain or a child’s
brain left unrefrigerated for too long. Moreover, most traditional cultures
do recognize adolescence as distinct, i.e., it brings some but not all of the
rights and responsibilities of adulthood. Nonetheless, what the West
invented is the longest period of adolescence.*
What does seem a construct of individualistic cultures is adolescence
as a period of intergenerational conflict; youth of collectivist cultures
seem less prone toward eye rolling at the dorkiness of adults, starting
with parents. Moreover, even within individualistic cultures adolescence
is not universally a time of acne of the psyche, of Sturm und Drang.
Most of us get through it just fine.

153

THE NUTS AND BOLTS OF FRONTAL
CORTICAL MATURATION

T

he delayed maturation of the frontal cortex suggests an obvious
scenario, namely that early in adolescence the frontal cortex has
fewer neurons, dendritic branches, and synapses than in adulthood, and
that levels increase into the midtwenties. Instead, levels decrease.
This occurs because of a truly clever thing evolved by mammalian
brains. Remarkably, the fetal brain generates far more neurons than are
found in the adult. Why? During late fetal development, there is a
dramatic competition in much of the brain, with winning neurons being
the ones that migrate to the correct location and maximize synaptic
connections to other neurons. And neurons that don’t make the grade?
They undergo “programmed cell death”—genes are activated that cause
them to shrivel and die, their materials then recycled. Neuronal
overproduction followed by competitive pruning (which has been termed
“neural Darwinism”) allowed the evolution of more optimized neural
circuitry, a case of less being more.
The same occurs in the adolescent frontal cortex. By the start of
adolescence, there’s a greater volume of gray matter (an indirect measure
of the total number of neurons and dendritic branches) and more
synapses than in adults; over the next decade, gray-matter thickness
declines as less optimal dendritic processes and connections are pruned
away.*3 Within the frontal cortex, the evolutionarily oldest subregions
mature first; the spanking-new (cognitive) dorsolateral PFC doesn’t even
start losing gray-matter volume until late adolescence. The importance of
this developmental pattern was shown in a landmark study in which
children were neuroimaged and IQ tested repeatedly into adulthood. The
longer the period of packing on gray-matter cortical thickness in early
adolescence before the pruning started, the higher the adult IQ.
Thus, frontal cortical maturation during adolescence is about a more
efficient brain, not more brain. This is shown in easily misinterpreted
neuroimaging studies comparing adolescents and adults.4 A frequent
theme is how adults have more executive control over behavior during

154

some tasks than do adolescents and show more frontal cortical activation
at the time. Now find a task where, atypically, adolescents manage a
level of executive control equal to that of adults. In those situations
adolescents show more frontal activation than adults—equivalent
regulation takes less effort in a well-pruned adult frontal cortex.
That the adolescent frontal cortex is not yet lean and mean is
demonstrable in additional ways. For example, adolescents are not at
adult levels of competence at detecting irony and, when trying to do so,
activate the dmPFC more than do adults. In contrast, adults show more
activation in the fusiform face region. In other words, detecting irony
isn’t much of a frontal task for an adult; one look at the face is enough.5
What about white matter in the frontal cortex (that indirect measure
of myelination of axons)? Here things differ from the overproduce-thenprune approach to gray matter; instead, axons are myelinated throughout
adolescence. As discussed in appendix 1, this allows neurons to
communicate in a more rapid, coordinated manner—as adolescence
progresses, activity in different parts of the frontal cortex becomes more
correlated as the region operates as more of a functional unit.6
This is important. When learning neuroscience, it’s easy to focus on
individual brain regions as functionally distinct (and this tendency
worsens if you then spend a career studying just one of them). As a
measure of this, there are two high-quality biomedical journals out there,
one called Cortex, the other Hippocampus, each publishing papers about
its favorite brain region. At neuroscience meetings attended by tens of
thousands, there’ll be social functions for all the people studying the
same obscure brain region, a place where they can gossip and bond and
court. But in reality the brain is about circuits, about the patterns of
functional connectivity among regions. The growing myelination of the
adolescent brain shows the importance of increased connectivity.
Interestingly, other parts of the adolescent brain seem to help out the
underdeveloped frontal cortex, taking on some roles that it’s not yet
ready for. For example, in adolescents but not adults, the ventral striatum
helps regulate emotions; we will return to this.7
Something else keeps that tyro frontal cortex off-kilter, namely
estrogen and progesterone in females and testosterone in males. As
discussed in chapter 4, these hormones alter brain structure and function,
including in the frontal cortex, where gonadal hormones change rates of
myelination and levels of receptors for various neurotransmitters.
155

Logically, landmarks of adolescent maturation in brain and behavior are
less related to chronological age than to the time since puberty onset.8
Moreover, puberty is not just about the onslaught of gonadal
hormones. It’s about how they come online.9 The defining feature of
ovarian endocrine function is the cyclicity of hormone release—“It’s that
time of the month.” In adolescent females puberty does not arrive full
flower, so to speak, with one’s first period. Instead, for the first few years
only about half of cycles actually involve ovulation and surges of
estrogen and progesterone. Thus, not only are young adolescents
experiencing these first ovulatory cycles, but there are also higher-order
fluctuations in whether the ovulatory fluctuation occurs. Meanwhile,
while adolescent males don’t have equivalent hormonal gyrations, it
can’t help that their frontal cortex keeps getting hypoxic from the priapic
blood flow to the crotch.
Thus, as adolescence dawns, frontal cortical efficiency is diluted with
extraneous synapses failing to make the grade, sluggish communication
thanks to undermyelination, and a jumble of uncoordinated subregions
working at cross-purposes; moreover, while the striatum is trying to help,
a pinch hitter for the frontal cortex gets you only so far. Finally, the
frontal cortex is being pickled in that ebb and flow of gonadal hormones.
No wonder they act adolescent.

Frontal Cortical Changes in Cognition in
Adolescence
To appreciate what frontal cortical maturation has to do with our best
and worst behaviors, it’s helpful to first see how such maturation plays
out in cognitive realms.
During adolescence there’s steady improvement in working memory,
flexible rule use, executive organization, and frontal inhibitory regulation
(e.g., task shifting). In general, these improvements are accompanied by
increasing activity in frontal regions during tasks, with the extent of the
increase predicting accuracy.10
Adolescents also improve at mentalization tasks (understanding
someone else’s perspective). By this I don’t mean emotional perspective
(stay tuned) but purer cognitive challenges, like understanding what
objects look like from someone else’s perspective. The improvement in

156

detecting irony reflects improvement in abstract cognitive perspective
taking.

Frontal Cortical Changes in Emotional Regulation
Older teenagers experience emotions more intensely than do children
or adults, something obvious to anyone who ever spent time as a
teenager. For example, they are more reactive to faces expressing strong
emotions.*11 In adults, looking at an “affective facial display” activates
the amygdala, followed by activation of the emotion-regulating vmPFC
as they habituate to the emotional content. In adolescence, though, the
vmPFC response is less; thus the amygdaloid response keeps growing.
Chapter 2 introduced “reappraisal,” in which responses to strong
emotional stimuli are regulated by thinking about them differently.12 Get
a bad grade on an exam, and there’s an emotional pull toward “I’m
stupid”; reappraisal might lead you instead to focus on your not having
studied or having had a cold, to decide that the outcome was situational,
rather than a function of your unchangeable constitution.
Reappraisal strategies get better during adolescence, with logical
neurobiological underpinnings. Recall how in early adolescence, the
ventral striatum, trying to be helpful, takes on some frontal tasks (fairly
ineffectively, as it’s working above its pay grade). At that age reappraisal
engages the ventral striatum; more activation predicts less amygdaloid
activation and better emotional regulation. As the adolescent matures,
the prefrontal cortex takes over the task, and emotions get steadier.*13
Bringing the striatum into the picture brings up dopamine and
reward, thus bringing up the predilection of adolescents for bungee
jumping.

157

ADOLESCENT RISK TAKING

I

n the foothills of the Sierras are California Caverns, a cave system
that leads, after an initial narrow, twisting 30-foot descent down a
hole, to an abrupt 180-foot drop (now navigable by rappelling). The Park
Service has found skeletons at the bottom dating back centuries,
explorers who took one step too far in the gloom. And the skeletons are
always those of adolescents.
As shown experimentally, during risky decision making, adolescents
activate the prefrontal cortex less than do adults; the less activity, the
poorer the risk assessment. This poor assessment takes a particular form,
as shown by Sarah-Jayne Blakemore of University College London.14
Have subjects estimate the likelihood of some event occurring (winning
the lottery, dying in a plane crash); then tell them the actual likelihood.
Such feedback can constitute good news (i.e., something good is actually
more likely than the person estimated, or something bad is less likely).
Conversely, the feedback can constitute bad news. Ask subjects to
estimate the likelihood of the same events again. Adults incorporate the
feedback into the new estimates. Adolescents update their estimates as
adults do for good news, but feedback about bad news barely makes a
dent. (Researcher: “How likely are you to have a car accident if you’re
driving while drunk?” Adolescent: “One chance in a gazillion.”
Researcher: “Actually, the risk is about 50 percent; what do you think
your own chances are now?” Adolescent: “Hey, we’re talking about me;
one chance in a gazillion.”) We’ve just explained why adolescents have
two to four times the rate of pathological gambling as do adults.15
So adolescents take more risks and stink at risk assessment. But it’s
not just that teenagers are more willing to take risks. After all,
adolescents and adults don’t equally desire to do something risky and the
adults simply don’t do it because of their frontal cortical maturity. There
is an age difference in the sensations sought—adolescents are tempted to
bungee jump; adults are tempted to cheat on their low-salt diet.
Adolescence is characterized not only by more risking but by more
novelty seeking as well.*16

158

Novelty craving permeates adolescence; it is when we usually
develop our stable tastes in music, food, and fashion, with openness to
novelty declining thereafter.17 And it’s not just a human phenomenon.
Across the rodent life span, it’s adolescents who are most willing to eat a
new food. Adolescent novelty seeking is particularly strong in other
primates. Among many social mammals, adolescents of one sex leave
their natal group, emigrating into another population, a classic means to
avoid inbreeding. Among impalas there are groups of related females
and offspring with one breeding male; the other males knock around
disconsolately in “bachelor herds,” each scheming to usurp the breeding
male. When a young male hits puberty, he is driven from the group by
the breeding male (and to avoid some Oedipus nonsense, this is unlikely
to be his father, who reigned many breeding males ago).
But not among primates. Take baboons. Suppose two troops
encounter each other at some natural boundary—say, a stream. The
males threaten each other for a while, eventually get bored, and resume
whatever they were doing. Except there’s an adolescent, standing at the
stream’s edge, riveted. New baboons, a whole bunch of ’em! He runs
five steps toward them, runs back four, nervous, agitated. He gingerly
crosses and sits on the other bank, scampering back should any new
baboon glance at him.
So begins the slow process of transferring, spending more time each
day with the new troop until he breaks the umbilical cord and spends the
night. He wasn’t pushed out. Instead, if he has to spend one more day
with the same monotonous baboons he’s known his whole life, he’ll
scream. Among adolescent chimps it’s females who can’t get off the
farm fast enough. We primates aren’t driven out at adolescence. Instead
we desperately crave novelty.*
Thus, adolescence is about risk taking and novelty seeking. Where
does the dopamine reward system fit in?
Recall from chapter 2 how the ventral tegmentum is the source of the
mesolimbic dopamine projection to the nucleus accumbens, and of the
mesocortical dopamine projection to the frontal cortex. During
adolescence, dopamine projection density and signaling steadily increase
in both pathways (although novelty seeking itself peaks at
midadolescence, probably reflecting the emerging frontal regulation after
that).18

159

Changes in the amount of dopaminergic activity in the “reward center” of the
brain following different magnitudes of reward. For the adolescents, the highs
are higher, the lows lower.
Visit bit.ly/2o3TBI8 for a larger version of this graph.

It’s unclear how much dopamine is released in anticipation of
reward. Some studies show more anticipatory activation of reward
pathways in adolescents than in adults, while others show the opposite,
with the least dopaminergic responsiveness in adolescents who are most
risk taking.19
Age differences in absolute levels of dopamine are less interesting
than differences in patterns of release. In a great study, children,
adolescents, and adults in brain scanners did some task where correct
responses produced monetary rewards of varying sizes (see figure
above).20 During this, prefrontal activation in both children and
adolescents was diffuse and unfocused. However, activation in the
nucleus accumbens in adolescents was distinctive. In children, a correct
answer produced roughly the same increase in activity regardless of size
of reward. In adults, small, medium, and large rewards caused small,
medium, and large increases in accumbens activity. And adolescents?
After a medium reward things looked the same as in kids and adults. A
large reward produced a humongous increase, much bigger than in
adults. And the small reward? Accumbens activity declined. In other
words, adolescents experience bigger-than-expected rewards more
160

positively than do adults and smaller-than-expected rewards as aversive.
A gyrating top, nearly skittering out of control.
This suggests that in adolescents strong rewards produce exaggerated
dopaminergic signaling, and nice sensible rewards for prudent actions
feel lousy. The immature frontal cortex hasn’t a prayer to counteract a
dopamine system like this. But there is something puzzling.
Amid their crazy, unrestrained dopamine neurons, adolescents have
reasoning skills that, in many domains of perceiving risk, match those of
adults. Yet despite that, logic and reasoning are often jettisoned, and
adolescents act adolescent. Work by Laurence Steinberg of Temple
University has identified a key juncture where adolescents are
particularly likely to leap before looking: when around peers.

161

PEERS, SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE, AND
SOCIAL EXCLUSION

A

dolescent vulnerability to peer pressure from friends, especially
peers they want to accept them as friends, is storied. It can also be
demonstrated experimentally. In one Steinberg study adolescents and
adults took risks at the same rate in a video driving game. Adding two
peers to egg them on had no effect on adults but tripled risk taking in
adolescents. Moreover, in neuroimaging studies, peers egging subjects
on (by intercom) lessens vmPFC activity and enhances ventral striatal
activity in adolescents but not adults.21
Why do adolescents’ peers have such social power? For starters,
adolescents are more social and more complexly social than children or
adults. For example, a 2013 study showed that teens average more than
four hundred Facebook friends, far more than do adults.22 Moreover,
teen sociality is particularly about affect, and responsiveness to
emotional signaling—recall the greater limbic and lesser frontal cortical
response to emotional faces in adolescents. And teens don’t rack up four
hundred Facebook friends for data for their sociology doctorates. Instead
there is the frantic need to belong.
This produces teen vulnerability to peer pressure and emotional
contagion. Moreover, such pressure is typically “deviance training,”
increasing the odds of violence, substance abuse, crime, unsafe sex, and
poor health habits (few teen gangs pressure kids to join them in tooth
flossing followed by random acts of kindness). For example, in college
dorms the excessive drinker is more likely to influence the teetotaling
roommate than the reverse. The incidence of eating disorders in
adolescents spreads among peers with a pattern resembling viral
contagion. The same occurs with depression among female adolescents,
reflecting their tendency to “co-ruminate” on problems, reinforcing one
another’s negative affect.
Neuroimaging studies show the dramatic sensitivity of adolescents to
peers. Ask adults to think about what they imagine others think of them,
then about what they think of themselves. Two different, partially

162

overlapping networks of frontal and limbic structures activate for the two
tasks. But with adolescents the two profiles are the same. “What do you
think about yourself?” is neurally answered with “Whatever everyone
else thinks about me.”23
The frantic adolescent need to belong is shown beautifully in studies
of the neurobiology of social exclusion. Naomi Eisenberger of UCLA
developed the fiendishly clever “Cyberball” paradigm to make people
feel snubbed.24 The subject lies in a brain scanner, believing she is
playing an online game with two other people (naturally, they don’t exist
—it’s a computer program). Each player occupies a spot on the screen,
forming a triangle. The players toss a virtual ball among themselves; the
subject is picking whom to throw to and believes the other two are doing
the same. The ball is tossed for a while; then, unbeknownst to the
subject, the experiment begins—the other two players stop throwing the
ball to her. She’s being excluded by those creeps. In adults there is
activation of the periaqueductal gray, anterior cingulate, amygdala, and
insular cortex. Perfect—these regions are central to pain perception,
anger, and disgust.* And then, after a delay, the ventrolateral PFC
activates; the more activation, the more the cingulate and insula are
silenced and the less subjects report being upset afterward. What’s this
delayed vlPFC activation about? “Why am I getting upset? This is just a
stupid game of catch.” The frontal cortex comes to the rescue with
perspective, rationalization, and emotion regulation.
Now do the study with teenagers. Some show the adult neuroimaging
profiles; these are ones who rate themselves as least sensitive to rejection
and who spend the most time with friends. But for most teenagers, when
social exclusion occurs, the vlPFC barely activates; the other changes are
bigger than in adults, and the subjects report feeling lousier—adolescents
lack sufficient frontal forcefulness to effectively hand-wave about why it
doesn’t matter. Rejection hurts adolescents more, producing that stronger
need to fit in.25
One neuroimaging study examined a neural building block of
conformity.26 Watch a hand moving, and neurons in premotor regions
that contribute to moving your own hand become a bit active—your
brain is on the edge of imitating the movement. In the study, ten-yearolds watched film clips of hand movements or facial expressions; those
most vulnerable to peer influence (assessed on a scale developed by
Steinberg)* had the most premotor activation—but only for emotional
163

facial expressions. In other words, kids who are more sensitive to peer
pressure are more prepared to imitate someone else’s emotionality.
(Given the age of the subjects, the authors framed their findings as
potentially predictive of later teen behavior.)*
This atomistic level of explaining conformity might predict
something about which teens are likely to join in a riot. But it doesn’t tell
much about who chooses not to invite someone to a party because the
cool kids think she’s a loser.
Another study showed neurobiological correlates of more abstract
peer conformity. Recall how the adolescent ventral striatum helps the
frontal cortex reappraise social exclusion. In this study, young
adolescents most resistant to peer influence had the strongest such
ventral striatal responses. And where might a stronger ventral striatum
come from? You know the answer by now: you’ll see in the remaining
chapters.

164

EMPATHY, SYMPATHY, AND MORAL
REASONING

B

y adolescence, people are typically pretty good at perspective
taking, seeing the world as someone else would. That’s usually
when you’ll first hear the likes of “Well, I still disagree, but I can see
how he feels that way, given his experience.”
Nonetheless, adolescents are not yet adults. Unlike adults, they are
still better at first- than third-person perspective taking (“How would you
feel in her situation?” versus “How does she feel in her situation?”).27
Adolescent moral judgments, while growing in sophistication, are still
not at adult levels. Adolescents have left behind children’s egalitarian
tendency to split resources evenly. Instead, adolescents mostly make
meritocratic decisions (with a smattering of utilitarian and libertarian
viewpoints thrown in); meritocratic thinking is more sophisticated than
egalitarian, since the latter is solely about outcomes, while the former
incorporates thinking about causes. Nonetheless, adolescents’
meritocratic thinking is less complex than adults’—for example,
adolescents are as adept as adults at understanding how individual
circumstances impact behavior, but not at understanding systemic
circumstances.
As adolescents mature, they increasingly distinguish between
intentional and accidental harm, viewing the former as worse.28 When
contemplating the latter, there is now less activation of three brain
regions related to pain processing, namely the amygdala, the insula, and
the premotor areas (the last reflecting the tendency to cringe when
hearing about pain being inflicted). Meanwhile, there is increasing
dlPFC and vmPFC activation when contemplating intentional harm. In
other words, it is a frontal task to appreciate the painfulness of
someone’s being harmed intentionally.
As adolescents mature, they also increasingly distinguish between
harm to people and harm to objects (with the former viewed as worse);
harm to people increasingly activates the amygdala, while the opposite
occurs for harm to objects. Interestingly, as adolescents age, there is less

165

differentiation between recommended punishment for intentional and
unintentional damage to objects. In other words, the salient point about
the damage becomes that, accidental or otherwise, the damn thing needs
to be fixed—even if there is less crying over spilled milk, there is no less
cleaning required.*
What about one of the greatest things about adolescents, with respect
to this book’s concerns—their frenzied, agitated, incandescent ability to
feel someone else’s pain, to feel everyone’s pain, to try to make
everything right? A later chapter distinguishes between sympathy and
empathy—between feeling for someone in pain and feeling as that
someone. Adolescents are specialists at the latter, where the intensity of
feeling as the other can border on being the other.
This intensity is no surprise, being at the intersection of many facets
of adolescence. There are the abundant emotions and limbic gyrations.
The highs are higher, the lows lower, empathic pain scalds, and the glow
of doing the right thing makes it seem plausible that we are here for a
purpose. Another contributing factor is the openness to novelty. An open
mind is a prerequisite for an open heart, and the adolescent hunger for
new experiences makes possible walking miles in lots of other people’s
shoes. And there is the egoism of adolescence. During my late
adolescence I hung out with Quakers, and they’d occasionally use the
aphorism “All God has is thee.” This is the God of limited means, not
just needing the help of humans to right a wrong, but needing you, you
only, to do so. The appeal to egoism is tailor-made for adolescents.
Throw in inexhaustible adolescent energy plus a feeling of omnipotence,
and it seems possible to make the world whole, so why not?
In chapter 13 we consider how neither the most burning emotional
capacity for empathy nor the most highfalutin moral reasoning makes
someone likely to actually do the brave, difficult thing. This raises a
subtle limitation of adolescent empathy.
As will be seen, one instance where empathic responses don’t
necessarily lead to acts is when we think enough to rationalize (“It’s
overblown as a problem” or “Someone else will fix it”). But feeling too
much has problems as well. Feeling someone else’s pain is painful, and
people who do so most strongly, with the most pronounced arousal and
anxiety, are actually less likely to act prosocially. Instead the personal
distress induces a self-focus that prompts avoidance—“This is too awful;

166

I can’t stay here any longer.” As empathic pain increases, your own pain
becomes your primary concern.
In contrast, the more individuals can regulate their adverse empathic
emotions, the more likely they are to act prosocially. Related to that, if a
distressing, empathy-evoking circumstance increases your heart rate,
you’re less likely to act prosocially than if it decreases it. Thus, one
predictor of who actually acts is the ability to gain some detachment, to
ride, rather than be submerged, by the wave of empathy.
Where do adolescents fit in, with their hearts on their sleeves, fully
charged limbic systems, and frontal cortices straining to catch up? It’s
obvious. A tendency toward empathic hyperarousal that can disrupt
acting effectively.29
This adolescent empathy frenzy can seem a bit much for adults. But
when I see my best students in that state, I have the same thought—it
used to be so much easier to be like that. My adult frontal cortex may
enable whatever detached good I do. The trouble, of course, is how that
same detachment makes it easy to decide that something is not my
problem.

167

ADOLESCENT VIOLENCE

O

bviously, the adolescent years are not just about organizing bake
sales to fight global warming. Late adolescence and early
adulthood are when violence peaks, whether premeditated or impulsive
murder, Victorian fisticuffs or handguns, solitary or organized (in or out
of a uniform), focused on a stranger or on an intimate partner. And then
rates plummet. As has been said, the greatest crime-fighting tool is a
thirtieth birthday.
On a certain level the biology underlying the teenaged mugger is
similar to that of the teen who joins the Ecology Club and donates his
allowance to help save the mountain gorillas. It’s the usual—heightened
emotional intensity, craving for peer approval, novelty seeking, and, oh,
that frontal cortex. But that’s where similarities end.
What underlies the adolescent peak in violence? Neuroimaging
shows nothing particularly distinct about it versus adult violence.30
Adolescent and adult psychopaths both have less sensitivity of the PFC
and the dopamine system to negative feedback, less pain sensitivity, and
less amygdaloid/frontal cortical coupling during tasks of moral reasoning
or empathy.
Moreover, the adolescent peak of violence isn’t caused by the surge
in testosterone; harking back to chapter 4, testosterone no more causes
violence in adolescents than it does in adult males. Moreover,
testosterone levels peak during early adolescence, but violence peaks
later.
The next chapter considers some of the roots of adolescent violence.
For now, the important point is that an average adolescent doesn’t have
the self-regulation or judgment of an average adult. This can prompt us
to view teenage offenders as having less responsibility than adults for
criminal acts. An alternative view is that even amid poorer judgment and
self-regulation, there is still enough to merit equivalent sentencing. The
former view has held in two landmark Supreme Court decisions.
In the first, 2005’s Roper v. Simmons, the Court ruled 5–4 that
executing someone for crimes committed before age eighteen is
unconstitutional, violating the Eighth Amendment ban on cruel and
168

unusual punishment. Then in 2012’s Miller v. Alabama, in another 5–4
split, the Court banned mandatory life sentences without the chance of
parole for juvenile offenders, on similar grounds.31
The Court’s reasoning was straight out of this chapter. Writing for the
majority in Roper v. Simmons, Justice Anthony Kennedy said:
First, [as everyone knows, a] lack of maturity and an
underdeveloped sense of responsibility are found in youth more
often than in adults and are more understandable among the
young. These qualities often result in impetuous and illconsidered actions and decisions.32
I fully agree with these rulings. But, to show my hand early, I think
this is just window dressing. As will be covered in the screed that
constitutes chapter 16, I think the science encapsulated in this book
should transform every nook and cranny of the criminal justice system.

169

A FINAL THOUGHT: WHY CAN’T THE
FRONTAL CORTEX JUST ACT ITS AGE?

A

s promised, this chapter’s dominant fact has been the delayed
maturation of the frontal cortex. Why should the delay occur? Is it
because the frontal cortex is the brain’s most complicated construction
project?
Probably not. The frontal cortex uses the same neurotransmitter
systems as the rest of the brain and uses the same basic neurons.
Neuronal density and complexity of interconnections are similar to the
rest of the (fancy) cortex. It isn’t markedly harder to build frontal cortex
than any other cortical region.
Thus, it is not likely that if the brain “could” grow a frontal cortex as
fast as the rest of the cortex, it “would.” Instead I think there was
evolutionary selection for delayed frontal cortex maturation.
If the frontal cortex matured as fast as the rest of the brain, there’d be
none of the adolescent turbulence, none of the antsy, itchy exploration
and creativity, none of the long line of pimply adolescent geniuses who
dropped out of school and worked away in their garages to invent fire,
cave painting, and the wheel.
Maybe. But this just-so story must accommodate behavior evolving
to pass on copies of the genes of individuals, not for the good of the
species (stay tuned for chapter 10). And for every individual who scored
big time reproductively thanks to adolescent inventiveness, there’ve been
far more who instead broke their necks from adolescent imprudence. I
don’t think delayed frontal cortical maturation evolved so that
adolescents could act over the top.
Instead, I think it is delayed so that the brain gets it right. Well, duh;
the brain needs to “get it right” with all its parts. But in a distinctive way
in the frontal cortex. The point of the previous chapter was the brain’s
plasticity—new synapses form, new neurons are born, circuits rewire,
brain regions expand or contract—we learn, change, adapt. This is
nowhere more important than in the frontal cortex.

170

An oft-repeated fact about adolescents is how “emotional
intelligence” and “social intelligence” predict adult success and
happiness better than do IQ or SAT scores.33 It’s all about social
memory, emotional perspective taking, impulse control, empathy, ability
to work with others, self-regulation. There is a parallel in other primates,
with their big, slowly maturing frontal cortices. For example, what
makes for a “successful” male baboon in his dominance hierarchy?
Attaining high rank is about muscle, sharp canines, well-timed
aggression. But once high status is achieved, maintaining it is all about
social smarts—knowing which coalitions to form, how to intimidate a
rival, having sufficient impulse control to ignore most provocations and
to keep displacement aggression to a reasonable level. Similarly, as noted
in chapter 2, among male rhesus monkeys a large prefrontal cortex goes
hand in hand with social dominance.
Adult life is filled with consequential forks in the road where the
right thing is definitely harder. Navigating these successfully is the
portfolio of the frontal cortex, and developing the ability to do this right
in each context requires profound shaping by experience.
This may be the answer. As we will see in chapter 8, the brain is
heavily influenced by genes. But from birth through young adulthood,
the part of the human brain that most defines us is less a product of the
genes with which you started life than of what life has thrown at you.
Because it is the last to mature, by definition the frontal cortex is the
brain region least constrained by genes and most sculpted by experience.
This must be so, to be the supremely complex social species that we are.
Ironically, it seems that the genetic program of human brain development
has evolved to, as much as possible, free the frontal cortex from genes.

171

Seven

Back to the Crib, Back to
the Womb

A

fter journeying to Planet Adolescence, we resume our basic
approach. Our behavior—good, bad, or ambiguous—has
occurred. Why? When seeking the roots of behavior, long before neurons
or hormones come to mind, we typically look first at childhood.

172

COMPLEXIFICATION

C

hildhood is obviously about increasing complexity in every realm
of behavior, thought, and emotion. Crucially, such increasing
complexity typically emerges in stereotypical, universal sequences of
stages. Most child behavioral development research is implicitly stage
oriented, concerning: (a) the sequence with which stages emerge; (b)
how experience influences the speed and surety with which that
sequential tape of maturation unreels; and (c) how this helps create the
adult a child ultimately becomes. We start by examining the
neurobiology of the “stage” nature of development.

173

A BRIEF TOUR OF BRAIN
DEVELOPMENT

T

he stages of human brain development make sense. A few weeks
after conception, a wave of neurons are born and migrate to their
correction locations. Around twenty weeks, there is a burst of synapse
formation—neurons start talking to one another. And then axons start
being wrapped in myelin, the glial cell insulation (forming “white
matter”) that speeds up action.
Neuron formation, migration, and synaptogenesis are mostly prenatal
in humans.1 In contrast, there is little myelin at birth, particularly in
evolutionarily newer brain regions; as we’ve seen, myelination proceeds
for a quarter century. The stages of myelination and consequent
functional development are stereotypical. For example, the cortical
region central to language comprehension myelinates a few months
earlier than that for language production—kids understand language
before producing it.
Myelination is most consequential when enwrapping the longest
axons, in neurons that communicate the greatest distances. Thus
myelination particularly facilitates brain regions talking to one another.
No brain region is an island, and the formation of circuits connecting farflung brain regions is crucial—how else can the frontal cortex use its few
myelinated neurons to talk to neurons in the brain’s subbasement to
make you toilet trained?2
As we saw, mammalian fetuses overproduce neurons and synapses;
ineffective or unessential synapses and neurons are pruned, producing
leaner, meaner, more efficient circuitry. To reiterate a theme from the last
chapter, the later a particular brain region matures, the less it is shaped
by genes and the more by environment.3

174

STAGES

W

hat stages of child development help explain the good/bad/inbetween adult behavior that got the ball rolling in chapter 1?
The mother of all developmental stage theories was supplied in 1923,
pioneered by Jean Piaget’s clever, elegant experiments revealing four
stages of cognitive development:4
Sensorimotor stage (birth to ~24 months). Thought
concerns only what the child can directly sense and
explore. During this stage, typically at around 8 months,
children develop “object permanence,” understanding
that even if they can’t see an object, it still exists—the
infant can generate a mental image of something no
longer there.*
Preoperational stage (~2 to 7 years). The child can
maintain ideas about how the world works without
explicit examples in front of him. Thoughts are
increasingly symbolic; imaginary play abounds.
However, reasoning is intuitive—no logic, no cause and
effect. This is when kids can’t yet demonstrate
“conservation of volume.” Identical beakers A and B are
filled with equal amounts of water. Pour the contents of
beaker B into beaker C, which is taller and thinner. Ask
the child, “Which has more water, A or C?” Kids in the
preoperational stage use incorrect folk intuition—the
water line in C is higher than that in A; it must contain
more water.
Concrete operational stage (7 to 12 years). Kids think
logically, no longer falling for that different-shapedbeakers nonsense. However, generalizing logic from
specific cases is iffy. As is abstract thinking—for
example, proverbs are interpreted literally (“‘Birds of a

175

feather flock together’ means that similar birds form
flocks”).
Formal operational stage (adolescence onward).
Approaching adult levels of abstraction, reasoning, and
metacognition.

176

Kid playing hide-and-seek while in the “If I can’t see you (or even if I can’t see
you as easily as usual), then you can’t see me” stage.

177

Other aspects of cognitive development are also conceptualized in
stages. An early stage occurs when toddlers form ego boundaries
—“There is a ‘me,’ separate from everyone else.” A lack of ego
boundaries is shown when a toddler isn’t all that solid on where he ends
and Mommy starts—she’s cut her finger, and he claims his finger hurts.5
Next comes the stage of realizing that other individuals have
different information than you do. Nine-month-olds look where someone
points (as can other apes and dogs), knowing the pointer has information
that they don’t. This is fueled by motivation: Where is that toy? Where’s
she looking? Older kids understand more broadly that other people have
different thoughts, beliefs, and knowledge than they, the landmark of
achieving Theory of Mind (ToM).6
Here’s what not having ToM looks like. A two-year-old and an adult
see a cookie placed in box A. The adult leaves, and the researcher
switches the cookie to box B. Ask the child, “When that person comes
back, where will he look for the cookie?” Box B—the child knows it’s
there and thus everyone knows. Around age three or four the child can
reason, “They’ll think it’s in A, even though I know it’s in B.” Shazam:
ToM.
Mastering such “false belief” tests is a major developmental
landmark. ToM then progresses to fancier insightfulness—e.g., grasping
irony, perspective taking, or secondary ToM (understanding person A’s
ToM about person B).7
Various cortical regions mediate ToM: parts of the medial PFC
(surprise!) and some new players, including the precuneus, the superior
temporal sulcus, and the temporoparietal junction (TPJ). This is shown
with neuroimaging; by ToM deficits if these regions are damaged
(autistic individuals, who have limited ToM, have decreased gray matter
and activity in the superior temporal sulcus); and by the fact that if you
temporarily inactivate the TPJ, people don’t consider someone’s
intentions when judging them morally.8
Thus there are stages of gaze following, followed by primary ToM,
then secondary ToM, then perspective taking, with the speed of
transitions influenced by experience (e.g., kids with older siblings
achieve ToM earlier than average).9
Naturally, there are criticisms of stage approaches to cognitive
development. One is at the heart of this book: a Piagetian framework sits

178

in a “cognition” bucket, ignoring the impact of social and emotional
factors.
One example to be discussed in chapter 12 concerns preverbal
infants, who sure don’t grasp transitivity (if A > B, and B > C, then A >
C). Show a violation of transitivity in interactions between shapes on a
screen (shape A should knock over shape C, but the opposite occurs),
and the kid is unbothered, doesn’t look for long. But personify the shapes
with eyes and a mouth, and now heart rate increases, the kid looks longer
—“Whoa, character C is supposed to move out of character A’s way,
not the reverse.” Humans understand logical operations between
individuals earlier than between objects.10
Social and motivational state can shift cognitive stage as well.
Rudiments of ToM are more demonstrable in chimps who are interacting
with another chimp (versus a human) and if there is something
motivating—food—involved.*11
Emotion and affect can alter cognitive stage in remarkably local
ways. I saw a wonderful example of this when my daughter displayed
both ToM and failure of ToM in the same breath. She had changed
preschools and was visiting her old class. She told everyone about life in
her new school: “Then, after lunch, we play on the swings. There are
swings at my new school. And then, after that, we go inside and Carolee
reads us a story. Then, after that . . .” ToM: “play on the swings”—wait,
they don’t know that my school has swings; I need to tell them. Failure
of ToM: “Carolee reads us a story.” Carolee, the teacher at her new
school. The same logic should apply—tell them who Carolee is. But
because Carolee was the most wonderful teacher alive, ToM failed.
Afterward I asked her, “Hey, why didn’t you tell everyone that Carolee is
your teacher?” “Oh, everyone knows Carolee.” How could everyone
not?

Feeling Someone Else’s Pain
ToM leads to a next step—people can have different feelings than
me, including pained ones.12 This realization is not sufficient for
empathy. After all, sociopaths, who pathologically lack empathy, use
superb ToM to stay three manipulative, remorseless steps ahead of
everyone. Nor is this realization strictly necessary for empathy, as kids

179

too young for ToM show rudiments of feeling someone else’s pain—a
toddler will try to comfort someone feigning crying, offering them her
pacifier (and the empathy is rudimentary in that the toddler can’t imagine
someone being comforted by different things than she is).
Yes, very rudimentary. Maybe the toddler feels profound empathy. Or
maybe she’s just distressed by the crying and is self-interestedly trying to
quiet the adult. The childhood capacity for empathy progresses from
feeling someone’s pain because you are them, to feeling for the other
person, to feeling as them.
The neurobiology of kid empathy makes sense. As introduced in
chapter 2, in adults the anterior cingulate cortex activates when they see
someone hurt. Ditto for the amygdala and insula, especially in instances
of intentional harm—there is anger and disgust. PFC regions including
the (emotional) vmPFC are on board. Observing physical pain (e.g., a
finger being poked with a needle) produces a concrete, vicarious pattern:
there is activation of the periaqueductal gray (PAG), a region central to
your own pain perception, in parts of the sensory cortex receiving
sensation from your own fingers, and in motor neurons that command
your own fingers to move.* You clench your fingers.
Work by Jean Decety of the University of Chicago shows that when
seven-year-olds watch someone in pain, activation is greatest in the more
concrete regions—the PAG and the sensory and motor cortices—with
PAG activity coupled to the minimal vmPFC activation there is. In older
kids the vmPFC is coupled to increasingly activated limbic structures.13
And by adolescence the stronger vmPFC activation is coupled to ToM
regions. What’s happening? Empathy is shifting from the concrete world
of “Her finger must hurt, I’m suddenly conscious of my own finger” to
ToM-ish focusing on the pokee’s emotions and experience.
Young kids’ empathy doesn’t distinguish between intentional and
unintentional harm or between harm to a person and to an object. Those
distinctions emerge with age, around the time when the PAG part of
empathic responses lessens and there is more engagement of the vmPFC
and ToM regions; moreover, intentional harm now activates the
amygdala and insula—anger and disgust at the perpetrator.* This is also
when kids first distinguish between self- and other-inflicted pain.
More sophistication—by around age seven, kids are expressing their
empathy. By ages ten through twelve, empathy is more generalized and
abstracted—empathy for “poor people,” rather than one individual

180

(downside: this is also when kids first negatively stereotype categories of
people).
There are also hints of a sense of justice. Preschoolers tend to be
egalitarians (e.g., it’s better that the friend gets a cookie when she does).
But before we get carried away with the generosity of youth, there is
already in-group bias; if the other child is a stranger, there is less
egalitarianism.14
There is also a growing tendency of kids to respond to an injustice,
when someone has been treated unfairly.15 But once again, before getting
carried away with things, it comes with a bias. By ages four through six,
kids in cultures from around the world respond negatively when they are
the ones being shortchanged. It isn’t until ages eight through ten that kids
respond negatively to someone else being treated unfairly. Moreover,
there is considerable cross-cultural variability as to whether that later
stage even emerges. The sense of justice in young kids is a very selfinterested one.
Soon after kids start responding negatively to someone else being
treated unjustly, they begin attempting to rectify previous inequalities
(“He should get more now because he got less before”).16 By
preadolescence, egalitarianism gives way to acceptance of inequality
because of merit or effort or for a greater good (“She should play more
than him; she’s better/worked harder/is more important to the team”).
Some kids even manage self-sacrifice for the greater good (“She should
play more than me; she’s better”).* By adolescence, boys tend to accept
inequality more than girls do, on utilitarian grounds. And both sexes are
acquiescing to inequality as social convention—“Nothing can be done;
that’s the way it is.”

Moral Development
With ToM, perspective taking, nuanced empathy, and a sense of
justice in place, a child can start wrestling with telling right from wrong.
Piaget emphasized how much kids’ play is about working out rules
of appropriate behavior (rules that can differ from those of adults)* and
how this involves stages of increasing complexity. This inspired a
younger psychologist to investigate the topic more rigorously, with
enormously influential consequences.

181

In the 1950s Lawrence Kohlberg, then a graduate student at the
University of Chicago and later a professor at Harvard, began
formulating his monumental stages of moral development.17
Kids would be presented with moral conundrums. For example: The
only dose of the only drug that will save a poor woman from dying is
prohibitively expensive. Should she steal it? Why?
Kohlberg concluded that moral judgment is a cognitive process, built
around increasingly complex reasoning as kids mature. He proposed his
famed three stages of moral development, each with two subparts.
You’ve been told not to eat the tempting cookie in front of you.
Should you eat it? Here are the painfully simplified stages of reasoning
that go into the decision:

Level 1: Should I Eat the Cookie? Preconventional
Reasoning
Stage 1. It depends. How likely am I to get punished? Being
punished is unpleasant. Aggression typically peaks around ages two
through four, after which kids are reined in by adults’ punishment (“Go
sit in the corner”) and peers (i.e., being ostracized).
Stage 2. It depends. If I refrain, will I get rewarded? Being rewarded
is nice.
Both stages are ego-oriented—obedience and self-interest (what’s in
it for me?). Kohlberg found that children are typically at this level up to
around ages eight through ten.
Concern arises when aggression, particularly if callous and
remorseless, doesn’t wane around these ages—this predicts an increased
risk of adult sociopathy (aka antisocial personality).* Crucially, the
behavior of future sociopaths seems impervious to negative feedback. As
noted, high pain thresholds in sociopaths help explain their lack of
empathy—it’s hard to feel someone else’s pain when you can’t feel your
own. It also helps explain the imperviousness to negative feedback—
why change your behavior if punishment doesn’t register?
It is also around this stage that kids first reconcile after conflicts and
derive comfort from reconciliation (e.g., decreasing glucocorticoid
secretion and anxiety). Those benefits certainly suggest self-interest

182

motivating reconciliation. This is shown in another, realpolitik way—
kids reconcile more readily when the relationship matters to them.

Level 2: Should I Eat the Cookie? Conventional
Reasoning
Stage 3. It depends. Who will be deprived if I do? Do I like them?
What would other people do? What will people think of me for eating
the cookie? It’s nice to think of others; it’s good to be well regarded.
Stage 4. It depends. What’s the law? Are laws sacrosanct? What if
everyone broke this law? It’s nice to have order. This is the judge who,
considering predatory but legal lending practices by a bank, thinks, “I
feel sorry for these victims . . . but I’m here to decide whether the bank
broke a law . . . and it didn’t.”
Conventional moral reasoning is relational (about your interactions
with others and their consequences); most adolescents and adults are at
this level.

Level 3: Should I Eat the Cookie?
Postconventional Reasoning
Stage 5: It depends. What circumstances placed the cookie there?
Who decided that I shouldn’t take it? Would I save a life by taking the
cookie? It’s nice when clear rules are applied flexibly. Now the judge
would think: “Yes, the bank’s actions were legal, but ultimately laws
exist to protect the weak from the mighty, so signed contract or
otherwise, that bank must be stopped.”
Stage 6: It depends. Is my moral stance regarding this more vital than
some law, a stance for which I’d pay the ultimate price if need be? It’s
nice to know there are things for which I’d repeatedly sing, “We Will
Not Be Moved.”
This level is egoistic in that rules and their application come from
within and reflect conscience, where a transgression exacts the ultimate
cost—having to live with yourself afterward. It recognizes that being
good and being law-abiding aren’t synonymous. As Woody Guthrie
wrote in “Pretty Boy Floyd,” “I love a good man outside the law, just as
much as I hate a bad man inside the law.”*
183

Stage 6 is also egotistical, implicitly built on self-righteousness that
trumps conventional petty bourgeois rule makers and bean counters, The
Man, those sheep who just follow, etc. To quote Emerson, as is often
done when considering the postconventional stage, “Every heroic act
measures itself by its contempt of some external good.” Stage 6
reasoning can inspire. But it can also be insufferable, premised on “being
good” and “being law abiding” as opposites. “To live outside the law,
you must be honest,” wrote Bob Dylan.
Kohlbergians found hardly anyone consistently at stage 5 or stage 6.

—
Kohlberg basically invented the scientific study of moral development in
children. His stage model is so canonical that people in the business dis
someone by suggesting they’re stuck in the primordial soup of a
primitive Kohlberg stage. As we’ll see in chapter 12, there is even
evidence that conservatives and liberals reason at different Kohlberg
stages.
Naturally, Kohlberg’s work has problems.
The usual: Don’t take any stage model too seriously—there are
exceptions, maturational transitions are not clean cut, and someone’s
stage can be context dependent.
The problem of tunnel vision and wrong emphases: Kohlberg initially studied
the usual unrepresentative humans, namely Americans, and as we will
see in later chapters, moral judgments differ cross-culturally. Moreover,
subjects were male, something challenged in the 1980s by Carol Gilligan
of NYU. The two agreed on the general sequence of stages. However,
Gilligan and others showed that in making moral judgments, girls and
women generally value care over justice, in contrast to boys and men. As
a result, females tilt toward conventional thinking and its emphasis on
relationships, while males tilt toward postconventional abstractions.18
The cognitive emphasis: Are moral judgments more the outcome of
reasoning or of intuition and emotion? Kohlbergians favor the former.
But as will be seen in chapter 13, plenty of organisms with limited
cognitive skills, including young kids and nonhuman primates, display
rudimentary senses of fairness and justice. Such findings anchor “social
intuitionist” views of moral decision making, associated with
psychologists Martin Hoffman and Jonathan Haidt, both of NYU.19
Naturally, the question becomes how moral reasoning and moral

184

intuitionism interact. As we’ll see, (a) rather than being solely about
emotion, moral intuition is a different style of cognition from conscious
reasoning; and (b) conversely, moral reasoning is often flagrantly
illogical. Stay tuned.
The lack of predictability: Does any of this actually predict who does the
harder thing when it’s the right thing to do? Are gold medalists at
Kohlbergian reasoning the ones willing to pay the price for whistleblowing, subduing the shooter, sheltering refugees? Heck, forget the
heroics; are they even more likely to be honest in dinky psych
experiments? In other words, does moral reasoning predict moral action?
Rarely; as we will see in chapter 13, moral heroism rarely arises from
super-duper frontal cortical willpower. Instead, it happens when the right
thing isn’t the harder thing.

Marshmallows
The frontal cortex and its increasing connectivity with the rest of the
brain anchors the neurobiology of kids’ growing sophistication, most
importantly in their capacity to regulate emotions and behavior. The
most iconic demonstration of this revolves around an unlikely object—
the marshmallow.20
In the 1960s Stanford psychologist Walter Mischel developed the
“marshmallow test” to study gratification postponement. A child is
presented with a marshmallow. The experimenter says, “I’m going out of
the room for a while. You can eat the marshmallow after I leave. But if
you wait and don’t eat it until I get back, I’ll give you another
marshmallow,” and leaves. And the child, observed through a two-way
mirror, begins the lonely challenge of holding out for fifteen minutes
until the researcher returns.
Studying hundreds of three- to six-year-olds, Mischel saw enormous
variability—a few ate the marshmallow before the experimenter left the
room. About a third lasted the fifteen minutes. The rest were scattered in
between, averaging a delay of eleven minutes. Kids’ strategies for
resisting the marshmallow’s siren call differed, as can be seen on
contemporary versions of the test on YouTube. Some kids cover their
eyes, hide the marshmallow, sing to distract themselves. Others grimace,
sit on their hands. Others sniff the marshmallow, pinch off an infinitely
tiny piece to eat, hold it reverentially, kiss it, pet it.
185

Various factors modulated kids’ fortitude (shown in later studies
described in Mischel’s book where, for some reason, it was pretzels
instead of marshmallows). Trusting the system mattered—if
experimenters had previously betrayed on promises, kids wouldn’t wait
as long. Prompting kids to think about how crunchy and yummy pretzels
are (what Mischel calls “hot ideation”) nuked self-discipline; prompts to
think about a “cold ideation” (e.g., the shape of pretzels) or an alternative
hot ideation (e.g., ice cream) bolstered resistance.
As expected, older kids hold out longer, using more effective
strategies. Younger kids describe strategies like “I kept thinking about
how good that second marshmallow would taste.” The problem, of
course, is that this strategy is about two synapses away from thinking
about the marshmallow in front of you. In contrast, older kids use
strategies of distraction—thinking about toys, pets, their birthday. This
progresses to reappraisal strategies (“This isn’t about marshmallows.
This is about the kind of person I am”). To Mischel, maturation of
willpower is more about distraction and reappraisal strategies than about
stoicism.
So kids improve at delayed gratification. Mischel’s next step made
his studies iconic—he tracked the kids afterward, seeing if marshmallow
wait time predicted anything about their adulthoods.
Did it ever. Five-year-old champs at marshmallow patience averaged
higher SAT scores in high school (compared with those who couldn’t
wait), with more social success and resilience and less aggressive* and
oppositional behavior. Forty years postmarshmallow, they excelled at
frontal function, had more PFC activation during a frontal task, and had
lower BMIs.21 A gazillion-dollar brain scanner doesn’t hold more
predictive power than one marshmallow. Every anxious middle-class
parent obsesses over these findings, has made marshmallows fetish
items.

186

CONSEQUENCES

W

e’ve now gotten a sense of various domains of behavioral
development. Time to frame things with this book’s central
question. Our adult has carried out that wonderful or crummy or
ambiguous behavior. What childhood events contributed to that
occurring?
A first challenge is to truly incorporate biology into our thinking. A
child suffers malnutrition and, as an adult, has poor cognitive skills.
That’s easy to frame biologically—malnutrition impairs brain
development. Alternatively, a child is raised by cold, inexpressive
parents and, as an adult, feels unlovable. It’s harder to link those two
biologically, to resist thinking that somehow this is a less biological
phenomenon than the malnutrition/cognition link. There may be less
known about the biological changes explaining the link between the cold
parents and the adult with poor self-esteem than about the
malnutrition/cognition one. It may be less convenient to articulate the
former biologically than the latter. It may be harder to apply a proximal
biological therapy for the former than for the latter (e.g., an imaginary
neural growth factor drug that improves self-esteem versus cognition).
But biology mediates both links. A cloud may be less tangible than a
brick, but it’s constructed with the same rules about how atoms interact.
How does biology link childhood with the behaviors of adulthood?
Chapter 5’s neural plasticity writ large and early. The developing brain
epitomizes neural plasticity, and every hiccup of experience has an
effect, albeit usually a miniscule one, on that brain.
We now examine ways in which different types of childhoods
produce different sorts of adults.

187

LET’S START AT THE VERY BEGINNING:
THE IMPORTANCE OF MOTHERS

N

othing like a section heading stating the obvious. Everybody needs
a mother. Even rodents; separate rat pups from Mom a few hours
daily and, as adults, they have elevated glucocorticoid levels and poor
cognitive skills, are anxious, and, if male, are more aggressive.22
Mothers are crucial. Except that well into the twentieth century, most
experts didn’t think so. The West developed child-rearing techniques
where, when compared with traditional cultures, children had less
physical contact with their mothers, slept alone at earlier ages, and had
longer latencies to be picked up when crying. Around 1900 the leading
expert Luther Holt of Columbia University warned against the “vicious
practice” of picking up a crying child or handling her too often. This was
the world of children of the wealthy, raised by nannies and presented to
their parents before bedtime to be briefly seen but not heard.
This period brought one of history’s strangest one-night stands,
namely when the Freudians and the behaviorists hooked up to explain
why infants become attached to their mothers. To behaviorists,
obviously, it’s because mothers reinforce them, providing calories when
they’re hungry. For Freudians, also obviously, infants lack the “ego
development” to form a relationship with anything/anyone other than
Mom’s breasts. When combined with children-should-be-seen-but-notheard-ism, this suggested that once you’ve addressed a child’s need for
nutrition, proper temperature, plus other odds and ends, they’re set to go.
Affection, warmth, physical contact? Superfluous.
Such thinking produced at least one disaster. When a child was
hospitalized for a stretch, dogma was that the mother was unnecessary—
she just added emotional tumult, and everything essential was supplied
by the staff. Typically, mothers could visit their children once a week for
a few minutes. And when kids were hospitalized for extended periods,
they wasted away with “hospitalism,” dying in droves from nonspecific
infections and gastrointestinal maladies unrelated to their original
illness.23 This was an era when the germ theory had mutated into the

188

belief that hospitalized children do best when untouched, in antiseptic
isolation. Remarkably, hospitalism soared in hospitals with newfangled
incubators (adapted from poultry farming); the safest hospitals were poor
ones that relied on the primitive act of humans actually touching and
interacting with infants.
In the 1950s the British psychiatrist John Bowlby challenged the
view of infants as simple organisms with few emotional needs; his
“attachment theory” birthed our modern view of the mother-infant
bond.*24 In his trilogy Attachment and Loss, Bowlby summarized the
no-brainer answers we’d give today to the question “What do children
need from their mothers?”: love, warmth, affection, responsiveness,
stimulation, consistency, reliability. What is produced in their absence?
Anxious, depressed, and/or poorly attached adults.*
Bowlby inspired one of the most iconic experiments in psychology’s
history, by Harry Harlow of the University of Wisconsin; it destroyed
Freudian and behaviorist dogma about mother-infant bonding.25 Harlow
would raise an infant rhesus monkey without a mother but with two
“surrogates” instead. Both were made of a chicken-wire tube
approximating a torso, with a monkey-ish plastic head on top. One
surrogate had a bottle of milk coming from its “torso.” The other had
terry cloth wrapped around the torso. In other words, one gave calories,
the other a poignant approximation of a mother monkey’s fur. Freud and
B. F. Skinner would have wrestled over access to chicken-wire mom. But
infant monkeys chose the terry-cloth mom.* “Man cannot live by milk
alone. Love is an emotion that does not need to be bottle- or spoon-fed,”
wrote Harlow.
Evidence for the most basic need provided by a mother comes from a
controversial quarter. Starting in the 1990s, crime rates plummeted
across the United States. Why? For liberals the answer was the thriving
economy. For conservatives it was the larger budgets for policing,
expanded prisons, and three-strikes sentencing laws. Meanwhile, a
partial explanation was provided by legal scholar John Donohue of
Stanford and economist Steven Levitt of the University of Chicago—it
was the legalization of abortions. The authors’ state-by-state analysis of
the liberalization of abortion laws and the demographics of the crime
drop showed that when abortions become readily available in an area,
rates of crime by young adults decline about twenty years later. Surprise
—this was highly controversial, but it makes perfect, depressing sense to

189

me. What majorly predicts a life of
crime? Being born to a mother who,
if she could, would have chosen
that you not be. What’s the most
basic thing provided by a mother?
Knowing that she is happy that you
exist.*26
Harlow also helped demonstrate
a cornerstone of this book, namely
what mothers (and later peers)
provide as children grow. To do so,
he performed some of the most
inflammatory research in
psychology’s history. This involved
raising infant monkeys in isolation,
absent mother or peers; they spent
the first months, even years, of their lives without contact with another
living being, before being placed in a social group.*
Predictably, they’d be wrecks. Some would sit alone, clutching
themselves, rocking “autistically.” Others would be markedly
inappropriate in their hierarchical or sexual behaviors.
There was something interesting. It wasn’t that these ex-isolates did
behaviors wrong—they didn’t aggressively display like an ostrich, make
the sexually solicitive gestures of a gecko. Behaviors were normal but
occurred at the wrong time and place—say, giving subordination
gestures to pipsqueaks half their size, threatening alphas they should
cower before. Mothers and peers don’t teach the motoric features of
fixed action patterns; those are hardwired. They teach when, where, and
to whom—the appropriate context for those behaviors. They give the
first lessons about when touching someone’s arm or pulling a trigger can
be among the best or worst of our behaviors.
I saw a striking example of this among the baboons that I study in
Kenya, when both a high-ranking and a low-ranking female gave birth to
daughters the same week. The former’s kid hit every developmental
landmark earlier than the other, the playing field already unlevel. When
the infants were a few weeks old, they nearly had their first interaction.
Daughter of subordinate mom spotted daughter of dominant one, toddled

190

over to say hello. And as she got near, her low-ranking mother grabbed
her by the tail and pulled her back.
This was her first lesson about her place in that world. “You see her?
She’s much higher ranking than you, so you don’t just go and hang with
her. If she’s around, you sit still and avoid eye contact and hope she
doesn’t take whatever you’re eating.” Amazingly, in twenty years those
two infants would be old ladies, sitting in the savanna, still displaying the
rank asymmetries they learned that morning.

191

ANY KIND OF MOTHER IN A STORM

H

arlow provided another important lesson, thanks to another study
painful to contemplate. Infant monkeys were raised with chickenwire surrogates with air jets in the middle of their torsos. When an infant
clung, she’d receive an aversive blast of air. What would a behaviorist
predict that the monkey would do when faced with such punishment?
Flee. But, as in the world of abused children and battered partners,
infants held harder.
Why do we often become attached to a source of negative
reinforcement, seek solace when distressed from the cause of that
distress? Why do we ever love the wrong person, get abused, and return
for more?
Psychological insights abound. Because of poor self-esteem,
believing you’ll never do better. Or a codependent conviction that it’s
your calling to change the person. Maybe you identify with your
oppressor, or have decided it’s your fault and the abuser is justified, so
they seem less irrational and terrifying. These are valid and can have
huge explanatory and therapeutic power. But work by Regina Sullivan of
NYU demonstrates bits of this phenomenon miles from the human
psyche.
Sullivan would condition rat pups to associate a neutral odor with a
shock.27 If a pup that had been conditioned at ten days of age or older
(“older pups”) was exposed to that odor, logical things happened—
amygdala activation, glucocorticoid secretion, and avoidance of the odor.
But do the same to a younger pup and none of that would occur;
remarkably, the pup would be attracted to the odor.
Why? There is an interesting wrinkle related to stress in newborns.
Rodent fetuses are perfectly capable of secreting glucocorticoids. But
within hours of birth, the adrenal glands atrophy dramatically, becoming
barely able to secrete glucocorticoids. This “stress hyporesponsive
period” (SHRP) wanes over the coming weeks.28
What is the SHRP about? Glucocorticoids have so many adverse
effects on brain development (stay tuned) that the SHRP represents a
gamble—“I won’t secrete glucocorticoids in response to stress, so that I
192

develop optimally; if something stressful happens, Mom will handle it
for me.” Accordingly, deprive infant rats of their mothers, and within
hours their adrenals expand and regain the ability to secrete plenty of
glucocorticoids.
During the SHRP infants seem to use a further rule: “If Mom is
around (and I thus don’t secrete glucocorticoids), I should get attached to
any strong stimulus. It couldn’t be bad for me; Mom wouldn’t allow
that.” As evidence, inject glucocorticoids into the amygdalae of young
pups during the conditioning, and the amygdalae would activate and the
pups would develop an aversion to the odor. Conversely, block
glucocorticoid secretion in older pups during conditioning, and they’d
become attracted to the odor. Or condition them with their mother
present, and they wouldn’t secrete glucocorticoids and would develop an
attraction. In other words, in young rats even aversive things are
reinforcing in Mom’s presence, even if Mom is the source of the aversive
stimuli. As Sullivan and colleagues wrote, “attachment [by such an
infant] to the caretaker has evolved to ensure that the infant forms a bond
to that caregiver regardless of the quality of care received.” Any kind of
mother in a storm.
If this applies to humans, it helps explain why individuals abused as
kids are as adults prone toward relationships in which they are abused by
their partner.29 But what about the flip side? Why is it that about 33
percent of adults who were abused as children become abusers
themselves?
Again, useful psychological insights abound, built around
identification with the abuser and rationalizing away the terror: “I love
my kids, but I smack them around when they need it. My father did that
to me, so he could have loved me too.” But once again something
biologically deeper also occurs—infant monkeys abused by their
mothers are more likely to become abusive mothers.30

193

DIFFERENT ROUTES TO THE SAME
PLACE
anticipated that, with mothers now covered, we’d next examine the
Iadult
consequences of, say, paternal deprivation, or childhood poverty, or
exposure to violence or natural disasters. And there’d be the same
question—what specific biological changes did each cause in children
that increased the odds of specific adult behaviors?
But this plan didn’t work—the similarities of effects of these varied
traumas are greater than the differences. Sure, there are specific links
(e.g., childhood exposure to domestic violence makes adult antisocial
violence more likely than does childhood exposure to hurricanes). But
they all converge sufficiently that I will group them together, as is done
in the field, as examples of “childhood adversity.”
Basically, childhood adversity increases the odds of an adult having
(a) depression, anxiety, and/or substance abuse; (b) impaired cognitive
capabilities, particularly related to frontocortical function; (c) impaired
impulse control and emotion regulation; (d) antisocial behavior,
including violence; and (e) relationships that replicate the adversities of
childhood (e.g., staying with an abusive partner).31 And despite that,
some individuals endure miserable childhoods just fine. More on this to
come.
We’ll now examine the biological links between childhood adversity
and increased risk of these adult outcomes.

194

THE BIOLOGICAL PROFILE

A

ll these forms of adversity are obviously stressful and cause
abnormalities in stress physiology. Across numerous species,
major early-life stressors produce both kids and adults with elevated
levels of glucocorticoids (along with CRH and ACTH, the hypothalamic
and pituitary hormones that regulate glucocorticoid release) and
hyperactivity of the sympathetic nervous system.32 Basal glucocorticoid
levels are elevated—the stress response is always somewhat activated—
and there is delayed recovery back to baseline after a stressor. Michael
Meaney of McGill University has shown how early-life stress
permanently blunts the ability of the brain to rein in glucocorticoid
secretion.
As covered in chapter 4, marinating the brain in excess
glucocorticoids, particularly during development, adversely effects
cognition, impulse control, empathy, and so on.33 There is impaired
hippocampal-dependent learning in adulthood. For example, abused
children who develop PTSD have decreased volume of the hippocampus
in adulthood. Stanford psychiatrist Victor Carrion has shown decreased
hippocampal growth within months of the abuse. As a likely cause,
glucocorticoids decrease hippocampal production of the growth factor
BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor).
So childhood adversity impairs learning and memory. Crucially, it
also impairs maturation and function of the frontal cortex; again,
glucocorticoids, via inhibiting BDNF, are likely culprits.
The connection between childhood adversity and frontocortical
maturation pertains to childhood poverty. Work by Martha Farah of the
University of Pennsylvania, Tom Boyce of UCSF, and others
demonstrates something outrageous: By age five, the lower a child’s
socioeconomic status, on the average, the (a) higher the basal
glucocorticoid levels and/or the more reactive the glucocorticoid stress
response, (b) the thinner the frontal cortex and the lower its metabolism,
and (c) the poorer the frontal function concerning working memory,
emotion regulation, impulse control, and executive decision making;
moreover, to achieve equivalent frontal regulation, lower-SES kids must
195

activate more frontal cortex than do higher-SES kids. In addition,
childhood poverty impairs maturation of the corpus callosum, a bundle
of axonal fibers connecting the two hemispheres and integrating their
function. This is so wrong—foolishly pick a poor family to be born into,
and by kindergarten, the odds of your succeeding at life’s marshmallow
tests are already stacked against you.34
Considerable research focuses on how poverty “gets under the skin.”
Some mechanisms are human specific—if you’re poor, you’re more
likely to grow up near environmental toxins,*35 in a dangerous
neighborhood with more liquor stores than markets selling produce;
you’re less likely to attend a good school or have parents with time to
read to you. Your community is likely to have poor social capital, and
you, poor self-esteem. But part of the link reflects the corrosive effects of
subordination in all hierarchical species. For example, having a lowranking mother predicts elevated glucocorticoids in adulthood in
baboons.36
Thus, childhood adversity can atrophy and blunt the functioning of
the hippocampus and frontal cortex. But it’s the opposite in the amygdala
—lots of adversity and the amygdala becomes larger and hyperreactive.
One consequence is increased risk of anxiety disorders; when coupled
with the poor frontocortical development, it explains problems with
emotion and behavior regulation, especially impulse control.37
Childhood adversity accelerates amygdaloid maturation in a
particular way. Normally, around adolescence the frontal cortex gains the
ability to inhibit the amygdala, saying, “I wouldn’t do this if I were you.”
But after childhood adversity, the amygdala develops the ability to
inhibit the frontal cortex, saying, “I’m doing this and just try to stop me.”
Childhood adversity also damages the dopamine system (with its role
in reward, anticipation, and goal-directed behavior) in two ways.
First, early adversity produces an adult organism more vulnerable to
drug and alcohol addiction. The pathway to this vulnerability is probably
threefold: (a) effects on the developing dopamine system; (b) the
excessive adult exposure to glucocorticoids, which increases drug
craving; (c) that poorly developed frontal cortex.38
Childhood adversity also substantially increases the risk of adult
depression. Depression’s defining symptom is anhedonia, the inability to
feel, anticipate, or pursue pleasure. Chronic stress depletes the
mesolimbic system of dopamine, generating anhedonia.* The link
196

between childhood adversity and adult depression involves both
organizational effects on the developing mesolimbic system and elevated
adult glucocorticoid levels, which can deplete dopamine.39
Childhood adversity increases depression risk via “second hit”
scenarios—lowering thresholds so that adult stressors that people
typically manage instead trigger depressive episodes. This vulnerability
makes sense. Depression is fundamentally a pathological sense of loss of
control (explaining the classic description of depression as “learned
helplessness”). If a child experiences severe, uncontrollable adversity,
the most fortunate conclusion in adulthood is “Those were terrible
circumstances over which I had no control.” But when childhood
traumas produce depression, there is cognitively distorted
overgeneralization: “And life will always be uncontrollably awful.”

197

TWO SIDE TOPICS

S

o varied types of childhood adversity converge in producing similar
adult problems. Nonetheless, two types of adversity should be
considered separately.

Observing Violence
What happens when children observe domestic violence, warfare, a
gang murder, a school massacre? For weeks afterward there is impaired
concentration and impulse control. Witnessing gun violence doubles a
child’s likelihood of serious violence within the succeeding two years.
And adulthood brings the usual increased risks of depression, anxiety,
and aggression. Consistent with that, violent criminals are more likely
than nonviolent ones to have witnessed violence as kids.*40
This fits our general picture of childhood adversity. A separate topic
is the effects of media violence on kids.
Endless studies have analyzed the effects of kids witnessing violence
on TV, in movies, in the news, and in music videos, and both witnessing
and participating in violent video games. A summary:
Exposing children to a violent TV or film clip increases their odds of
aggression soon after.41 Interestingly, the effect is stronger in girls (amid
their having lower overall levels of aggression). Effects are stronger
when kids are younger or when the violence is more realistic and/or is
presented as heroic. Such exposure can make kids more accepting of
aggression—in one study, watching violent music videos increased
adolescent girls’ acceptance of dating violence. The violence is key—
aggression isn’t boosted by material that’s merely exciting, arousing, or
frustrating.
Heavy childhood exposure to media violence predicts higher levels
of aggression in young adults of both sexes (“aggression” ranging from
behavior in an experimental setting to violent criminality). The effect
typically remains after controlling for total media-watching time,
maltreatment or neglect, socioeconomic status, levels of neighborhood

198

violence, parental education, psychiatric illness, and IQ. This is a reliable
finding of large magnitude. The link between exposure to childhood
media violence and increased adult aggression is stronger than the link
between lead exposure and IQ, calcium intake and bone mass, or
asbestos and laryngeal cancer.
Two caveats: (a) there is no evidence that catastrophically violent
individuals (e.g., mass shooters) are that way because of childhood
exposure to violent media; (b) exposure does not remotely guarantee
increased aggression—instead, effects are strongest on kids already
prone toward violence. For them, exposure desensitizes and normalizes
their own aggression.*

Bullying
Being bullied is mostly another garden-variety childhood adversity,
with adult consequences on par with childhood maltreatment at home.42
There is a complication, though. As most of us observed, exploited,
or experienced as kids, bullying targets aren’t selected at random. Kids
with the metaphorical “kick me” signs on their backs are more likely to
have personal or family psychiatric issues and poor social and emotional
intelligence. These are kids already at risk for bad adult outcomes, and
adding bullying to the mix just makes the child’s future even bleaker.
The picture of the bullies is no surprise either, starting with their
disproportionately coming from families of single moms or younger
parents with poor education and employment prospects. There are
generally two profiles of the kids themselves—the more typical is an
anxious, isolated kid with poor social skills, who bullies out of
frustration and to achieve acceptance. Such kids typically mature out of
bullying. The second profile is the confident, unempathic, socially
intelligent kid with an imperturbable sympathetic nervous system; this is
the future sociopath.
There is an additional striking finding. You want to see a kid who’s
really likely to be a mess as an adult? Find someone who both bullies
and is bullied, who terrorizes the weaker at school and returns home to
be terrorized by someone stronger.43 Of the three categories (bully,
bullied, bully/bullied), they’re most likely to have prior psychiatric
problems, poor school performance, and poor emotional adjustment.

199

They’re more likely than pure bullies to use weapons and inflict serious
damage. As adults, they’re most at risk for depression, anxiety, and
suicidality.
In one study kids from these three categories read scenarios of
bullying.44 Bullied victims would condemn bullying and express
sympathy. Bullies would condemn bullying but rationalize the scenario
(e.g., this time it was the victim’s fault). And bully/bullied kids? They
would say bullying is okay. No wonder they have the worst outcome.
“The weak deserve to be bullied, so it’s fine when I bully. But that means
I deserve to be bullied at home. But I don’t, and that relative bullying me
is awful. Maybe then I’m awful when I bully someone. But I’m not,
because the weak deserve to be bullied. . . .” A Möbius strip from hell.*

200

A KEY QUESTION

W

e’ve now examined adult consequences of childhood adversity
and their biological mediators. A key question persists. Yes,
childhood abuse increases the odds of being an abusive adult; witnessing
violence raises the risk for PTSD; loss of a parent to death means more
chance of adult depression. Nevertheless, many, maybe even most
victims of such adversity turn into reasonably functional adults. There is
a shadow over childhood, demons lurk in corners of the mind, but overall
things are okay. What explains such resilience?
As we’ll see, genes and fetal environment are relevant. But most
important, recall the logic of collapsing different types of trauma into a
single category. What counts is the sheer number of times a child is
bludgeoned by life and the number of protective factors. Be sexually
abused as a child, or witness violence, and your adult prognosis is better
than if you had experienced both. Experience childhood poverty, and
your future prospects are better if your family is stable and loving than
broken and acrimonious. Pretty straightforwardly, the more categories of
adversities a child suffers, the dimmer his or her chances of a happy,
functional adulthood.45

201

A SLEDGEHAMMER

W

hat happens when everything goes wrong—no mother or family,
minimal peer interactions, sensory and cognitive neglect, plus
some malnutrition?46
These are the Romanian
institution kids, poster children for
just how nightmarish childhood can
be. In the 1980s the Romanian
dictator Nicolae Ceauşescu banned
contraceptives and abortions and
required women to bear at least five
children. Soon institutions filled
with thousands of infants and kids
abandoned by impoverished
families (many intent on reclaiming
their child when finances
improved).* Kids were warehoused
in overwhelmed institutions,
resulting in severe neglect and
deprivation. The story broke after
Ceauşescu’s 1989 overthrow. Many kids were adopted by Westerners,
and international attention led to some improvements in the institutions.
Since then, children adopted in the West, those eventually returned to
their families, and those who remained institutionalized have been
studied, primarily by Charles Nelson of Harvard.
As adults, these kids are mostly what you’d expect. Low IQ and poor
cognitive skills. Problems with forming attachments, often bordering on
autistic. Anxiety and depression galore. The longer the
institutionalization, the worse the prognosis.
And their brains? Decreased total brain size, gray matter, white
matter, frontal cortical metabolism, connectivity between regions, sizes
of individual brain regions. Except for the amygdala. Which is enlarged.
That pretty much says it all.

202

CULTURE, WITH BOTH A BIG AND A
LITTLE C

C

hapter 9 considers the effects of culture on our best and worst
behaviors. We now preview that chapter, focusing on two facts—
childhood is when culture is inculcated, and parents mediate that process.
There is huge cultural variability in how childhood is experienced—
how long and often kids are nursed; how often they are in contact with
parents and other adults; how often they’re spoken to; how long they cry
before someone responds; at what age they sleep alone.
Considering cross-cultural child rearing often brings out the most
invidious and neurotic in parents—do other cultures do a better job at it?
There must be the perfect combo out there, a mixture of the Kwakiutl
baby diet, the Trobriand sleeping program, and the Ituri approach to
watching Baby Mozart videos. But there is no anthropological ideal of
child rearing. Cultures (starting with parents) raise children to become
adults who behave in the ways valued by that culture, a point
emphasized by the anthropologist Meredith Small of Cornell
University.47
We begin with parenting style, a child’s first encounter with cultural
values. Interestingly, the most influential typology of parenting style,
writ small, grew from thinking about cultural styles, writ large.
Amid the post–World War II ruins, scholars tried to understand
where Hitler, Franco, Mussolini, Tojo, and their minions came from.
What are the roots of fascism? Two particularly influential scholars were
refugees from Hitler, namely Hannah Arendt (with her 1951 book The
Origins of Totalitarianism) and Theodor Adorno (with the 1950 book
The Authoritarian Personality, coauthored with Else Frenkel-Brunswik,
Daniel Levinson, and Nevitt Sanford). Adorno in particular explored the
personality traits of fascists, including extreme conformity, submission to
and belief in authority, aggressiveness, and hostility toward
intellectualism and introspection—traits typically rooted in childhood.48
This influenced the Berkeley psychologist Diana Baumrind, who in
the 1960s identified three key parenting styles (in work since replicated

203

and extended to various cultures).49 First is authoritative parenting.
Rules and expectations are clear, consistent, and explicable—“Because I
said so” is anathema—with room for flexibility; praise and forgiveness
trump punishment; parents welcome children’s input; developing
children’s potential and autonomy is paramount. By the standards of the
educated neurotics who would read (let alone write . . .) this book, this
produces a good adult outcome—happy, emotionally and socially mature
and fulfilled, independent and self-reliant.
Next is authoritarian parenting. Rules and demands are numerous,
arbitrary, and rigid and need no justification; behavior is mostly shaped
by punishment; children’s emotional needs are low priorities. Parental
motivation is often that it’s a tough, unforgiving world and kids better be
prepared. Authoritarian parenting tends to produce adults who may be
narrowly successful, obedient, conformist (often with an undercurrent of
resentment that can explode), and not particularly happy. Moreover,
social skills are often poor because, instead of learning by experience,
they grew up following orders.
And then there is permissive parenting, the aberration that
supposedly let Boomers invent the 1960s. There are few demands or
expectations, rules are rarely enforced, and children set the agenda.
Adult outcome: self-indulgent individuals with poor impulse control, low
frustration tolerance, plus poor social skills thanks to living
consequence-free childhoods.
Baumrind’s trio was expanded by Stanford psychologists Eleanor
Maccoby and John Martin to include neglectful parenting.50 This
addition produces a two-by-two matrix: parenting is authoritative (high
demand, high responsiveness), authoritarian (high demand, low
responsiveness), permissive (low demand, high responsiveness), or
neglectful (low demand, low responsiveness).
Importantly, each style usually produces adults with that same
approach, with different cultures valuing different styles.
Then comes the next way cultural values are transmitted to kids,
namely by peers. This was emphasized in Judith Rich Harris’s The
Nurture Assumption. Harris, a psychologist without an academic
affiliation or doctorate, took the field by storm, arguing that the
importance of parenting in shaping a child’s adult personality is
exaggerated.51 Instead, once kids pass a surprisingly young age, peers
are most influential. Elements of her argument included: (a) Parental
204

influence is often actually mediated via peers. For example, being raised
by a single mother increases the risk of adult antisocial behavior, but not
because of the parenting; instead, because of typically lower income,
kids more likely live in a neighborhood with tough peers. (b) Peers have
impact on linguistic development (e.g., children acquire the accent of
their peers, not their parents). (c) Other young primates are mostly
socialized by peers, not mothers.
The book was controversial (partially because the theme begged to
be distorted—“Psychologist proves that parents don’t matter”), drawing
criticism and acclaim.* As the dust has settled, current opinion tends to
be that peer influences are underappreciated, but parents still are plenty
important, including by influencing what peer groups their kids
experience.
Why are peers so important? Peer interactions teach social
competence—context-dependent behavior, when to be friend or foe,
where you fit in hierarchies. Young organisms utilize the greatest
teaching tool ever to acquire such information—play.52
What is social play in the young? Writ large, it’s an array of
behaviors that train individuals in social competence. Writ medium, it’s
fragments of the real thing, bits and pieces of fixed action patterns, a
chance to safely try out roles and improve motor skills. Writ small and
endocrine, it’s a demonstration that moderate and transient stress
—“stimulation”—is great. Writ small and neurobiological, it’s a tool for
deciding which excess synapses to prune.
The historian Johan Huizinga characterized humans as “Homo
Ludens,” Man the Player, with our structured, rule-bound play—i.e.,
games. Nevertheless, play is universal among socially complex species,
ubiquitous among the young and peaking at puberty, and all play
involves similar behaviors, after some ethological translating (e.g., a
dominant dog signals the benevolence needed to initiate play by
crouching, diminishing herself; translated into baboon, a dominant kid
presents her rear to someone lower ranking).
Play is vital. In order to play, animals forgo foraging, expend
calories, make themselves distracted and conspicuous to predators.
Young organisms squander energy on play during famines. A child
deprived of or disinterested in play rarely has a socially fulfilling adult
life.

205

Most of all, play is intrinsically pleasurable—why else perform a
smidgen of a behavioral sequence in an irrelevant setting? Dopaminergic
pathways activate during play; juvenile rats, when playing, emit the same
vocalizations as when rewarded with food; dogs spend half their calories
wagging their tails to pheromonally announce their presence and
availability for play. As emphasized by the psychiatrist Stuart Brown,
founder of the National Institute for Play, the opposite of play is not
work—it’s depression. A challenge is to understand how the brain codes
for the reinforcing properties of the variety of play. After all, play
encompasses everything from mathematicians besting each other with
hilarious calculus jokes to kids besting each other by making hilarious
fart sounds with their armpits.
One significant type of play involves fragments of aggression, what
Harlow called “rough and tumble” play—kids wrestling, adolescent
impalas butting heads, puppies play-biting each other.53 Males typically
do it more than females, and as we’ll see soon, it’s boosted by prenatal
testosterone. Is rough-and-tumble play practice for life’s looming status
tournament, or are you already in the arena? A mixture of both.
Expanding beyond peers, neighborhoods readily communicate
culture to kids. Is there garbage everywhere? Are houses decrepit?
What’s ubiquitous—bars, churches, libraries, or gun shops? Are there
many parks, and are they safe to enter? Do billboards, ads, and bumper
stickers sell religious or material paradises, celebrate acts of martyrdom
or kindness and inclusiveness?

—
And then we get to culture at the level of tribes, nations, and states. Here,
briefly, are some of the broadest cultural differences in child-rearing
practices.

Collectivist Versus Individualist Cultures
As will be seen in chapter 9, this is the most studied cultural contrast,
typically comparing collectivist East Asian cultures with
überindividualist America. Collectivist cultures emphasize
interdependence, harmony, fitting in, the needs and responsibilities of the
group; in contrast, individualist cultures value independence,
competition, the needs and rights of the individual.
206

On average, mothers in individualist cultures, when compared with
those in collectivist ones, speak louder, play music louder, have more
animated expressions.54 They view themselves as teachers rather than
protectors, abhor a bored child, value high-energy affect. Their games
emphasize individual competition, urge hobbies involving doing rather
than observing. Kids are trained in verbal assertiveness, to be
autonomous and influential. Show a cartoon of a school of fish with one
out front, and she’ll describe it to her child as the leader.*
Mothers in collectivist cultures, in contrast, spend more time than
individualist mothers soothing their child, maintaining contact, and
facilitating contact with other adults. They value low arousal affect and
sleep with their child to a later age. Games are about cooperation and
fitting in; if playing with her child with, say, a toy car, the point is not
exploring what a car does (i.e., being automobile), but the process of
sharing (“Thank you for giving me your car; now I’ll give it back to
you”). Kids are trained to get along, think of others, accept and adapt,
rather than change situations; morality and conformity are nearly
synonymous. Show the cartoon of the school of fish, and the fish out
front must have done something wrong, because no one will play with
him.
Logically, kids in individualist cultures acquire ToM later than
collectivist-culture kids and activate pertinent circuits more to achieve
the same degree of competence. For a collectivist child, social
competence is all about taking someone else’s perspective.55
Interestingly, kids in (collectivist) Japan play more violent video
games than do American kids, yet are less aggressive. Moreover,
exposing Japanese kids to media violence boosts aggression less than in
American kids.56 Why the difference? Three possible contributing
factors: (a) American kids play alone more often, a lone-wolf breeding
ground; (b) Japanese kids rarely have a computer or TV in their
bedroom, so they play near their parents; (c) Japanese video-game
violence is more likely to have prosocial, collectivist themes.
More in chapter 9 on collectivist versus individualist cultures.

Cultures of Honor

207

These cultures emphasize rules of civility, courtesy, and hospitality.
Taking retribution is expected for affronts to the honor of one’s self,
family, or clan; failing to do so is shameful. These are cultures filled with
vendettas, revenge, and honor killings; cheeks aren’t turned. A classic
culture of honor is the American South, but as we’ll see in chapter 9,
such cultures occur worldwide and with certain ecological correlates. A
particularly lethal combo is when a culture of victimization—we were
wronged last week, last decade, last millennium—is coupled with a
culture of honor’s ethos of retribution.
Parenting in cultures of honor tends to be authoritarian.57 Kids are
aggressive, particularly following honor violations, and staunchly
endorse aggressive responses to scenarios of honor violation.

Class Differences
As noted, an infant baboon learns her place in the hierarchy from her
mother. A human child’s lessons about status are more complex—there
is implicit cuing, subtle language cues, the cognitive and emotional
weight of remembering the past (“When your grandparents emigrated
here they couldn’t even . . .”) and hoping about the future (“When you
grow up, you’re going to . . .”). Baboon mothers teach their young
appropriate behavioral context; human parents teach their young what to
bother dreaming about.
Class differences in parenting in Western countries resemble
parenting differences between Western countries and those in the
developing world. In the West a parent teaches and facilitates her child
exploring the world. In the toughest corners of the developing world,
little more is expected than the awesome task of keeping your child alive
and buffered from the menacing world.*
In Western cultures, class differences in parenting sort by Baumrind’s
typologies. In higher-SES strata, parenting tends to be authoritative or
permissive. In contrast, parenting in society’s lower-SES rungs is
typically authoritarian, reflecting two themes. One concerns protecting.
When are higher-SES parents authoritarian? When there is danger.
“Sweetie, I love that you question things, but if you run into the street
and I scream ‘Stop,’ you stop.” A lower-SES childhood is rife with
threat. The other theme is preparing the child for the tough world out

208

there—for the poor, adulthood consists of the socially dominant treating
them in an authoritarian manner.
Class differences in parenting were explored in a classic study by the
anthropologist Adrie Kusserow of St. Michael’s College, who did
fieldwork observing parents in three tribes—wealthy families on
Manhattan’s Upper East Side; a stable, blue-collar community; and a
poor, crime-ridden one (the last two both in Queens).58 The differences
were fascinating.
Parenting in the poor neighborhood involved “hard defensive
individualism.” The neighborhood was rife with addiction,
homelessness, incarceration, death—and parents’ aim was to shelter their
child from the literal and metaphorical street. Their speech was full of
metaphors about not losing what was achieved—standing your ground,
keeping up your pride, not letting others get under your skin. Parenting
was authoritarian, toughening the goal. For example, parents teased kids
far more than in the other neighborhoods.
In contrast, working-class parenting involved “hard offensive
individualism.” Parents had some socioeconomic momentum, and kids
were meant to maintain that precarious trajectory. Parents’ speech about
their hopes for their kids contained images of movement, progress, and
athletics—getting ahead, testing the waters, going for the gold. With hard
work and the impetus of generations of expectations, your child might
pioneer landfall in the middle class.
Parenting in both neighborhoods emphasized respect for authority,
particularly within the family. Moreover, kids were fungible members of
a category, rather than individualized—“You kids get over here.”
Then there was the “soft individualism” of upper-middle-class
parenting.* Children’s eventual success, by conventional standards, was
a given, as were expectations of physical health. Far more vulnerable
was a child’s psychological health; when children could become
anything, parents’ responsibility was to facilitate their epic journey
toward an individuated “fulfillment.” Moreover, the image of fulfillment
was often postconventional—“I hope my child will never work an
unsatisfying job just for money.” This, after all, is a tribe giddied by tales
of the shark in line to become CEO chucking it to learn carpentry or
oboe. Parents’ speech brimmed with metaphors of potential being
fulfilled—flowering, blooming, growing, blossoming. Parenting was
authoritative or permissive, riddled with ambivalence about parent-child

209

power differentials. Rather than “You kids, clean up this mess,” there’d
be the individuated, justifying request—“Caitlin, Zach, Dakota, could
you clean things up a bit please? Malala is coming for dinner.”*
We’ve now seen how childhood events—from the first mother-infant
interaction to the effects of culture—have persistent influences, and how
biology mediates such influences. When combined with the preceding
chapters, we have finished our tour of environmental effects on behavior,
from the second before a behavior occurs to a second after birth. In
effect, we’ve done “environment”; time for next chapter’s “genes.”
But this ignores something crucial: environment doesn’t begin at
birth.

210

NINE LONG MONTHS
The Cat in the Hat in the Womb
The existence of prenatal environmental influences caught the
public’s imagination with some charming studies demonstrating that
near-term fetuses hear (what’s going on outside the womb), taste
(amniotic fluid), and remember and prefer those stimuli after birth.
This was shown experimentally—inject lemon-flavored saline into a
pregnant rat’s amniotic fluid, and her pups are born preferring that flavor.
Moreover, some spices consumed by pregnant women get into amniotic
fluid. Thus we may be born preferring foods our mothers ate during
pregnancy—pretty unorthodox cultural transmission.59
Prenatal effects can also be auditory, as shown by inspired research
by Anthony DeCasper of the University of North Carolina.60 A pregnant
woman’s voice is audible in the womb, and newborns recognize and
prefer the sound of their mother’s voice.* DeCasper used ethology’s
playbook to show this: A newborn can learn to suck a pacifier in two
different patterns of long and short sucks. Generate one pattern, and you
hear Mom’s voice; the other, another woman’s voice. Newborns want
Mom’s voice. Elements of language are also learned in utero—the
contours of a newborn’s cry are similar to the contours of speech in the
mother’s language.
The cognitive capacities of near-term fetuses are even more
remarkable. For example, fetuses can distinguish between two pairs of
nonsense syllables (“biba” versus “babi”). How do you know? Get this—
Mom says “Biba, biba, biba” repeatedly while fetal heart rate is
monitored. “Boring (or perhaps lulling),” thinks the fetus, and heart rate
slows. Then Mom switches to “babi.” If the fetus doesn’t distinguish
between the two, heart rate deceleration continues. But if the difference
is noted—“Whoa, what happened?”—heart rate increases. Which is what
DeCasper reported.61
DeCasper and colleague Melanie Spence then showed (using the
pacifier-sucking-pattern detection system) that newborns typically don’t
distinguish between the sounds of their mother reading a passage from
211

The Cat in the Hat and from the rhythmically similar The King, the Mice,
and the Cheese.62 But newborns whose mothers had read The Cat in the
Hat out loud for hours during the last trimester preferred Dr. Seuss.
Wow.
Despite the charm of these findings, this book’s concerns aren’t
rooted in such prenatal learning—few infants are born with a preference
for passages from, say, Mein Kampf. However, other prenatal
environmental effects are quite consequential.

212

BOY AND GIRL BRAINS, WHATEVER
THAT MIGHT MEAN

W

e start with a simple version of what “environment” means for a
fetal brain: the nutrients, immune messengers, and, most
important, hormones carried to the brain in the fetal circulation.
Once the pertinent glands have developed in a fetus, they are
perfectly capable of secreting their characteristic hormones. This is
particularly consequential. When hormones first made their entrance in
chapter 4, our discussion concerned their “activational” effects that
lasted on the order of hours to days. In contrast, hormones in the fetus
have “organizational” effects on the brain, causing lifelong changes in
structure and function.
Around eight weeks postconception, human fetal gonads start
secreting their steroid hormones (testosterone in males; estrogen and
progesterone in females). Crucially, testosterone plus “anti-Müllerian
hormone” (also from the testes) masculinize the brain.
Three complications, of increasing messiness:
In many rodents the brain isn’t quite sexually
differentiated at birth, and these hormonal effects
continue postnatally.
A messier complication: Surprisingly few testosterone
effects in the brain result from the hormone binding to
androgen receptors. Instead, testosterone enters targets
cells and, bizarrely, is converted to estrogen, then binds
to intracellular estrogen receptors (while testosterone
has its effects outside the brain either as itself or, after
intracellular conversion to a related androgen,
dihydrotestosterone). Thus testosterone has much of its
masculinizing effect in the brain by becoming estrogen.
The conversion of testosterone to estrogen also occurs in
the fetal brain. Wait. Regardless of fetal sex, fetal
circulation is full of maternal estrogen, plus female

213

fetuses secrete estrogen. Thus female fetal brains are
bathed in estrogen. Why doesn’t that masculinize the
female fetal brain? Most likely it’s because fetuses make
something called alpha-fetoprotein, which binds
circulating estrogen, taking it out of action. So neither
Mom’s estrogen nor fetal-derived estrogen masculinizes
the brain in female fetuses. And it turns out that unless
there is testosterone and anti-Müllerian hormone around,
fetal mammalian brains automatically feminize.63
Now for the übermessy complication. What exactly is a
“female” or “male” brain? This is where the arguments
begin.
To start, male brains merely consistently drool reproductive
hormones out of the hypothalamus, whereas female brains must master
the cyclic secretion of ovulatory cycles. Thus fetal life produces a
hypothalamus that is more complexly wired in females.
But how about sex differences in the behaviors that interest us? The
question is, how much of male aggression is due to prenatal
masculinizing of the brain?
Virtually all of it, if we’re talking rodents. Work in the 1950s by
Robert Goy of the University of Wisconsin showed that in guinea pigs an
organizational effect of perinatal testosterone is to make the brain
responsive to testosterone in adulthood.64 Near-term pregnant females
would be treated with testosterone. This produced female offspring who,
as adults, appeared normal but were behaviorally “masculinized”—they
were more sensitive than control females to an injection of testosterone,
with a greater increase in aggression and male-typical sexual behavior
(i.e., mounting other females). Moreover, estrogen was less effective at
eliciting female-typical sexual behavior (i.e., a back-arching reflex called
lordosis). Thus prenatal testosterone exposure had masculinizing
organizational effects, so that these females as adults responded to the
activational effects of testosterone and estrogen as males would.
This challenged dogma that sexual identity is due to social, not
biological, influences. This was the view of sociologists who hated high
school biology . . . and of the medical establishment as well. According
to this view, if an infant was born with sexually ambiguous genitalia
(roughly 1 to 2 percent of births), it didn’t matter which gender they
214

were raised, as long as you decided within the first eighteen months—
just do whichever reconstructive surgery was more convenient.*65
So here’s Goy reporting that prenatal hormone environment, not
social factors, determines adult sex-typical behaviors. “But these are
guinea pigs” was the retort. Goy and crew then studied nonhuman
primates.
A quick tour of sexually dimorphic (i.e., differing by sex) primate
behavior: South American species such as marmosets and tamarins, who
form pair-bonds, show few sex differences in behavior. In contrast, most
Old World primates are highly dimorphic; males are more aggressive,
and females spend more time at affiliative behaviors (e.g., social
grooming, interacting with infants). How’s this for a sex difference: in
one study, adult male rhesus monkeys were far more interested in
playing with “masculine” human toys (e.g., wheeled toys) than
“feminine” ones (stuffed animals), while females had a slight preference
for feminine.66
What next, female monkeys prefer young-adult fantasy novels with
female protagonists? Why should human toys be relevant to sex
differences in monkeys? The authors speculate that this reflects the
higher activity levels in males, and how masculine toys facilitate more
active play.

215

Male rhesus monkeys show a strong preference for playing with stereotypically
“masculine” versus “feminine” human toys.
Visit bit.ly/2o8ogEL for a larger version of this graph.

Goy studied highly sexually dimorphic rhesus monkeys. There were
already hints that testosterone has organizational effects on their
behavior—within weeks of birth, males are more active than females and
spend more time in rough-and-tumble play. This is long before puberty
and its burst of testosterone secretion. Furthermore, even if you suppress
their testosterone levels at birth (low, but nevertheless still higher than
those of females), males still do more roughing and tumbling. This
suggested that the sex difference arose from fetal hormone differences.
Goy proved this by treating pregnant monkeys with testosterone and
examining their female offspring. Testosterone exposure throughout
pregnancy produced daughters who were “pseudohermaphrodites”—
looked like males on the outside but had female gonads on the inside.
When compared with control females, these androgenized females did
more rough-and-tumble play, were more aggressive, and displayed maletypical mounting behavior and vocalizations (as much as males, by some
measures). Importantly, most but not all behaviors were masculinized,
216

and these androgenized females were as interested as control females in
infants. Thus, testosterone has prenatal organizational effects on some
but not all behaviors.
In further studies, many carried out by Goy’s student Kim Wallen of
Emory University, pregnant females received lower doses of
testosterone, and only in the last trimester.67 This produced daughters
with normal genitalia but masculinized behavior. The authors noted the
relevance of this to transgender individuals—the external appearance of
one sex but the brain, if you will, of the other.*

And Us
Initially it seemed clear that prenatal testosterone exposure is also
responsible for male aggression in humans. This was based on studies of
a rare disorder, congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). An enzyme in the
adrenal glands has a mutation, and instead of making glucocorticoids,
they make testosterone and other androgens, starting during fetal life.
The lack of glucocorticoids causes serious metabolic problems
requiring replacement hormones. And what about the excessive
androgens in CAH girls (who are typically born with ambiguous genitals
and are infertile as adults)?
In the 1950s psychologist John Money of Johns Hopkins University
reported that CAH girls had pathologically high levels of male-typical
behaviors, a paucity of female-typical ones, and elevated IQ.
That sure stopped everyone in their tracks. But the research had some
problems. First, the IQ finding was spurious—parents willing to enroll
their CAH child in these studies averaged higher levels of education than
did controls. And the gender-typical behaviors? “Normal” was judged by
1950s Ozzie and Harriet standards—CAH girls were pathologically
interested in having careers and disinterested in having babies.
Oops, back to the drawing board. Careful contemporary CAH
research has been conducted by Melissa Hines of the University of
Cambridge.68 When compared with non-CAH girls, CAH girls do more
rough-and-tumble play, fighting, and physical aggression. Moreover,
they prefer “masculine” toys over dolls. As adults they score lower on
measures of tenderness and higher in aggressiveness and self-report

217

more aggression and less interest in infants. In addition, CAH women are
more likely to be gay or bisexual or have a transgender sexual identity.*
Importantly, drug treatments begun soon after birth normalize
androgen levels in these girls, so that the excessive androgen exposure is
solely prenatal. Thus prenatal testosterone exposure appears to cause
organizational changes that increase the incidence of male-typical
behaviors.
A similar conclusion is reached by an inverse of CAH, namely
androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS, historically called “testicular
feminization syndrome”).69 A fetus is male—XY chromosomes, testes
that secrete testosterone. But a mutation in the androgen receptor makes
it insensitive to testosterone. Thus the testes can secrete testosterone till
the cows come home but there won’t be any masculinization. And often
the individual is born with a female external phenotype and is raised as a
girl. Along comes puberty, she’s not getting periods, and a trip to the
doctor reveals that the “girl” is actually a “boy” (with testes typically
near the stomach, plus a shortened vagina that dead-ends). The
individual usually continues with a female identity but is infertile as an
adult. In other words, when human males don’t experience the
organizational prenatal effects of testosterone, you get female-typical
behaviors and identification.
Between CAH and AIS, the issue seems settled—prenatal
testosterone plays a major role in explaining sex differences in
aggression and various affiliative prosocial behaviors in humans.
Careful readers may have spotted two whopping big problems with
this conclusion:70
Remember that CAH girls are born with a “something’s
very different” Post-it—the ambiguous genitalia,
typically requiring multiple reconstructive surgeries.
CAH females are not merely prenatally androgenized.
They’re also raised by parents who know something is
different, have slews of doctors mighty interested in
their privates, and are treated with all sorts of hormones.
It’s impossible to attribute the behavioral profile solely
to the prenatal androgens.
Testosterone has no effects in AIS individuals because
of the androgen receptor mutation. But doesn’t
218

testosterone have most of its fetal brain effects as
estrogen, interacting with the estrogen receptor? That
aspect of brain masculinization should have occurred
despite the mutation. Complicating things, some of the
masculinizing effects of prenatal testosterone in
monkeys don’t require conversion to estrogen. So we
have genetically and gonadally male individuals with at
least some brain masculinization raised successfully as
females.
The picture is complicated further—AIS individuals raised female
have higher-than-expected rates of being gay, and of having an otherthan-female or neither-female-nor-male-sex/gender self-identification.
Argh. All we can say is that there is (imperfect) evidence that
testosterone has masculinizing prenatal effects in humans, as in other
primates. The question becomes how big these effects are.
Answering that question would be easy if you knew how much
testosterone people were exposed to as fetuses. Which brings up a truly
quirky finding, one likely to cause readers to start futzing awkwardly
with a ruler.
Weirdly, prenatal testosterone exposure influences digit length.71
Specifically, while the second finger is usually shorter than the fourth
finger, the difference (the “2D:4D ratio”) is greater in men than in
women, something first noted in the 1880s. The difference is
demonstrable in third-trimester fetuses, and the more fetal testosterone
exposure (as assessed by amniocentesis), the more pronounced the ratio.
Moreover, CAH females have a more masculine ratio, as do females who
shared their fetal environment (and thus some testosterone) with a male
twin, while AIS males have a more feminine ratio. The sex difference in
the ratio occurs in other primates and rodents. And no one knows why
this difference exists. Moreover, this oddity is not alone. A barely
discernible background noise generated by the inner ear (“otoacoustic
emissions”) shows a sex difference that reflects prenatal testosterone
exposure. Go explain that.
The 2D:4D ratio is so variable, and the sex difference so small, that
you can’t determine someone’s sex by knowing it. But it does tell you
something about the extent of fetal testosterone exposure.

219

So what does the extent of exposure (as assessed by the ratio) predict
about adult behavior? Men with more “masculine” 2D:4D ratios tend
toward higher levels of aggression and math scores; more assertive
personalities; higher rates of ADHD and autism (diseases with strong
male biases); and decreased risk of depression and anxiety (disorders
with a female skew). The faces and handwriting of such men are judged
to be more “masculine.” Furthermore, some reports show a decreased
likelihood of being gay.
Women having a more “feminine” ratio have less chance of autism
and more of anorexia (a female-biased disease). They’re less likely to be
left-handed (a male-skewed trait). Moreover, they exhibit less athletic
ability and more attraction to highly masculine faces. And they’re more
likely to be straight or, if lesbian, more likely to take stereotypical female
sexual roles.72
This constitutes some of the strongest evidence that (a) fetal
androgen exposure has organizational effects on adult behavior in
humans as in other species, and (b) that individual differences in the
extent of such exposure predict individual differences in adult
behavior.*73 Prenatal endocrine environment is destiny.
Well, not exactly. These effects are small and variable, producing a
meaningful relationship only when considering large numbers of
individuals. Do testosterone’s organizational effects determine the
quality and/or quantity of aggression? No. How about the organizational
plus the activational effects? Not those either.

Expanding the Scope of “Environment”
Thus the fetal brain can be influenced by hormones secreted by the
fetus. But in addition, the outside world alters a pregnant woman’s
physiology, which in turn affects the fetal brain.
The most obvious version of this is how food ingested by a pregnant
female influences what nutrients are delivered to the fetal circulation.*
At an extreme, maternal malnutrition broadly impairs fetal brain
development.*74 Moreover, pathogens acquired by the mother can be
passed to the fetus—for example, the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma
gondii can infect someone pregnant (typically after exposure to infected
cat feces) and eventually reach the fetal nervous system, potentially

220

wreaking serious havoc. And this is also the world of maternal substance
abuse producing heroin and crack babies or fetal alcohol syndrome.
Importantly, maternal stress impacts fetal development. There are
indirect routes—for example, stressed people consume less healthy diets
and consume more substances of abuse. More directly, stress alters
maternal blood pressure and immune defenses, which impact a fetus.
Most important, stressed mothers secrete glucocorticoids, which enter
fetal circulation and basically have the same bad consequences as in
stressed infants and children.
Glucocorticoids accomplish this through organizational effects on
fetal brain construction and decreasing levels of growth factors, numbers
of neurons and synapses, and so on. Just as prenatal testosterone
exposure generates an adult brain that is more sensitive to environmental
triggers of aggression, excessive prenatal glucocorticoid exposure
produces an adult brain more sensitive to environmental triggers of
depression and anxiety.
In addition, prenatal glucocorticoid exposure has effects that blend
classical developmental biology with molecular biology. To appreciate
this, here’s a highly simplified version of the next chapter’s focus on
genes: (a) each gene specifies the production of a specific type of
protein; (b) a gene has to be “activated” for the protein to be produced
and “deactivated” to stop producing it—thus genes come with on/off
switches; (c) every cell in our bodies contains the same library of genes;
(d) during development, the pattern of which genes are activated
determines which cells turn into nose, which into toes, and so on; (e)
forever after, nose, toes, and other cells retain distinctive patterns of gene
activation.
Chapter 4 discussed how some hormones have activational effects by
altering on/off switches on particular genes (e.g., testosterone-activating
genes related to increased growth in muscle cells). The field of
“epigenetics” concerns how some hormonal organizational effects arise
from permanently turning particular genes on or off in particular cells.75
Plenty more on this in the next chapter.
This helps explain why your toes and nose work differently. More
important, epigenetic changes also occur in the brain.
This domain of epigenetics was uncovered in a landmark 2004 study
by Meaney and colleagues, one of the most cited papers published in the
prestigious journal Nature Neuroscience. They had shown previously

221

that offspring of more “attentive” rat mothers (those that frequently
nurse, groom, and lick their pups) become adults with lower
glucocorticoid levels, less anxiety, better learning, and delayed brain
aging. The paper showed that these changes were epigenetic—that
mothering style altered the on/off switch in a gene relevant to the brain’s
stress response.* Whoa—mothering style alters gene regulation in pups’
brains. Remarkably, Meaney, along with Darlene Francis of the
University of California, Berkeley, then showed that such rat pups, as
adults, are more attentive mothers—passing this trait epigenetically to
the next generation.* Thus, adult behavior produces persistent molecular
brain changes in offspring, “programming” them to be likely to replicate
that distinctive behavior in adulthood.76
More findings flooded in, many provided by Meaney, his
collaborator Moshe Szyf, also of McGill, and Frances Champagne of
Columbia University.77 Hormonal responses to various fetal and
childhood experiences have epigenetic effects on genes related to the
growth factor BDNF, to the vasopressin and oxytocin system, and to
estrogen sensitivity. These effects are pertinent to adult cognition,
personality, emotionality, and psychiatric health. Childhood abuse, for
example, causes epigenetic changes in hundreds of genes in the human
hippocampus. Moreover, Stephen Suomi of the National Institutes of
Health and Szyf found that mothering style in monkeys has epigenetic
effects on more than a thousand frontocortical genes.*
This is totally revolutionary. Sort of. Which segues to a chapter
summary.

222

CONCLUSIONS

E

pigenetic environmental effects on the developing brain are hugely
exciting. Nonetheless, curbing of enthusiasm is needed. Findings
have been overinterpreted, and as more researchers flock to the subject,
the quality of studies has declined. Moreover, there is the temptation to
conclude that epigenetics explains “everything,” whatever that might be;
most effects of childhood experience on adult outcomes probably don’t
involve epigenetics and (stay tuned) most epigenetic changes are
transient. Particularly strong criticisms come from molecular geneticists
rather than behavioral scientists (who generally embrace the topic); some
of the negativity from the former, I suspect, is fueled by the indignity of
having to incorporate the likes of rat mothers licking their pups into their
beautiful world of gene regulation.
But the excitement should be restrained on a deeper level, one
relevant to the entire chapter. Stimulating environments, harsh parents,
good neighborhoods, uninspiring teachers, optimal diets—all alter genes
in the brain. Wow. And not that long ago the revolution was about how
environment and experience change the excitability of synapses, their
number, neuronal circuits, even the number of neurons. Whoa. And
earlier the revolution was about how environment and experience can
change the sizes of different parts of the brain. Amazing.
But none of this is truly amazing. Because things must work these
ways. While little in childhood determines an adult behavior, virtually
everything in childhood changes propensities toward some adult
behavior. Freud, Bowlby, Harlow, Meaney, from their differing
perspectives, all make the same fundamental and once-revolutionary
point: childhood matters. All that the likes of growth factors, on/off
switches, and rates of myelination do is provide insights into the innards
of that fact.
Such insight is plenty useful. It shows the steps linking childhood
point A to adult point Z. It shows how parents can produce offspring
whose behaviors resemble their own. It identifies Achilles’ heels that
explain how childhood adversity can make for damaged and damaging

223

adults. And it hints at how bad outcomes might be reversed and good
outcomes reinforced.
There is another use. In chapter 2 I recounted how it required the
demonstration of hippocampal volume loss in combat vets with PTSD to
finally convince many in power that the disorder is “real.” Similarly, it
shouldn’t require molecular genetics or neuroendocrinology factoids to
prove that childhood matters and thus that it profoundly matters to
provide childhoods filled with good health and safety, love and
nurturance and opportunity. But insofar as it seems to require precisely
that sort of scientific validation at times, more power to those factoids.

224

Eight

Back to When You Were
Just a Fertilized Egg

I

’m reminded of a cartoon where one lab-coated scientist is telling the
other, “You know how you’re on the phone, and the other person
wants to get off but won’t say it, so they say, ‘Well, you probably need to
get going,’ like you’re the one who wants to get off, when it’s really
them? I think I found the gene for that.”
This chapter is about progress in finding “the gene for that.”

—
Our prototypical behavior has occurred. How was it influenced by events
when the egg and sperm that formed that person joined, creating their
genome—the chromosomes, the sequences of DNA—destined to be
duplicated in every cell in that future person’s body? What role did those
genes play in causing that behavior?
Genes are relevant to, say, aggression, which is why we’re less
alarmed if a toddler pulls at the ears of a basset hound rather than a pit
bull. Genes are relevant to everything in this book. Many
neurotransmitters and hormones are coded for by genes. As are
molecules that construct or degrade those messengers, as are their
receptors. Ditto for growth factors guiding brain plasticity. Genes
typically come in different versions; we each consist of an individuated
orchestration of the different versions of our approximately twenty
thousand genes.
This topic carries two burdens. The first reflects many people being
troubled by linking genes with behavior—in one incident from my
academic youth, a federally funded conference was canceled for
225

suggesting that genes were pertinent to violence. This suspicion of
gene/behavior links exists because of the pseudoscientific genetics used
to justify various “isms,” prejudice, and discrimination. Such
pseudoscience has fostered racism and sexism, birthed eugenics and
forced sterilizations, allowed scientifically meaningless versions of
words like “innate” to justify the neglect of have-nots. And monstrous
distortions of genetics have fueled those who lynch, ethnically cleanse,
or march children into gas chambers.*1
But studying the genetics of behavior also carries the opposite burden
of people who are overly enthusiastic about the subject. After all, this is
the genomics era, with personalized genomic medicine, people getting
their genomes sequenced, and popular writing about genomics giddy
with terms like “the holy grail” and “the code of codes.” In a reductionist
view, understanding something complex requires breaking it down into
its components; understand those parts, add them together, and you’ll
understand the big picture. And in this reductionist world, to understand
cells, organs, bodies, and behavior, the best constituent part to study is
genes.
Overenthusiasm for genes can reflect a sense that people possess an
immutable, distinctive essence (although essentialism predates
genomics). Consider a study concerning “moral spillover” based on
kinship.2 Suppose a person harmed people two generations ago; are this
person’s grandchildren obliged to help his victims’ grandchildren?
Subjects viewed a biological grandchild as more obligated than one
adopted into the family at birth; the biological relationship carried a taint.
Moreover, subjects were more willing to jail two long-lost identical
twins for a crime committed by one of them than to jail two unrelated but
perfect look-alikes—the former, raised in different environments, share a
moral taint because of their identical genes. People see essentialism
embedded in bloodlines—i.e., genes.*
This chapter threads between these two extremes, concluding that
while genes are important to this book’s concerns, they’re far less so than
often thought. The chapter first introduces gene function and regulation,
showing the limits of genes’ power. Next it examines genetic influences
on behavior in general. Finally we’ll examine genetic influences on our
best and worst behaviors.

226

PART I: GENES FROM THE BOTTOM UP

W

e start by considering the limited power of genes. If you are
shaky about topics such as the central dogma (DNA codes for
RNA, which codes for protein sequence), protein structure determining
function, the three-nucleotide codon code, or the basics of point,
insertion, and deletion mutations, first read the primer in appendix 3.

Do Genes Know What They Are Doing? The
Triumph of the Environment
So genes specify protein structure, shape, and function. And since
proteins do virtually everything, this makes DNA the holy grail of life.
But no—genes don’t “decide” when a new protein is made.
Dogma was that there’d be a stretch of DNA in a chromosome,
constituting a single gene, followed by a stop codon, followed
immediately by the next gene, and then the next. . . . But genes don’t
actually come one after another—not all DNA constitutes genes. Instead
there are stretches of DNA between genes that are noncoding, that are
not “transcribed.”* And now a flabbergasting number—95 percent of
DNA is noncoding. Ninety-five percent.
What is that 95 percent? Some is junk—remnants of pseudogenes
inactivated by evolution.*3 But buried in that are the keys to the
kingdom, the instruction manual for when to transcribe particular genes,
the on/off switches for gene transcription. A gene doesn’t “decide” when
to be photocopied into RNA, to generate its protein. Instead, before the
start of the stretch of DNA coding for that gene is a short stretch called a
promoter*—the “on” switch. What turns the promoter switch on?
Something called a transcription factor (TF) binds to the promoter. This
causes the recruitment of enzymes that transcribe the gene into RNA.
Meanwhile, other transcription factors deactivate genes.
This is huge. Saying that a gene “decides” when it is transcribed* is
like saying that a recipe decides when a cake is baked.

227

Thus transcription factors regulate genes. What regulates
transcription factors? The answer devastates the concept of genetic
determinism: the environment.
To start unexcitingly, “environment” can mean intracellular
environment. Suppose a hardworking neuron is low on energy. This state
activates a particular transcription factor, which binds to a specific
promoter, which activates the next gene in line (the “downstream” gene).
This gene codes for a glucose transporter; more glucose transporter
proteins are made and inserted into the cell membrane, improving the
neuron’s ability to access circulating glucose.
Next consider “environment,” including the neuron next door, which
releases serotonin onto the neuron in question. Suppose less serotonin
has been released lately. Sentinel transcription factors in dendritic spines
sense this, travel to the DNA, and bind to the promoter upstream of the
serotonin receptor gene. More receptor is made and placed in the
dendritic spines, and they become more sensitive to the faint serotonin
signal.
Sometimes “environment” can be far-flung within an organism. A
male secretes testosterone, which travels through the bloodstream and
binds to androgen receptors in muscle cells. This activates a
transcription-factor cascade that results in more intracellular scaffolding
proteins, enlarging the cell (i.e., muscle mass increases).
Finally, and most important, there is “environment,” meaning the
outside world. A female smells her newborn, meaning that odorant
molecules that floated off the baby bind to receptors in her nose. The
receptors activate and (many steps later in the hypothalamus) a
transcription factor activates, leading to the production of more oxytocin.
Once secreted, the oxytocin causes milk letdown. Genes are not the
deterministic holy grail if they can be regulated by the smell of a baby’s
tushy. Genes are regulated by all the incarnations of environment.
In other words, genes don’t make sense outside the context of
environment. Promoters and transcription factor introduce if/then
clauses: “If you smell your baby, then activate the oxytocin gene.”
Now the plot thickens.
There are multiple types of transcription factors in a cell, each
binding to a particular DNA sequence constituting a particular promoter.
Consider a genome containing one gene. In that imaginary organism
there is only a single profile of transcription (i.e., the gene is

228

transcribed), requiring only one transcription factor.
Now consider a genome consisting of genes A and B, meaning three
different transcription profiles—A is transcribed, B is transcribed, A and
B are transcribed—requiring three different TFs (assuming you activate
only one at a time).
Three genes, seven transcription profiles: A, B, C, A + B, A + C, B +
C, A + B + C. Seven different TFs.
Four genes, fifteen profiles. Five genes, thirty-one profiles.*
As the number of genes in a genome increases, the number of
possible expression profiles increases exponentially. As does the number
of TFs needed to produce those profiles.
Now another wrinkle that, in the lingo of an ancient generation, will
blow your mind.
TFs are usually proteins, coded for by genes. Back to genes A and B.
To fully exploit them, you need the TF that activates gene A, and the TF
that activates gene B, and the TF that activates genes A and B. Thus
there must exist three more genes, each coding for one of those TFs.
Requiring TFs that activate those genes. And TFs for the genes coding
for those TFs . . .
Whoa. Genomes aren’t infinite; instead TFs regulate one another’s
transcription, solving that pesky infinity problem. Importantly, across the
species whose genomes have been sequenced, the longer the genome
(i.e., roughly the more genes there are), the greater the percentage of
genes coding for TFs. In other words, the more genomically complex the
organism, the larger the percentage of the genome devoted to gene
regulation by the environment.
Back to mutations. Can there be mutations in DNA stretches
constituting promoters? Yes, and more often than in genes themselves. In
the 1970s Allan Wilson and Mary-Claire King at Berkeley correctly
theorized that the evolution of genes is less important than the evolution
of regulatory sequences upstream of genes (and thus how the
environment regulates genes). Reflecting that, a disproportionate share of
genetic differences between chimps and humans are in genes for TFs.
Time for more complexity. Suppose you have genes 1–10, and
transcription factors A, B, and C. TF-A induces the transcription of
genes 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9. TF-B induces genes 1, 2, 5, and 6. TF-C induces
1, 5, and 10. Thus, upstream of gene 1 are separate promoters responding
to TFs A, B, and C—thus genes can be regulated by multiple TFs.

229

Conversely, each TF usually activates more than one gene, meaning that
multiple genes are typically activated in networks (for example, cell
injury causes a TF called NF-κB to activate a network of inflammation
genes). Suppose the promoter upstream of gene 3 that responds to
promoter TF-A has a mutation making it responsive to TF-B. Result?
Gene 3 is now activated as part of a different network. Same
networkwide outcome if there is a mutation in a gene for a TF, producing
a protein that binds to a different promoter type.4
Consider this: the human genome codes for about 1,500 different
TFs, contains 4,000,000 TF-binding sites, and the average cell uses about
200,000 such sites to generate its distinctive gene-expression profile.5
This is boggling.

Epigenetics
The last chapter introduced the phenomenon of environmental
influences freezing genetic on/off in one position. Such “epigenetic”
changes* were relevant to events, particularly in childhood, causing
persistent effects on the brain and behavior. For example, recall those
pair-bonding prairie voles; when females and males first mate, there are
epigenetic changes in regulation of oxytocin and vasopressin receptor
genes in the nucleus accumbens, that target of mesolimbic dopamine
projection.6
Let’s translate the last chapter’s imagery of “freezing on/off
switches” into molecular biology.7 What mechanisms underlie epigenetic
changes in gene regulation? An environmental input results in a chemical
being attached tightly to a promoter, or to some nearby structural
proteins surrounding DNA. The result of either is that TFs can no longer
access or properly bind to the promoter, thus silencing the gene.
As emphasized in the last chapter, epigenetic changes can be
multigenerational.8 Dogma was that all the epigenetic marks (i.e.,
changes in the DNA or surrounding proteins) were erased in eggs and
sperm. But it turns out that epigenetic marks can be passed on by both
(e.g., make male mice diabetic, and they pass the trait to their offspring
via epigenetic changes in sperm).
Recall one of the great punching bags of science history, the
eighteenth-century French biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck.9 All

230

anybody knows about the guy now is that he was wrong about heredity.
Suppose a giraffe habitually stretches her neck to reach leaves high in a
tree; this lengthens her neck. According to Lamarck, when she has
babies, they will have longer necks because of “acquired inheritance.”*
Lunatic! Buffoon! Epigenetically mediated mechanisms of inheritance—
now often called “neo-Lamarckian inheritance”—prove Lamarck right in
this narrow domain. Centuries late, the guy’s getting some acclaim.
Thus, not only does environment regulate genes, but it can do so with
effects that last days to lifetimes.

The Modular Construction of Genes: Exons and
Introns
Time to do in another dogma about DNA. It turns out that most genes
are not coded for by a continuous stretch of DNA. Instead there might be
a stretch of noncoding DNA in the middle. In that case, the two separate
stretches of coding DNA are called “exons,” separated by an “intron.”
Many genes are broken into numerous exons (with, logically, one less
intron than the number of exons).
How do you produce a protein from an “exonic” gene? The RNA
photocopy of the gene initially contains the exons and introns; an
enzyme removes the intronic parts and splices together the exons.
Clunky, but with big implications.
Back to each particular gene coding for a particular protein.10 Introns
and exons destroy this simplicity. Imagine a gene consisting of exons 1,
2, and 3, separated by introns A and B. In one part of the body a splicing
enzyme exists that splices out the introns and also trashes exon 3,
producing a protein coded for by exons 1 and 2. Meanwhile, elsewhere
in the body, a different splicing enzyme jettisons exon 2 along with the
introns, producing a protein derived from exons 1 and 3. In another cell
type a protein is made solely from exon 1. . . . Thus “alternative splicing”
can generate multiple unique proteins from a single stretch of DNA; so
much for “one gene specifies one protein”—this gene specifies seven (A,
B, C, A-B, A-C, B-C, and A-B-C). Remarkably, 90 percent of human
genes with exons are alternatively spliced. Moreover, when a gene is
regulated by multiple TFs, each can direct the transcription of a different

231

combination of exons. Oh, and splicing enzymes are proteins, meaning
that each is coded for by a gene. Loops and loops.

Transposable Genetic Elements, the Stability of the
Genome, and Neurogenesis
Time to unmoor another cherished idea, namely that genes inherited
from your parents (i.e., what you started with as a fertilized egg) are
immutable. This calls up a great chapter of science history. In the 1940s
an accomplished plant geneticist named Barbara McClintock observed
something impossible. She was studying the inheritance of kernel color
in maize (a frequent tool of geneticists) and found patterns of mutations
unexplained by any known mechanism. The only possibility, she
concluded, was that stretches of DNA had been copied, with the copy
then randomly inserted into another stretch of DNA.
Yeah, right.
Clearly McClintock, with her (derisively named) “jumping genes,”
had gone mad, and so she was ignored (not exactly true, but this detracts
from the drama). She soldiered on in epic isolation. And finally, with the
molecular revolution of the 1970s, she was vindicated about her (now
termed) transposable genetic elements, or transposons. She was lionized,
canonized, Nobel Prized (and was wonderfully inspirational, as
disinterested in acclaim as in her ostracism, working until her nineties).
Transpositional events rarely produce great outcomes. Consider a
hypothetical stretch of DNA coding for “The fertilized egg is implanted
in the uterus.”
There has been a transpositional event, where the underlined stretch
of message was copied and randomly plunked down elsewhere: “The
fertilized eggterus is implanted in the uterus.”
Gibberish.
But sometimes “The fertilized egg is implanted in the uterus”
becomes “The fertilized eggplant is implanted in the uterus.”
Now, that’s not an everyday occurrence.

—
Plants utilize transposons. Suppose there is a drought; plants can’t move
to wetter pastures like animals can. Plant “stress” such as drought

232

induces transpositions in particular cells, where the plant metaphorically
shuffles its DNA deck, hoping to generate some novel savior of a
protein.
Mammals have fewer transposons than plants. The immune system is
one transposon hot spot, in the enormous stretches of DNA coding for
antibodies. A novel virus invades; shuffling the DNA increases the odds
of coming up with an antibody that will target the invader.*
The main point here is that transposons occur in the brain.11 In
humans transpositional events occur in stem cells in the brain when they
are becoming neurons, making the brain a mosaic of neurons with
different DNA sequences. In other words, when you make neurons, that
boring DNA sequence you inherited isn’t good enough. Remarkably,
transpositional events occur in neurons that form memories in fruit flies.
Even flies evolved such that their neurons are freed from the strict
genetic marching orders they inherit.

Chance
Finally, chance lessens genes as the Code of Codes. Chance, driven
by Brownian motion—the random movement of particles in a fluid—has
big effects on tiny things like molecules floating in cells, including
molecules regulating gene transcription.12 This influences how quickly
an activated TF reaches the DNA, splicing enzymes bump into target
stretches of RNA, and an enzyme synthesizing something grabs the two
precursor molecules needed for the synthesis. I’ll stop here; otherwise,
I’ll go on for hours.

Some Key Points, Completing This Part of the
Chapter
a. Genes are not autonomous agents commanding
biological events.
b. Instead, genes are regulated by the environment, with
“environment” consisting of everything from events
inside the cell to the universe.
c. Much of your DNA turns environmental influences into
gene transcription, rather than coding for genes
233

themselves; moreover, evolution is heavily about
changing regulation of gene transcription, rather than
genes themselves.
d. Epigenetics can allow environmental effects to be
lifelong, or even multigenerational.
e. And thanks to transposons, neurons contain a mosaic of
different genomes.
In other words, genes don’t determine much. This theme continues as
we focus on the effects of genes on behavior.

234

PART 2: GENES FROM THE TOP DOWN—
BEHAVIOR GENETICS

L

ong before anything was known about promoters, exons, or
transcription factors, it became clear that you study genetics top
down, by observing traits shared by relatives. Early in the last century,
this emerged as the science of “behavior genetics.” As we’ll see, the field
has often been mired in controversy, typically because of disagreements
over the magnitude of genetic effects on things like IQ or sexual
orientation.

First Attempts
The field began with the primitive idea that, if everyone in a family
does it, it must be genetic. This was confounded by environment running
in families as well.
The next approach depended on closer relatives having more genes in
common than distant ones. Thus, if a trait runs in a family and is more
common among closer relatives, it’s genetic. But obviously, closer
relatives share more environment as well—think of a child and parent
versus a child and grandparent.
Research grew subtler. Consider someone’s biological aunt (i.e., the
sister of a parent), and the uncle who married the aunt. The uncle shares
some degree of environment with the individual, while the aunt shares
the same, plus genes. Therefore, the extent to which the aunt is more
similar to the individual than the uncle reflects the genetic influence. But
as we’ll see, this approach has problems.
More sophistication was needed.

Twins, Adoptees, and Adopted Twins
A major advance came with “twin studies.” Initially, examining
twins helped rule out the possibility of genetic determination of a

235

behavior. Consider pairs of identical twins, sharing 100 percent of their
genes. Suppose one of each pair has schizophrenia; does the twin as
well? If there are any cases where the other twin doesn’t (i.e., where the
“concordance rate” is less than 100 percent), you’ve shown that the
genome and epigenetic profile inherited at birth do not solely determine
the incidence of schizophrenia (in fact the concordance rate is about 50
percent).
But then a more elegant twin approach emerged, involving the key
distinction between identical (monozygotic, or MZ) twins, who share
100 percent of their genes, and fraternal, nonidentical (dizygotic, or DZ)
twins, who, like all other sibling pairs, share 50 percent of their genes.
Compare pairs of MZ twins with same-sex DZ twins. Each pair is the
same age, was raised in the same environment, and shared a fetal
environment; the only difference is the percentage of genes shared.
Examine a trait occurring in one member of the twin pair; is it there in
the other? The logic ran that, if a trait is shared more among MZ than
among DZ twins, that increased degree of sharing reflects the genetic
contribution to the trait.
Another major advance came in the 1960s. Identify individuals
adopted soon after birth. All they share with their biological parents is
genes; all they share with their adoptive parents is environment. Thus, if
adopted individuals share a trait more with their biological than with
their adoptive parents, you’ve uncovered a genetic influence. This
replicates a classic tool in animal studies, namely “cross-fostering”—
switching newborn rat pups between two mothers. The approach was
pioneered in revealing a strong genetic component to schizophrenia.13
Then came the most wonderful, amazing, like, totally awesome thing
ever in behavior genetics, started by Thomas Bouchard of the University
of Minnesota. In 1979 Bouchard found a pair of identical twins who
were—get this—separated at birth and adopted into different homes,
with no knowledge of each other’s existence until being reunited as
adults.14 Identical twins separated at birth are so spectacular and rare that
behavior geneticists swoon over them, want to collect them all. Bouchard
eventually studied more than a hundred such pairs.
The attraction was obvious—same genes, different environments
(and the more different the better); thus, similarities in behavior probably
reflect genetic influences. Here’s an imaginary twin pair that would be
God’s gift to behavior geneticists—identical twin boys separated at birth.

236

One, Shmuel, is raised as an Orthodox Jew in the Amazon; the other,
Wolfie, is raised as a Nazi in the Sahara. Reunite them as adults and see
if they do similar quirky things like, say, flushing the toilet before using
it. Flabbergastingly, one twin pair came close to that. They were born in
1933 in Trinidad to a German Catholic mother and a Jewish father; when
the boys were six months of age, the parents separated; the mother
returned to Germany with one son, and the other remained in Trinidad
with the father. The latter was raised there and in Israel as Jack Yufe, an
observant Jew whose first language was Yiddish. The other, Oskar Stohr,
was raised in Germany as a Hitler Youth zealot. Reunited and studied by
Bouchard, they warily got to know each other, discovering numerous
shared behavioral and personality traits including . . . flushing the toilet
before use. (As we’ll see, studies were more systematic than just
documenting bathroom quirks. The flushing detail, however, always
comes up in accounts of the pair.)
Behavior geneticists, wielding adoption and twin approaches,
generated scads of studies, filling specialized journals like Genes, Brain
and Behavior and Twin Research and Human Genetics. Collectively, the
research consistently showed that genetics plays a major role in a gamut
of domains of behavior, including IQ and its subcomponents (i.e., verbal
ability, and spatial ability),*15 schizophrenia, depression, bipolar
disorder, autism, attention-deficit disorder, compulsive gambling, and
alcoholism.
Nearly as strong genetic influences were shown for personality
measures related to extroversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
neuroticism, and openness to experience (known as the “Big Five”
personality traits).16 Likewise with genetic influences on degree of
religiosity, attitude toward authority, attitude toward homosexuality,* and
propensities toward cooperation and risk taking in games.
Other twin studies showed genetic influences on the likelihood of
risky sexual behavior and on people’s degree of attraction to secondary
sexual characteristics (e.g., musculature in men, breast size in women).17
Meanwhile, some social scientists report genetic influences on the
extent of political involvement and sophistication (independent of
political orientation); there are behavior genetics papers in the American
Journal of Political Science.18
Genes, genes, everywhere. Large genetic contributions have even
been uncovered for everything from the frequency with which teenagers
237

text to the occurrence of dental phobias.19
So does this mean there is a gene “for” finding chest hair on guys to
be hot, for likelihood of voting, for feelings about dentists? Vanishingly
unlikely. Instead, gene and behavior are often connected by tortuous
routes.20 Consider the genetic influence on voter participation; the
mediating factor between the two turns out to be sense of control and
efficacy. People who vote regularly feel that their actions matter, and this
central locus of control reflects some genetically influenced personality
traits (e.g., high optimism, low neuroticism). Or how about the link
between genes and self-confidence? Some studies show that the
intervening variable is genetic effects on height; taller people are
considered more attractive and treated better, boosting their selfconfidence, dammit.*
In other words, genetic influences on behavior often work through
very indirect routes, something rarely emphasized when news broadcasts
toss out behavior genetics sound bites—“Scientists report genetic
influence on strategy when playing Candyland.”

The Debates About Twin and Adoption Studies
Many scientists have heavily criticized the assumptions in twin and
adoption studies, showing that they generally lead to overestimates of the
importance of genes.* Most behavior geneticists recognize these
problems but argue that the overestimates are tiny.21 A summary of this
technical but important debate:
Criticism #1: Twin studies are premised on MZ and same-sex DZ twin
pairs sharing environment equally (while sharing genes to very different
extents). This “equal environment assumption” (EEA) is simply wrong;
starting with parents, MZ twins are treated more similarly than DZ twins,
creating more similar environments for them. If this isn’t recognized,
greater similarity between MZs will be misattributed to genes.22
Scientists such as Kenneth Kendler of Virginia Commonwealth
University, a dean of the field, have tried to control for this by (a)
quantifying just how similar childhoods were for twins (with respect to
variables like sharing rooms, clothing, friends, teachers, and adversity);
(b) examining cases of “mistaken zygosity,” where parents were wrong
about their twins’ MZ/DZ status (thus, for example, raising their DZ

238

twins as if they were MZ); and (c) comparing full-, half-, and stepsiblings who were reared together for differing lengths of time. Most of
these studies show that controlling for the assumption of MZs sharing
more environment than do DZs doesn’t significantly reduce the size of
genetic influences.*23 Hold that thought.
Criticism #2: MZ twins experience life more similarly starting as
fetuses. DZ twins are “dichorionic,” meaning that they have separate
placentas. In contrast, 75 percent of MZ twins share one placenta (i.e.,
are “monochorionic”).* Thus most MZ twin fetuses share maternal blood
flow more than do DZ twins, and thus are exposed to more similar levels
of maternal hormones and nutrients. If that isn’t recognized, greater
similarity in MZs will be misattributed to genes.
Various studies have determined what the chorionic status was in
different MZ pairs and then examined end points related to cognition,
personality, and psychiatric disease. By a small margin, most studies
show that chorionic status does make a difference, leading to
overestimates of genetic influence. How big of an overestimation? As
stated in one review, “small but not negligible.”24
Criticism #3: Recall that adoption studies assume that if a child is
adopted soon after birth, she shares genes but no environment with her
biological parents. But what about prenatal environmental effects? A
newborn just spent nine months sharing the circulatory environment with
Mom. Moreover, eggs and sperm can carry epigenetic changes into the
next generation. If these various effects are ignored, an environmentally
based similarity between mother and child would be misattributed to
genes.
Epigenetic transmission via sperm seems of small significance. But
prenatal and epigenetic effects from the mother can be huge—for
example, the Dutch Hunger Winter phenomenon showed that thirdtrimester malnutrition increased the risk of some adult diseases more
than tenfold.
This confound can be controlled for. Roughly half your genes come
from each parent, but prenatal environment comes from Mom. Thus,
traits shared more with biological mothers than with fathers argue
against a genetic influence.* The few tests of this, concerning the genetic
influence on schizophrenia demonstrated in twin studies, suggest that
prenatal effects aren’t big.

239

Criticism #4: Adoption studies assume that a child and adoptive parents
share environment but not genes.25 That might approach being true if

adoption involved choosing adoptive parents randomly among everyone
on earth. Instead, adoption agencies prefer to place children with families
of similar racial or ethnic background as the biological parents (a policy
advocated by the National Association of Black Social Workers and the
Child Welfare League).* Thus, kids and adoptive parents typically share
genes at a higher-than-chance level; if this isn’t recognized, a similarity
between them will be misattributed to environment.
Researchers admit there is selective placement but argue over
whether it’s consequential. This remains unsettled. Bouchard, with his
twins separated at birth, controlled for cultural, material, and
technological similarities between the separate homes of twin pairs,
concluding that shared similarity of home environments due to selective
placement was a negligible factor. A similar conclusion was reached in a
larger study carried out by both Kendler and another dean of the field,
Robert Plomin of King’s College London.
These conclusions have been challenged. The most fire-breathing
critic has been Princeton psychologist Leon Kamin, who argues that
concluding that selective placement isn’t important is wrong because of
misinterpretation of results, use of wimpy analytical tests, and
overreliance on questionable retrospective data. He wrote: “We suggest
that no scientific purpose is served by the flood of heritability estimates
generated by these studies.”26
Here’s where I give up—if super smart people who think about this
issue all the time can’t agree, I sure don’t know how seriously selective
placement distorts the literature.
Criticism #5: Adoptive parents tend to be more educated, wealthier, and
more psychiatrically healthy than biological parents.27 Thus, adoptive
households show “range restriction,” being more homogeneous than
biological ones, which decreases the ability to detect environmental
effects on behavior. Predictably, attempts to control for this satisfy only
some critics.

—
So what do we know after this slog through the criticisms and
countercriticisms about adoption and twin studies?

240

Everyone agrees that confounds from prenatal
environment, epigenetics, selective placement, range
restriction, and assumptions about equal environment
are unavoidable.
Most of these confounds inflate the perceived
importance of genes.
Efforts have been made to control for these confounds
and generally have shown that they are of less
magnitude than charged by many critics.
Crucially, these studies have mostly been about
psychiatric disorders, which, while plenty interesting,
aren’t terribly relevant to the concerns of this book. In
other words, no one has studied whether these
confounds matter when considering genetic influences
on, say, people’s tendency to endorse their culture’s
moral rules yet rationalize why those rules don’t apply
to them today, because they’re stressed and it’s their
birthday. Lots more work to be done.

The Fragile Nature of Heritability Estimates
Now starts a bruising, difficult, immensely important subject. I
review its logic every time I teach it, because it’s so unintuitive, and I’m
still always just words away from getting it wrong when I open my
mouth in class.
Behavior genetics studies usually produce a number called a
heritability score.28 For example, studies have reported heritability
scores in the 40 to 60 percent range for traits related to prosocial
behavior, resilience after psychosocial stress, social responsiveness,
political attitudes, aggression, and leadership potential.
What’s a heritability score? “What does a gene do?” is at least two
questions. How does a gene influence average levels of a trait? How
does a gene influence variation among people in levels of that trait?
These are crucially different. For example, how much do genes have
to do with people’s scores averaging 100 on this thing called an IQ test?
Then how much do genes have to do with one person scoring higher than
another?

241

Or how much do genes help in explaining why humans usually enjoy
ice cream? How much in explaining why people like different flavors?
These issues utilize two terms with similar sounds but different
meanings. If genes strongly influence average levels of a trait, that trait is
strongly inherited. If genes strongly influence the extent of variability
around that average level, that trait has high heritability.* It is a
population measure, where a heritability score indicates the percentage
of total variation attributable to genetics.
The difference between an inherited trait and heritability generates at
least two problems that inflate the putative influence of genes. First,
people confuse the two terms (things would be easier if heritability were
called something like “gene tendency”), and in a consistent direction.
People often mistakenly believe that if a trait is strongly inherited, it’s
thus highly heritable. And it’s particularly bad that confusion is typically
in that direction, because people are usually more interested in variability
of traits among humans than in average levels of traits. For example, it’s
more interesting to consider why some people are smarter than others
than why humans are smarter than turnips.
The second problem is that research consistently inflates heritability
measures, leading people to conclude that genes influence individual
differences more than they do.
Let’s slowly work through this, because it’s really important.

The Difference Between a Trait Being Inherited
and Having a High Degree of Heritability
You can appreciate the difference by considering cases where they
dissociate.
First, an example of a trait that is highly inherited but has low
heritability, offered by the philosopher Ned Block:29 What do genes have
to do with humans averaging five fingers per hand? Tons; it’s an
inherited trait. What do genes have to do with variation around that
average? Not much—cases of other than five fingers on a hand are
mostly due to accidents. While average finger number is an inherited
trait, the heritability of finger number is low—genes don’t explain
individual differences much. Or stated differently: Say you want to guess
whether some organism’s limb has five fingers or a hoof. Knowing their

242

genetic makeup will help by identifying their species. Alternatively,
you’re trying to guess whether a particular person is likely to have five
or four fingers on his hand. Knowing whether he uses buzz saws while
blindfolded is more useful than knowing the sequence of his genome.
Next consider the opposite—a trait that is not highly inherited but
which has high heritability. What do genes directly have to do with
humans being more likely than chimps to wear earrings? Not much. Now
consider individual differences among humans—how much do genes
help predict which individuals are wearing earrings at a high school
dance in 1958? Tons. Basically, if you had two X chromosomes, you
probably wore earrings, but if you had a Y chromosome, you wouldn’t
have been caught dead doing so. Thus, while genes had little to do with
the prevalence of earrings among Americans in 1958 being around 50
percent, they had lots to do with determining which Americans wore
them. Thus, in that time and place, wearing earrings, while not a strongly
inherited trait, had high heritability.

The Reliability of Heritability Measures
We’re now clear on the difference between inherited traits and their
degree of heritability and recognize that people are usually more
interested in the latter—you versus your neighbor—than the former—
you versus a wildebeest. As we saw, scads of behavioral and personality
traits have heritability scores of 40 to 60 percent, meaning that genetics
explains about half the variability in the trait. The point of this section is
that the nature of research typically inflates such scores.*30
Say a plant geneticist sits in the desert, studying a particular species
of plant. In this imaginary scenario a single gene, gene 3127, regulates
the plant’s growth. Gene 3127 comes in versions, A, B, and C. Plants
with version A always grow to be one inch tall; version B, two inches; C,
three inches.* What single fact gives you the most power in predicting a
plant’s height? Obviously, whether it has version A, B, or C—that
explains all the variation in height between plants, meaning 100 percent
heritability.
Meanwhile, twelve thousand miles away in a rain forest, a second
plant geneticist is studying a clone of that same plant. And in that
environment plants with version A, B, or C are 101, 102, or 103 inches

243

tall, respectively. This geneticist also concludes that plant height in this
case shows 100 percent heritability.
Then, as required by the plot line, the two stand side by side at a
conference, one brandishing 1/2/3 inch data, the other 101/102/103. They
combine data sets. Now you want to predict the height of one example of
that plant, taken from anywhere on the planet. You can either know
which version of gene 3127 it possesses or what environment it is
growing in. Which is more useful? Knowing which environment. When
you study this plant species in two environments, you discover that
heritability of height is miniscule.
Neon lights! This is crucial: Study a gene in only one environment
and, by definition, you’ve eliminated the ability to see if it works
differently in other environments (in other words, if other environments
regulate the gene differently). And thus you’ve artificially inflated the
importance of the genetic contribution. The more environments in which
you study a genetic trait, the more novel environmental effects will be
revealed, decreasing the heritability score.
Scientists study things in controlled settings to minimize variation in
extraneous factors and thus get cleaner, more interpretable results—for
example, making sure that the plants all have their height measured
around the same time of year. This inflates heritability scores, because
you’ve prevented yourself from ever discovering that some extraneous
environmental factor isn’t actually extraneous.* Thus a heritability score
tells how much variation in a trait is explained by genes in the
environment(s) in which it’s been studied. As you study the trait in more
environments, the heritability score will decrease. This is recognized by
Bouchard: “These conclusions [derived from a behavior genetics study]
can be generalized, of course only to new populations exposed to a range
of environments similar to those studied.”31
Okay, that was slick on my part, inventing a plant that grows in both
desert and rain forest, just to trash heritability scores. Real plants rarely
occur in both of those environments. Instead, in one rain forest the three
gene versions might produce plants of heights 1, 2, and 3 inches, while in
another they are 1.1, 2.1, and 3.1, producing a heritability score that,
while less than 100 percent, is still extremely high.
Genes typically still play hefty roles in explaining individual
variability, given that any given species lives in a limited range of
environments—capybaras stick to the tropics, polar bears to the Arctic.

244

This business about heterogeneous environments driving down
heritability scores is important only in considering some hypothetical
species that, say, lives in both tundra and desert, in various population
densities, in nomadic bands, sedentary farming communities, and urban
apartment buildings.
Oh, that’s right, humans. Of all species, heritability scores in humans
plummet the most when shifting from a controlled experimental setting
to considering the species’ full range of habitats. Just consider how much
the heritability score for wearing earrings, with its gender split, has
declined since 1958.

—
Now to consider an extremely important complication.

Gene/Environment Interactions
Back to our plant. Imagine a growth pattern in environment A of 1, 1,
and 1 for the three gene variants, while in environment B it’s 10, 10, and
10. When considering the combined data from both environments,
heritability is zero—variation is entirely explained by which
environment the plant grew in.
Now, instead, in environment A it’s 1, 2, and 3, while in environment
B it’s also 1, 2, and 3. Heritability is 100 percent, with all variability in
height explained by genetic variation.
Now say environment A is 1, 2, and 3, and environment B is 1.5, 2.5,
3.5. Heritability is somewhere between 0 percent and 100 percent.
Now for something different: Environment A: 1, 2, 3. Environment
B: 3, 2, 1. In this case even talking about a heritability score is
problematic, because different gene variants have diametrically opposite
effects in different environments. We have an example of a central
concept in genetics, a gene/environment interaction, where qualitative,
rather than just quantitative, effects of a gene differ by environment.
Here’s a rule of thumb for recognizing gene/environment interactions,
translated into English: You are studying the behavioral effects of a gene
in two environments. Someone asks, “What are the effects of the gene on
some behavior?” You answer, “It depends on the environment.” Then
they ask, “What are the effects of environment on this behavior?” And

245

you answer, “It depends on the version of the gene.” “It depends” = a
gene/environment interaction.
Here are some classic examples concerning behavior:32
The disease phenylketonuria arises from a single gene mutation;
skipping over details, the mutation disables an enzyme that converts a
potentially neurotoxic dietary constituent, phenylalanine, into something
safe. Thus, if you eat a normal diet, phenylalanine accumulates,
damaging the brain. But eat a phenylalanine-free diet from birth, and
there is no damage. What are the effects of this mutation on brain
development? It depends on your diet. What’s the effect of diet on brain
development? It depends on whether you have this (rare) mutation.
Another gene/environment interaction pertains to depression, a
disease involving serotonin abnormalities.33 A gene called 5HTT codes
for a transporter that removes serotonin from the synapse; having a
particular 5HTT variant increases the risk of depression . . . but only
when coupled with childhood trauma.* What’s the effect of 5HTT
variant on depression risk? It depends on childhood trauma exposure.
What’s the effect of childhood trauma exposure on depression risk? It
depends on 5HTT variant (plus loads of other genes, but you get the
point).
Another example concerns FADS2, a gene involved in fat
metabolism.34 One variant is associated with higher IQ, but only in
breast-fed children. Same pair of “what’s the effect” questions, same “it
depends” answers.
One final gene/environment interaction was revealed in an important
1999 Science paper. The study was a collaboration among three
behavioral geneticists—one at Oregon Health Sciences University, one at
the University of Alberta, and one at the State University of New York in
Albany.35 They studied mouse strains known to have genetic variants
relevant to particular behaviors (e.g., addiction or anxiety). First they
ensured that the mice from a particular strain were essentially genetically
identical in all three labs. Then the scientists did cartwheels to test the
animals in identical conditions in the labs.
They standardized everything. Because some mice were born in the
lab but others came from breeders, homegrowns were given bouncy van
rides to simulate the jostling that commercially bred mice undergo
during shipping, just in case that was important. Animals were tested at
the same day of age on the same date at the same local time. Animals
246

had been weaned at the same age and lived in the same brand of cage
with the same brand and thickness of sawdust bedding, changed on the
same day of the week. They were handled the same number of times by
humans wearing the same brand of surgical gloves. They were fed the
same food and kept in the same lighting environment at the same
temperature. The environments of these animals could hardly have been
more similar if the three scientists had been identical triplets separated at
birth.
What did they observe? Some gene variants showed massive
gene/environment interactions, with variants having radically different
effects in different labs.
Here’s the sort of data they got: Take a strain called 129/SvEvTac
and a test measuring the effects of cocaine on activity. In Oregon cocaine
increased activity in these mice by 667 centimeters of movement per
fifteen minutes. In Albany, an increase of 701. Those are pretty similar
numbers; good. And in Alberta? More than 5,000. That’s like identical
triplets pole-vaulting, each in a different location; they’ve all had the
same training, equipment, running surface, night’s rest, breakfast, and
brand of underwear. The first two vault 18 feet and 18 feet one inch, and
the third vaults 108 feet.
Maybe the scientists didn’t know what they were doing; maybe the
labs were chaotic. But variability was small within each lab, showing
stable environmental conditions. And crucially, a few variants didn’t
show a gene/environment interaction, producing similar effects in the
three labs.
What does this mean? That most of the gene variants were so
sensitive to environment that gene/environment interactions occurred
even in these obsessively similar lab settings, where incredibly subtle
(and still unidentified) environmental differences made huge differences
in what the gene did.
Citing “gene/environment interactions” is a time-honored genetics
cliché.36 My students roll their eyes when I mention them. I roll my eyes
when I mention them. Eat your vegetables, floss your teeth, remember to
say, “It’s difficult to quantitatively assess the relative contributions of
genes and environment to a particular trait when they interact.” This
suggests a radical conclusion: it’s not meaningful to ask what a gene
does, just what it does in a particular environment. This is summarized
wonderfully by the neurobiologist Donald Hebb: “It is no more

247

appropriate to say things like characteristic A is more influenced by
nature than nurture than . . . to say that the area of a rectangle is more
influenced by its length than its width.” It’s appropriate to figure out if
lengths or widths explain more of the variability in a population of
rectangles. But not in individual ones.

—
As we conclude part 2 of this chapter, some key points:
a. A gene’s influence on the average value of a trait (i.e.,
whether it is inherited) differs from its influence on
variability of that trait across individuals (its
heritability).
b. Even in the realm of inherited traits—say, the
inheritance of five fingers as the human average—you
can’t really say that there is genetic determination in the
classically hard-assed sense of the word. This is because
the inheritance of a gene’s effect requires not just
passing on the gene but also the context that regulates
the gene in that manner.
c. Heritability scores are relevant only to the environments
in which the traits have been studied. The more
environments you study a trait in, the lower the
heritability is likely to be.
d. Gene/environment interactions are ubiquitous and can
be dramatic. Thus, you can’t really say what a gene
“does,” only what it does in the environments in which
it’s been studied.
Current research actively explores gene/environment interactions.37
How’s this for fascinating: Heritability of various aspects of cognitive
development is very high (e.g., around 70 percent for IQ) in kids from
high–socioeconomic status (SES) families but is only around 10 percent
in low-SES kids. Thus, higher SES allows the full range of genetic
influences on cognition to flourish, whereas lower-SES settings restrict
them. In other words, genes are nearly irrelevant to cognitive
development if you’re growing up in awful poverty—poverty’s adverse
effects trump the genetics.* Similarly, heritability of alcohol use is lower
248

among religious than nonreligious subjects—i.e., your genes don’t
matter much if you’re in a religious environment that condemns
drinking. Domains like these showcase the potential power of classical
behavior genetics.

249

PART 3: SO WHAT DO GENES
ACTUALLY HAVE TO DO WITH
BEHAVIORS WE’RE INTERESTED IN?
The Marriage of Behavior Genetics and Molecular
Genetics
Behavior genetics has gotten a huge boost by incorporating
molecular approaches—after examining similarities and differences
between twins or adoptees, find the actual genes that underlie those
similarities and differences. This powerful approach has identified
various genes relevant to our interests. But first, our usual caveats: (a)
not all of these findings consistently replicate; (b) effect sizes are
typically small (in other words, some gene may be involved, but not in a
major way); and (c) the most interesting findings show
gene/environment interactions.

Studying Candidate Genes
Gene searches can take a “candidate” approach or a genomewide
association approach (stay tuned). The former requires a list of plausible
suspects—genes already known to be related to some behavior. For
example, if you’re interested in a behavior that involves serotonin,
obvious candidate genes would include those coding for enzymes that
make or degrade serotonin, pumps that remove it from the synapse, or
serotonin receptors. Pick one that interests you, and study it in animals
using molecular tools to generate “knockout” mice (where you’ve
eliminated that gene) or “transgenic” mice (with an extra copy of the
gene). Make manipulations like these only in certain brain regions or at
certain times. Then examine what’s different about behavior. Once
you’re convinced of an effect, ask whether variants of that gene help
explain individual differences in human versions of the behavior. I start
with the topic that has gotten the most attention, for better or worse,
mostly “worse.”
250

The Serotonin System
What do genes related to serotonin have to do with our best and
worst behaviors? Plenty.
Chapter 2 presented a fairly clear picture of low levels of serotonin
fostering impulsive antisocial behavior. There are lower-than-average
levels of serotonin breakdown products in the bloodstreams of people
with that profile, and of serotonin itself in the frontal cortex of such
animals. Even more convincingly, drugs that decrease “serotonergic
tone” (i.e., decreasing serotonin levels or sensitivity to serotonin)
increase impulsive aggression; raising the tone does the opposite.
This generates some simple predictions—all of the following should
be associated with impulsive aggression, as they will produce low
serotonin signaling:
a. Low-activity variants of the gene for tryptophan
hydroxylase (TH), which makes serotonin
b. High-activity variants of the gene for monoamine
oxidase-A (MAO-A), which degrades serotonin
c. High-activity variants of the gene for the serotonin
transporter (5HTT), which removes serotonin from the
synapse
d. Variants of genes for serotonin receptors that are less
sensitive to serotonin
An extensive literature shows that for each of those genes the results
are inconsistent and generally go in the opposite direction from “low
serotonin = aggression” dogma. Ugh.
Studies of genes for TH and serotonin receptors are inconsistent
messes.38 In contrast, the picture of 5HTT, the serotonin transporter
gene, is consistently in the opposite direction from what’s expected. Two
variants exist, with one producing less transporter protein, meaning less
serotonin removed from the synapse.* And counter to expectations, this
variant, producing more serotonin in the synapse, is associated with more
impulsive aggression, not less. Thus, according to these findings, “high
serotonin = aggression” (recognizing this as simplified shorthand).
The clearest and most counterintuitive studies concern MAO-A. It
burst on the scene in a hugely influential 1993 Science paper reporting a
251

Dutch family with an MAO-A gene mutation that eliminated the
protein.39 Thus serotonin isn’t broken down and accumulates in the
synapse. And counter to chapter 2’s predictions, the family was
characterized by varied antisocial and aggressive behaviors.
Mouse studies in which the MAO-A gene was “knocked out”
(producing the equivalent of the Dutch family’s mutation) produced the
same—elevated serotonin levels in the synapse and hyperaggressive
animals with enhanced fear responses.40
This finding, of course, concerned a mutation in MAO-A resulting in
the complete absence of the protein. Research soon focused on lowactivity MAO-A variants that produced elevated serotonin levels.*41
People with that variant averaged higher levels of aggression and
impulsivity and, when looking at angry or fearful faces, more activation
of the amygdala and insula and less activation of the prefrontal cortex.
This suggests a scenario of more fear reactivity and less frontal capacity
to restrain such fear, a perfect storm for reactive aggression. Related
studies showed decreased activation of frontal cortical regions during
various attentional tasks and enhanced anterior cingulate activity in
response to social rejection in such individuals.
So studies where serotonin breakdown products are measured in the
body, or where serotonin levels are manipulated with drugs, say that low
serotonin = aggression.42 And the genetic studies, particularly of MAOA, say high serotonin = aggression. What explains this discrepancy? The
key probably is that a drug manipulation lasts for a few hours or days,
while genetic variants have their effects on serotonin for a lifetime.
Possible explanations: (a) The low-activity MAO-A variants don’t
produce higher synaptic levels of serotonin all that consistently because
the 5HTT serotonin reuptake pump works harder at removing serotonin
from the synapse, compensating, and maybe even overcompensating.
There is evidence for this, just to make life really complicated. (b) Those
variants do produce chronically elevated serotonin levels in the synapse,
but the postsynaptic neurons compensate or overcompensate by
decreasing serotonin receptor numbers, thereby reducing sensitivity to all
that serotonin; there is evidence for that too. (c) The lifelong
consequences of differences in serotonin signaling due to gene variants
(versus transient differences due to drugs) produce structural changes in
the developing brain. There is evidence there as well, and in accordance
with that, while temporarily inhibiting MAO-A activity with a drug in an
252

adult rodent decreases impulsive aggression, doing the same in fetal
rodents produces adults with increased impulsive aggression.
Yikes, this is complicated. Why go through the agony of all these
explanatory twists and turns? Because this obscure corner of
neurogenetics has caught the public’s fancy, with—I kid you not—the
low-activity MAO-A variant being referred to as the “warrior gene” by
both scientists and in the media.*43 And that warrior hoo-hah is
worsened by the MAO-A gene being X linked and its variants being
more consequential in males than females. Amazingly, prison sentences
for murderers have now been lessened in at least two cases because it
was argued that the criminal, having the “warrior gene” variant of MAOA, was inevitably fated to be uncontrollably violent. OMG.
Responsible people in the field have recoiled in horror at this sort of
unfounded genetic determinism seeping into the courtroom. The effects
of MAO-A variants are tiny. There is nonspecificity in the sense that
MAO-A degrades not only serotonin but norepinephrine as well. Most of
all, there is nonspecificity in the behavioral effects of the variants. For
example, while nearly everyone seems to remember that the landmark
MAO-A paper that started all the excitement was about aggression (one
authoritative review referred to the Dutch family with the mutation as
“notorious for the persistent and extreme reactive aggression
demonstrated by some of its males”), in actuality members of the family
with the mutation had borderline mental retardation. Moreover, while
some individuals with the mutation were quite violent, the antisocial
behavior of others consisted of arson and exhibitionism. So maybe the
gene has something to do with the extreme reactive aggression of some
family members. But it is just as responsible for explaining why other
family members, rather than being aggressive, were flashers. In other
words, there is as much rationale for going on about the “drop your pants
gene” as the “warrior gene.”
Probably the biggest reason to reject warrior-gene determinism
nonsense is something that should be utterly predictable by now: MAOA effects on behavior show strong gene/environment interactions.
This brings us to a hugely important 2002 study, one of my favorites,
by Avshalom Caspi and colleagues at Duke University.44 The authors
followed a large cohort of children from birth to age twenty-six, studying
their genetics, upbringing, and adult behavior. Did MAO-A variant status
predict antisocial behavior in twenty-six-year-olds (as measured by a

253

composite of standard psychological assessments and convictions for
violent crimes)? No. But MAO-A status coupled with something else
powerfully did. Having the low-activity version of MAO-A tripled the
likelihood . . . but only in people with a history of severe childhood
abuse. And if there was no such history, the variant was not predictive of
anything. This is the essence of gene/environment interaction. What does
having a particular variant of the MAO-A gene have to do with antisocial
behavior? It depends on the environment. “Warrior gene” my ass.
This study is important not just for its demonstration of a powerful
gene/environment interaction but for what the interaction is, namely the
ability of an abusive childhood environment to collaborate with a
particular genetic constitution. To quote a major review on the subject,
“In a healthy environment, increased threat sensitivity, poor emotion
control and enhanced fear memory in MAOA-L [i.e., the “warrior”
variant] men might only manifest as variation in temperament within a
‘normal’ or subclinical range. However, these same characteristics in an
abusive childhood environment—one typified by persistent uncertainty,
unpredictable threat, poor behavioral modeling and social referencing,
and inconsistent reinforcement for prosocial decision making—might
predispose toward frank aggression and impulsive violence in the adult.”
In a similar vein, the low-activity variant of the serotonin transporter
gene was reported to be associated with adult aggressiveness . . . but only
when coupled with childhood adversity.45 This is straight out of the
lessons of the previous chapter.
Since then, this MAO-A variant/childhood abuse interaction has been
frequently replicated, and even demonstrated with respect to aggressive
behavior in rhesus monkeys.46 There have also been hints as to how this
interaction works—the MAO-A gene promoter is regulated by stress and
glucocorticoids.
MAO-A variants show other important gene/environment
interactions. For example, in one study the low-activity MAO-A variant
predicts criminality, but only if coupled with high testosterone levels
(consistent with that, the MAO-A gene also has a promoter responsive to
androgens). In another study low-activity MAO-A participants in an
economic game were more likely than high-activity ones to retaliate
aggressively when exploited by the other player—but only if that
exploitation produced a large economic loss; if the loss was small, there
was no difference. In another study low-activity individuals were more

254

aggressive than others—but only in circumstances of social exclusion.
Thus the effects of this genetic variant can be understood only by
considering other, nongenetic factors in individuals’ lives, such as
childhood adversity and adult provocation.47

The Dopamine System
Chapter 2 introduced the role of dopamine in the anticipation of
reward and in goal-directed behavior. Lots of work has examined the
genes involved, most broadly showing that variants that produce lowered
dopamine signaling (less dopamine in the synapse, fewer dopamine
receptors, or lower responsiveness of these receptors) are associated with
sensation seeking, risk taking, attentional problems, and extroversion.
Such individuals have to seek experiences of greater intensity to
compensate for the blunted dopamine signaling.
Much of the research has focused on one particular dopamine
receptor; there are at least five kinds (found in different parts of the
brain, binding dopamine with differing strengths and duration), each
coded for by a gene.48 Work has focused on the gene for the D4
dopamine receptor (the gene is called DRD4), which mostly occurs in
the neurons in the cortex and nucleus accumbens. The DRD4 gene is
super variable, coming in at least ten different flavors in humans. One
stretch of the gene is repeated a variable number of times, and the
version with seven repeats (the “7R” form) produces a receptor protein
that is sparse in the cortex and relatively unresponsive to dopamine. This
is the variant associated with a host of related traits—sensation and
novelty seeking, extroversion, alcoholism, promiscuity, less sensitive
parenting, financial risk taking, impulsivity, and, probably most
consistently, ADHD (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
The implications cut both ways—the 7R could make you more likely
to impulsively steal the old lady’s kidney dialysis machine, or to
impulsively give the deed of your house to a homeless family. In come
gene/environment interactions. For example, kids with the 7R variant are
less generous than average. But only if they show insecure attachment to
their parents. Secure-attachment 7Rs show more generosity than average.
Thus 7R has something to do with generosity—but its effect is entirely
context dependent. In another study 7R students expressed the least

255

interest in organizations advocating prosocial causes, unless they were
given a religious prime,* in which case they were the most prosocial.
One more—7Rs are worse at gratification-postponement tasks, but only
if they grew up poor. Repeat the mantra: don’t ask what a gene does; ask
what it does in a particular context.49
Interestingly, the next chapter considers the extremely varied
frequency of the 7R variant in different populations. As we’ll see, it tells
you a lot about the history of human migration, as well as about
differences between collectivist and individualist cultures.50
We shift now to other parts of the dopamine system. As introduced in
chapter 2, after dopamine binds to receptors, it floats off and must be
removed from the synapse.51 One route involves its being degraded by
the enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Among the variants
of the COMT gene is one associated with a more efficient enzyme.
“More efficient” = better at degrading dopamine = less dopamine in the
synapse = less dopamine signaling. The highly efficient COMT variant is
associated with higher rates of extroversion, aggression, criminality, and
conduct disorder. Moreover, in a gene/environment interaction straight
out of the MAO-A playbook, that COMT variant is associated with anger
traits, but only when coupled with childhood sexual abuse. Intriguingly,
the variants seem pertinent to frontal regulation of behavior and
cognition, especially during stress.
In addition to degradation, neurotransmitters can be removed from
the synapse by being taken back up into the axon terminal for
recycling.52 Dopamine reuptake is accomplished by the dopamine
transporter (DAT). Naturally, the DAT gene comes in different variants,
and those that produce higher levels of synaptic dopamine (i.e.,
transporter variants that are less efficient) in the striatum are associated
with people who are more oriented toward social signaling—they’re
drawn more than average to happy faces, are more repelled by angry
faces, and have more positive parenting styles. How these findings
merge with the findings from the DRD4 and COMT studies (i.e., fitting
risk taking with a preference for happy faces) is not immediately
apparent.
Cool people with certain versions of these dopamine-related genes
are more likely to engage in all sorts of interesting behaviors, ranging
from the healthy to the pathological. But not so fast:

256

These findings are not consistent, no doubt reflecting
unrecognized gene/environment interactions.
Again, why should the COMT world be related to
sensation seeking, while there are the DAT people and
their happy faces? Both genes are about ending
dopamine signaling. This is probably related to different
parts of the brain differing as to whether DAT or COMT
plays a bigger role.53
The COMT literature is majorly messy, for the
inconvenient reason that the enzyme also degrades
norepinephrine. So COMT variants are pertinent to two
totally different neurotransmitter systems.
These effects are tiny. For example, knowing which
DRD4 variant someone has explains only 3 to 4 percent
of the variation in novelty-seeking behavior.
The final piece of confusion seems most important but is
least considered in the literature (probably because it
would be premature). Suppose that every study shows
with whopping clarity and consistency that a DRD4
variant is highly predictive of novelty seeking. That still
doesn’t tell us why for some people novelty seeking
means frequently switching their openings in chess
games, while for others it means looking for a new
locale because it’s getting stale being a mercenary in the
Congo. No gene or handful of genes that we are aware
of will tell us much about that.

The Neuropeptides Oxytocin and Vasopressin
Time for a quick recap from chapter 4. Oxytocin and vasopressin are
involved in prosociality, ranging from parent/offspring bonds to
monogamous bonds to trust, empathy, generosity, and social intelligence.
Recall the caveats: (a) sometimes these neuropeptides are more about
sociality than prosociality (in other words, boosting social information
gathering, rather than acting prosocially with that information); (b) they
most consistently boost prosociality in people who already lean in that
direction (e.g., making generous people more generous, while having no
effect on ungenerous people); and (c) the prosocial effects are within
257

groups, and these neuropeptides can make people crappier to outsiders—
more xenophobic and preemptively aggressive.
Chapter 4 also touched on oxytocin and vasopressin genetics,
showing that individuals with genetic variants that result in higher levels
of either the hormones or their receptors tend toward more stable
monogamous relationships, more actively engaged parenting, better skill
at perspective taking, more empathy, and stronger fusiform cortex
responses to faces. These are fairly consistent effects of moderate
magnitude.
Meanwhile, there are studies showing that one oxytocin receptor
gene variant is associated with extreme aggression in kids, as well as a
callous, unemotional style that foreshadows adult psychopathy.54
Moreover, another variant is associated with social disconnection in kids
and unstable adult relationships. But unfortunately these findings are
uninterpretable because no one knows if these variants produce more,
less, or the usual amount of oxytocin signaling.
Of course, there are cool gene/environment interactions. For
example, having a particular oxytocin receptor gene variant predicts less
sensitive mothering—but only when coupled with childhood adversity.
Another variant is associated with aggression—but only when people
have been drinking. Yet another variant is associated with greater
seeking of emotional support during times of stress—among Americans
(including first generation Korean Americans) but not Koreans (stay
tuned for more in the next chapter).

Genes Related to Steroid Hormones
We start with testosterone. The hormone is not a protein (none of the
steroid hormones are), meaning there isn’t a testosterone gene. However,
there are genes for the enzymes that construct testosterone, for the
enzyme that converts it to estrogen, and for the testosterone (androgen)
receptor. The most work has focused on the gene for the receptor, which
comes in variants that differ in their responsiveness to testosterone.*
Intriguingly, a few studies have shown that among criminals, having
the more potent variant is associated with violent crimes.55 A related
finding concerns sex differences in structure of the cortex, and
adolescent boys with the more potent variant show more dramatic

258

“masculinization” of the cortex. An interaction between receptor variant
and testosterone levels occurs. High basal testosterone levels do not
predict elevated levels of aggressive mood or of amygdaloid reactivity to
threatening faces in males—except in those with that variant.
Interestingly, the equivalent variant predicts aggressiveness in Akita
dogs.
How important are these findings? A key theme in chapter 4 was
how little individual differences in testosterone levels in the normal
range predict individual differences in behavior. How much more
predictability is there when combining knowledge of testosterone levels
and of receptor sensitivity? Not much. How about hormone levels and
receptor sensitivity and number of receptors? Still not much. But
definitely an improvement in predictive power.
Similar themes concern the genetics of the estrogen receptor.56 For
example, different receptor variants are associated with higher rates of
anxiety among women, but not men, and higher rates of antisocial
behavior and conduct disorder in men, but not women. Meanwhile, in
genetically manipulated mice, the presence or absence of the receptor
gene influences aggression in females . . . depending on how many
brothers there were in the litter in utero—gene/environment again. Once
again, the magnitude of these genetic influences is tiny.
Finally, there is work on genes related to glucocorticoids, particularly
regarding gene/environment interactions.57 For example, there is an
interaction between one variant of the gene for a type of receptor for
glucocorticoids (for mavens: it’s the MR receptor) and childhood abuse
in producing an amygdala that is hyperreactive to threat. Then there is a
protein called FKBP5, which modifies the activity of another type of
receptor for glucocorticoids (the GR receptor); one FKBP5 variant is
associated with aggression, hostility, PTSD, and hyperreactivity of the
amygdala to threat—but only when coupled with childhood abuse.
Buoyed by these findings, some researchers have examined two
candidate genes simultaneously. For example, having both “risk”
variants of 5HTT and DRD4 synergistically increases the risk of
disruptive behavior in kids—an effect exacerbated by low
socioeconomic status.58
Phew; all these pages and we’ve only gotten to thinking about two
genes and one environmental variable simultaneously. And despite this,
things still aren’t great:
259

The usual—results aren’t terribly consistent from one
study to the next.
The usual—effect sizes are small. Knowing what variant
of a candidate gene someone has (or even what variants
of a collection of genes) doesn’t help much in predicting
their behavior.
A major reason is that, after getting a handle on 5HTT
and DRD4 interactions, there are still roughly 19,998
more human genes and a gazillion more environments to
study. Time to switch to the other main approach—
looking at all those 20,000 genes at once.

Fishing Expeditions, Instead of Looking Where
the Light Is
The small effect sizes reflect a limitation in the candidate gene
approach; in scientific lingo, the problem is that one is only looking
where the light is. The cliché harks back to a joke: You discover
someone at night, searching the ground under a street lamp. “What’s
wrong?” “I dropped my ring; I’m looking for it.” Trying to be helpful,
you ask, “Were you standing on this side or that side of the lamp when
you dropped it?” “Oh, no, I was over by those trees when I dropped it.”
“Then why are you searching here?” “This is where the light is.” With
candidate gene approaches, you look only where the light is, examine
only genes that you already know are involved. And with twenty
thousand or so genes, it’s pretty safe to assume there are still some
interesting genes that you don’t know about yet. The challenge is to find
them.
The most common way of trying to find them all is with genomewide
association studies (GWAS).59 Examine, say, the gene for hemoglobin
and look at the eleventh nucleotide in the sequence; everyone will pretty
much have the same DNA letter in that spot. However, there are little hot
spots of variability, single nucleotides where, say, two different DNA
letters occur, each in about 50 percent of the population (and where this
typically doesn’t change the amino acid being specified, because of
DNA redundancy). There are more than a million of such “SNPs”
(single-nucleotide polymorphisms) scattered throughout the genome—in

260

stretches of DNA coding for genes, for promoters, for mysterious DNA
junk. Collect DNA from a huge number of people, and examine whether
particular SNPs associate with particular traits. If an SNP that’s
implicated occurs in a gene, you’ve just gotten a hint that the gene may
be involved in that trait.*
A GWAS study might implicate scads of genes as being associated
with a trait. Hopefully, some will be candidate genes already known to
be related to the trait. But other identified genes may be mysterious. Now
go check out what they do.
In a related approach, suppose you have two populations, one with
and one without a degenerative muscle disease. Take a muscle biopsy
from everyone, and see which of the ~20,000 genes are transcriptionally
active in the muscle cells. With this “microarray” or “gene chip”
approach, you look for genes that are transcriptionally active only in
diseased or in healthy muscle, not in both. Identify them, and you have
some new candidate genes to explore.*
These fishing expeditions* show why we’re so ignorant about the
genetics of behavior.60 Consider a classic GWAS that looked for genes
related to height. This was a crazy difficult study involving examining
the genomes of 183,727 people. 183,727. It must have taken an army of
scientists just to label the test tubes. And reflecting that, the paper
reporting the findings in Nature had approximately 280 authors.
And the results? Hundreds of genetic variants were implicated in
regulating height. A handful of genes identified were known to be
involved in skeletal growth, but the rest was terra incognita. The single
genetic variant identified that most powerfully predicted height
explained all of 0.4 percent—four tenths of one percent—of the variation
in height, and all those hundreds of variants put together explained only
about 10 percent of the variation.
Meanwhile, an equally acclaimed study did a GWAS regarding body
mass index (BMI). Similar amazingness—almost a quarter million
genomes examined, even more authors than the height study. And in this
case the single most explanatory genetic variant identified accounted for
only 0.3 percent of the variation in BMI. Thus both height and BMI are
highly “polygenic” traits. Same for age of menarche (when girls
menstruate for the first time). Moreover, additional genes are being
missed because their variants are too rare to be picked up by current

261

GWAS techniques. Thus these traits are probably influenced by hundreds
of genes.61
What about behavior? A superb 2013 GWAS study examined the
genetic variants associated with educational attainment.62 The usual
over-the-top numbers—126,559 study subjects, about 180 authors. And
the most predictive genetic variant accounted for 0.02 percent—two
hundredths of one percent—of the variation. All the identified variants
together accounted for about 2 percent of the variation. A commentary
accompanying the paper contained this landmark of understatement: “In
short, educational attainment looks to be a very polygenic trait.”
Educational attainment—how many years of high school or college
one completes—is relatively easy to measure. How about the subtler,
messier behaviors that fill this book’s pages? A handful of studies have
tackled that, and the findings are much the same—at the end, you have a
list of scores of genes implicated and can then go figure out what they do
(logically, starting with the ones that showed the strongest statistical
associations). Hard, hard approaches that are still in their infancy. Made
worse by a GWAS missing more subtly variable spots,* meaning even
more genes are likely involved.63

—
As we conclude this section, some key points:64
a. This review of candidate genes barely scratches even the
surface of the surface. Go on PubMed (a major search
engine of the biomedical literature) and search “MAO
gene/behavior”—up come more than 500 research
papers. “Serotonin transporter gene/behavior”—1,250
papers. “Dopamine receptor gene/behavior”—nearly
2,000.
b. The candidate gene approaches show that the effect of a
single gene on a behavior is typically tiny. In other
words, having the “warrior gene” variant of MAO
probably has less effect on your behavior than does
believing that you have it.
c. Genomewide survey approaches show that these
behaviors are influenced by huge numbers of genes,
each one playing only a tiny role.
262

d. What this translates into is nonspecificity. For example,
serotonin transporter gene variants have been linked to
risk of depression, but also anxiety, obsessivecompulsive disorder, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder,
Tourette’s syndrome, and borderline personality
disorder. In other words, that gene is part of a network
of hundreds of genes pertinent to depression, but also
part of another equally large and partially overlapping
network relevant to anxiety, another relevant to OCD,
and so on. And meanwhile, we’re plugging away, trying
to understand interactions of two genes at a time.
e. And, of course, gene and environment, gene and
environment.

263

CONCLUSIONS

A

t long last, you (and I!) have gotten to the end of this
excruciatingly but necessarily long chapter. Amid all these tiny
effects and technical limitations, it’s important to not throw out the
genetic baby with the bathwater, as has been an agitated sociopolitical
goal at times (during my intellectual youth in the 1970s, sandwiched
between the geologic periods of Cranberry Bell-bottoms and of John
Travolta White Suits was the Genes-Have-Nothing-to-Do-with-Behavior
Ice Age).
Genes have plenty to do with behavior. Even more appropriately, all
behavioral traits are affected to some degree by genetic variability.65
They have to be, given that they specify the structure of all the proteins
pertinent to every neurotransmitter, hormone, receptor, etc. that there is.
And they have plenty to do with individual differences in behavior, given
the large percentage of genes that are polymorphic, coming in different
flavors. But their effects are supremely context dependent. Ask not what
a gene does. Ask what it does in a particular environment and when
expressed in a particular network of other genes (i.e.,
gene/gene/gene/gene . . . /environment).
Thus, for our purposes, genes aren’t about inevitability. Instead
they’re about context-dependent tendencies, propensities, potentials, and
vulnerabilities. All embedded in the fabric of the other factors, biological
and otherwise, that fill these pages.
Now that this chapter’s done, why don’t we all take a bathroom break
and then see what’s in the refrigerator.

264

Nine

Centuries to Millennia
Before

L

et’s start with a seeming digression. Parts of chapters 4 and 7 have
debunked some supposed sex differences concerning the brain,
hormones, and behavior. One difference, however, is persistent. It’s far
from issues that concern this book, but bear with me.
A remarkably consistent finding, starting with elementary school
students, is that males are better at math than females. While the
difference is minor when it comes to considering average scores, there is
a huge difference when it comes to math stars at the upper extreme of the
distribution. For example, in 1983, for every girl scoring in the highest
percentile on the math SAT, there were eleven boys.
Why the difference? There have always been suggestions that
testosterone is central. During development, testosterone fuels the
growth of a brain region involved in mathematical thinking, and giving
adults testosterone enhances some math skills. Oh, okay, it’s biological.
But consider a paper published in Science in 2008.1 The authors
examined the relationship between math scores and sexual equality in
forty countries (based on economic, educational, and political indices of
gender equality; the worst was Turkey, the United States was middling,
and, naturally, the Scandinavians were tops). Lo and behold, the more
gender equal the country, the less of a discrepancy in math scores. By the
time you get to the Scandinavian countries, it’s statistically insignificant.
And by the time you examine the most gender-equal country on earth at
the time, Iceland, girls are better at math than boys.*

265

L. Guiso et al., “Culture, Gender, and Math,” Sci 320 (2008): 1164.
Visit bit.ly/2o88s4O for a larger version of this graph.

In other words, while you can never be certain, the Afghan girl
pictured on top, on the next page, seated next to her husband, is less
likely than the Swedish girl pictured below her to solve the Erdös-Hajnal
conjecture in graph theory.
In other, other words, culture matters. We carry it with us wherever
we go. As one example, the level of corruption—a government’s lack of
transparency regarding use of power and finances—in UN diplomats’
home countries predicts their likelihood of racking up unpaid parking
tickets in Manhattan. Culture leaves long-lasting residues—Shiites and
Sunnis slaughter each other over a succession issue fourteen centuries
old; across thirty-three countries population density in the year 1500
significantly predicts how authoritarian the government was in 2000;
over the course of millennia, earlier adoption of the hoe over the plow
predicts gender equality today.2

266

And in other, other, other words, when we contemplate our iconic
acts—the pulling of a trigger, the touching of an arm—and want to
explain why they happened using a biological framework, culture better
be on our list of explanatory factors.
Thus, the goals of this chapter:
Look at systematic patterns of cultural variation as they
pertain to the best and worst of our behaviors.
267

Explore how different types of brains produce different
culture and different types of culture produce different
brains. In other words, how culture and biology
coevolve.3
See the role of ecology in shaping culture.

268

DEFINITIONS, SIMILARITIES, AND
DIFFERENCES

“C

ulture,” naturally, has been defined various ways. One
influential definition comes from Edward Tylor, a distinguished
nineteenth-century cultural anthropologist. For him culture is “that
complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law,
custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man [sic] as a
member of society.”4
This definition, obviously, is oriented toward something that is
specific to humans. Jane Goodall blew off everyone’s socks in the 1960s
by reporting the now-iconic fact that chimps make tools. Her study
subjects modified twigs by stripping off the leaves and pushing them into
termite mounds; termites would bite the twig, still holding on when it
was pulled out, yielding a snack for the chimps.
This was just the start. Chimps were subsequently found to use
various tools—wood or rock anvils for cracking open nuts, wads of
chewed leaves to sponge up hard-to-reach water, and, in a real shocker,
sharpened sticks for spearing bush babies.5 Different populations make
different tools; new techniques spread across social networks (among
chimps who hang with one another); kids learn the ropes by watching
their moms; techniques spread from one group to another when someone
emigrates; chimp nut-cracking tools in excess of four thousand years old
have been excavated. And in my favorite example, floating between tool
use and accessorizing, a female in Zambia got it into her head to go
around with a strawlike blade of grass in her ear. The action had no
obvious function; apparently she just liked having a piece of grass
sticking out of her ear. So sue her. She did it for years, and over that time
the practice spread throughout her group. A fashionista.
In the decades since Goodall’s discovery, tool use has been observed
in apes and monkeys, elephants, sea otters, mongoose.6 Dolphins use sea
sponges to dig up fish burrowed into the sea floor. Birds use tools for
nest building or food acquisition—jays and crows, for example, use

269

twigs to fish for insects, much as chimps do. And there’s tool use in
cephalopods, reptiles, and fish.

E. van Leeuwen et al., “A Group-Specific Arbitrary Tradition in Chimpanzees
(Pan troglodytes),” Animal Cog 17 (2014): 1421.

All this is mighty impressive. Nonetheless, such cultural
transmission doesn’t show progression—this year’s chimp nut-cracking
tool is pretty much the same as that of four thousand years ago. And with
few exceptions (more later), nonhuman culture is solely about material
culture (versus, say, social organization).
So the classical definition of culture isn’t specific to humans.7 Most
cultural anthropologists weren’t thrilled with Goodall’s revolution—
270

great, next the zoologists will report that Rafiki persuaded Simba to
become the Lion King—and now often emphasize definitions of culture
that cut chimps and other hoi polloi out of the party. There’s a fondness
for the thinking of Alfred Kroeber, Clyde Kluckhohn, and Clifford
Geertz, three heavyweight social anthropologists who focused on how
culture is about ideas and symbols, rather than the mere behaviors in
which they instantiate, or material products like flint blades or iPhones.
Contemporary anthropologists like Richard Shweder have emphasized a
more affective but still human-centric view of culture as being about
moral and visceral versions of right and wrong. And of course these
views have been critiqued by postmodernists for reasons I can’t begin to
follow.
Basically, I don’t want to go anywhere near these debates. For our
purposes we’ll rely on an intuitive definition of culture that has been
emphasized by Frans de Waal: “culture” is how we do and think about
things, transmitted by nongenetic means.
Working with that broad definition, is the most striking thing about
the array of human cultures the similarities or the differences? Depends
on your taste.
If the similarities seem most interesting, there are plenty—after all,
multiple groups of humans independently invented agriculture, writing,
pottery, embalming, astronomy, and coinage. At the extreme of
similarities are human universals, and numerous scholars have proposed
lists of them. One of the lengthiest and most cited comes from the
anthropologist Donald Brown.8 Here’s a partial list of his proposed
cultural universals: the existence of and concern with aesthetics, magic,
males and females seen as having different natures, baby talk, gods,
induction of altered states, marriage, body adornment, murder,
prohibition of some type of murder, kinship terms, numbers, cooking,
private sex, names, dance, play, distinctions between right and wrong,
nepotism, prohibitions on certain types of sex, empathy, reciprocity,
rituals, concepts of fairness, myths about afterlife, music, color terms,
prohibitions, gossip, binary sex terms, in-group favoritism, language,
humor, lying, symbolism, the linguistic concept of “and,” tools, trade,
and toilet training. And that’s a partial list.
For the purposes of this chapter, the staggeringly large cultural
differences in how life is experienced, in resources and privileges
available, in opportunities and trajectories, are most interesting. Just to

271

start with some breathtaking demographic statistics born of cultural
differences: a girl born in Monaco has a ninety-three-year life
expectancy; one in Angola, thirty-nine. Latvia has 99.9 percent literacy;
Niger, 19 percent. More than 10 percent of children in Afghanistan die in
their first year, about 0.2 percent in Iceland. Per-capita GDP is $137,000
in Qatar, $609 in the Central African Republic. A woman in South Sudan
is roughly a thousand times more likely to die in childbirth than a woman
in Estonia.9
The experience of violence also varies enormously by culture.
Someone in Honduras is 450 times more likely to be murdered than
someone in Singapore. 65 percent of women experience intimate-partner
violence in Central Africa, 16 percent in East Asia. A South African
woman is more than one hundred times more likely to be raped than one
in Japan. Be a school kid in Romania, Bulgaria, or Ukraine, and you’re
about ten times more likely to be chronically bullied than a kid in
Sweden, Iceland, or Denmark (stay tuned for a closer look at this).10
Of course, there are the well-known gender-related cultural
differences. There are the Scandinavian countries approaching total
gender equality and Rwanda, with 63 percent of its lower-house
parliamentary seats filled by women, compared with Saudi Arabia,
where women are not allowed outside the house unless accompanied by
a male guardian, and Yemen, Qatar, and Tonga, with 0 percent female
legislators (and with the United States running around 20 percent).11
Then there’s the Philippines, where 93 percent of people say they feel
happy and loved, versus 29 percent of Armenians. In economic games,
people in Greece and Oman are more likely to spend resources to punish
overly generous players than to punish those who are cheaters, whereas
among Australians such “antisocial punishment” is nonexistent. And
there are wildly different criteria for prosocial behavior. In a study of
employees throughout the world working for the same multinational
bank, what was the most important reason cited to help someone?
Among Americans it was that the person had previously helped them; for
Chinese it was that the person was higher ranking; in Spain, that they
were a friend or acquaintance.12
Your life will be unrecognizably different, depending on which
culture the stork deposited you into. In wading through this variability,
there are some pertinent patterns, contrasts, and dichotomies.

272

COLLECTIVIST VERSUS
INDIVIDUALIST CULTURES

A

s introduced in chapter 7, a large percentage of cross-cultural
psychology studies compare collectivist with individualist
cultures. This almost always means comparisons between subjects from
collectivist East Asian cultures and Americans, coming from that mother
of all individualist cultures.* As defined, collectivist cultures are about
harmony, interdependence, conformity, and having the needs of the
group guiding behavior, whereas individualist cultures are about
autonomy, personal achievement, uniqueness, and the needs and rights of
the individual. Just to be a wee bit caustic, individualist culture can be
summarized by that classic American concept of “looking out for
number one”; collectivist culture can be summarized by the archetypical
experience of American Peace Corps teachers in such countries—pose
your students a math question, and no one will volunteer the correct
answer because they don’t want to stand out and shame their classmates.
Individualist/collectivist contrasts are striking. In individualist
cultures, people more frequently seek uniqueness and personal
accomplishment, use first-person singular pronouns more often, define
themselves in terms that are personal (“I’m a contractor”) rather than
relational (“I’m a parent”), attribute their successes to intrinsic attributes
(“I’m really good at X”) rather than to situational ones (“I was in the
right place at the right time”). The past is more likely to be remembered
via events (“That’s the summer I learned to swim”) rather than social
interactions (“That’s the summer we became friends”). Motivation and
satisfaction are gained from self- rather than group-derived effort
(reflecting the extent to which American individualism is about
noncooperation, rather than nonconformity). Competitive drive is about
getting ahead of everyone else. When asked to draw a “sociogram”—a
diagram of their social network, with circles representing themselves and
their friends, connected by lines—Americans tend to place the circle
representing themselves in the middle of the page and make it the
largest.13

273

In contrast, those from collectivist cultures show more social
comprehension; some reports suggest that they are better at Theory of
Mind tasks, more accurate in understanding someone else’s perspective
—with “perspective” ranging from the other person’s abstract thoughts
to how objects appear from where she is sitting. There is more blame of
the group when someone violates a norm due to peer pressure, and a
greater tendency to give situational explanations for behavior.
Competitive drive is about not falling behind everyone else. And when
drawing sociograms, the circle representing “yourself” is far from the
center, and far from the biggest.
Naturally, these cultural differences have biological correlates. For
example, subjects from individualist cultures strongly activate the
(emotional) mPFC when looking at a picture of themselves, compared to
looking at a picture of a relative or friend; in contrast, the activation is
far less for East Asian subjects.* Another example is a favorite
demonstration of mine of cross-cultural differences in psychological
stress—when asked in free recall, Americans are more likely than East
Asians to remember times in which they influenced someone;
conversely, East Asians are more likely to remember times when
someone influenced them. Force Americans to talk at length about a time
someone influenced them, or force East Asians to detail their influencing
someone, and both secrete glucocorticoids from the stressfulness of
having to recount this discomfiting event. And work by my Stanford
colleagues and friends Jeanne Tsai and Brian Knutson shows that
mesolimbic dopamine systems activate in European Americans when
looking at excited facial expressions; in Chinese, when looking at calm
expressions.
As we will see in chapter 13, these cultural differences produce
different moral systems. In the most traditional of collectivist societies,
conformity and morality are virtually synonymous and norm
enforcement is more about shame (“What will people think if I did
that?”) than guilt (“How could I live with myself?”). Collectivist cultures
foster more utilitarian and consequentialist moral stances (for example, a
greater willingness for an innocent person to be jailed in order to prevent
a riot). The tremendous collectivist emphasis on the group produces a
greater degree of in-group bias than among individualist culture
members. In one study, for example, Korean and European American
subjects observed pictures of either in- or out-group members in pain.

274

All subjects reported more subjective empathy and showed more
activation of Theory of Mind brain regions (i.e., the temporoparietal
junction) when observing in-group members, but the bias was
significantly greater among Korean subjects. In addition, subjects from
both individualist and collectivist cultures denigrate out-group members,
but only the former inflate assessments of their own group. In other
words, East Asians, unlike Americans, don’t have to puff up their own
group to view others as inferior.14
What is fascinating is the direction that some of these differences
take, as shown in approaches pioneered by one of the giants in this field,
Richard Nisbett of the University of Michigan. Westerners problemsolve in a more linear fashion, with more reliance on linguistic rather
than spatial coding. When asked to explain the movement of a ball, East
Asians are more likely to invoke relational explanations built around the
interactions of the ball with its environment—friction—while Westerners
focus on intrinsic properties like weight and density. Westerners are more
accurate at estimating length in absolute terms (“How long is that line?”)
while East Asians are better with relational estimates (“How much
longer is this line than that?”). Or how’s this one: Consider a monkey, a
bear, and a banana. Which two go together? Westerners think
categorically and choose the monkey and bear—they’re both animals.
East Asians think relationally and link the monkey and banana—if
you’re thinking of a monkey, also think of food it will need.15
Remarkably, the cultural differences extend to sensory processing,
where Westerners process information in a more focused manner, East
Asians in a more holistic one.16 Show a picture of a person standing in
the middle of a complex scene; East Asians will be more accurate at
remembering the scene, the context, while Westerners remember the
person in the middle. Remarkably, this is even observed on the level of
eye tracking—typically Westerners’ eyes first look at a picture’s center,
while East Asians scan the overall scene. Moreover, force Westerners to
focus on the holistic context of a picture, or East Asians on the central
subject, and the frontal cortex works harder, activating more.
As covered in chapter 7, cultural values are first inculcated early in
life. So it’s no surprise that culture shapes our attitudes about success,
morality, happiness, love, and so on. But what is startling to me is how
these cultural differences also shape where your eyes focus on a picture

275

or how you think about monkeys and bananas or the physics of a ball’s
trajectory. Culture’s impact is enormous.
Naturally, there are various caveats concerning
collectivist/individualist comparisons:
The most obvious is the perpetual “on the average”—
there are plenty of Westerners, for example, who are
more collectivist than plenty of East Asians. In general,
people who are most individualist by various personality
measures are most individualist in neuroimaging
studies.17
Cultures change over time. For example, levels of
conformity in East Asian cultures are declining (one
study, for example, shows increased rates of babies in
Japan receiving unique names). Moreover, one’s degree
of inculcation into one’s culture can be altered rapidly.
For example, priming someone beforehand with
individualist or collectivist cultural cues shifts how
holistically he processes a picture. This is especially true
for bicultural individuals.18
We will soon see about some genetic differences
between collectivist and individualist populations. There
is nothing resembling genetic destiny about this—the
best evidence for this conclusion comes from one of the
control groups in many of these studies, namely East
Asian Americans. In general, it takes about a generation
for the descendants of East Asian immigrants to
America to be as individualist as European Americans.19
Obviously, “East Asians” and “Westerners” are not
monolithic entities. Just ask someone from Beijing
versus the Tibetan steppes. Or stick three people from
Berkeley, Brooklyn, and Biloxi in a stalled elevator for a
few hours and see what happens. As we will see, there is
striking variation within cultures.
Why should people in one part of the globe have developed
collectivist cultures, while others went individualist? The United States
is the individualism poster child for at least two reasons. First there’s
276

immigration. Currently, 12 percent of Americans are immigrants, another
12 percent are (like me) children of immigrants, and everyone else
except for the 0.9 percent pure Native Americans descend from people
who emigrated within the last five hundred years.20 And who were the
immigrants? Those in the settled world who were cranks, malcontents,
restless, heretical, black sheep, hyperactive, hypomanic, misanthropic,
itchy, unconventional, yearning to be free, yearning to be rich, yearning
to be out of their damn boring repressive little hamlet, yearning. Couple
that with the second reason—for the majority of its colonial and
independent history, America has had a moving frontier luring those
whose extreme prickly optimism made merely booking passage to the
New World insufficiently novel—and you’ve got America the
individualistic.
Why has East Asia provided textbook examples of collectivism?21
The key is how culture is shaped by the way people traditionally made a
living, which in turn is shaped by ecology. And in East Asia it’s all about
rice. Rice, which was domesticated there roughly ten thousand years ago,
requires massive amounts of communal work. Not just backbreaking
planting and harvesting, which are done in rotation because the entire
village is needed to harvest each family’s rice.* Collective labor is first
needed to transform the ecosystem—terracing mountains and building
and maintaining irrigation systems for controlled flooding of paddies.
And there’s the issue of dividing up water fairly—in Bali, religious
authority regulates water access, symbolized by iconic water temples.
How’s this for amazing—the Dujiuangyan irrigation system irrigates
more than five thousand square kilometers of rice farms near Changdu,
China, and it is more than two thousand years old. The roots of
collectivism, like those of rice, run deep in East Asia.*

277

A fascinating 2014 Science paper strengthens the rice/collectivism
connection by exploring an exception.22 In parts of northern China it’s
difficult to grow rice, and instead people have grown wheat for
millennia; this involves individual rather than collective farming. And by
the standard tests of individualist versus collectivist cultures (e.g., draw a
sociogram, which two are most similar of a rabbit, dog, and carrot?)—
they look like Westerners. The region has two other markers of
individualism, namely higher rates of divorce and of inventiveness—
patent filings—than in rice-growing regions. The roots of individualism,
likes those of wheat, run deep in northern China.
The links between ecology, mode of production, and culture are
shown in a rare collectivist/individualist study not comparing Asians and
Westerners.23 The authors studied a Turkish region on the Black Sea,
where mountains hug the coastline. There, in close proximity, people live
by fishing, by farming the narrow ribbon of land between the sea and the
mountains, or as mountain shepherds. All three groups had the same
language, religion, and gene stock.
Herding is solitary; while Turkish farmers and fishermen (and
women) were no Chinese rice farmers, they at least worked their fields in
groups and manned their fishing boats in crews. Herders thought less
holistically than farmers or fishermen—the former were better at judging

278

absolute length of lines, the other two at relative judgments; when shown
a glove, a scarf, and a hand, herders grouped gloves and scarves
categorically, while the others grouped relationally, pairing gloves and
hands. In the authors’ words, “social interdependence fosters holistic
thinking.”
This theme appears in another study, comparing Jewish boys from
either observant Orthodox homes (dominated by endless shared rules
about beliefs and behaviors) with ones from far more individualist
secular homes. Visual processing was more holistic in the Orthodox,
more focused in the secular.24
The East Asian/Western collectivist/individualist dichotomy has a
fascinating genetic correlate.25 Recall from the last chapter dopamine
and DRD4, the gene for the D4 receptor. It’s extraordinarily variable,
with at least twenty-five human variants (with lesser variability in other
primates). Moreover, the variation isn’t random, inconsequential drift of
DNA sequences; instead there has been strong positive selection for
variants. Most common is the 4R variant, occurring in about half of East
Asians and European Americans. There’s also the 7R variant, producing
a receptor less responsive to dopamine in the cortex, associated with
novelty seeking, extroversion, and impulsivity. It predates modern
humans but became dramatically more common ten to twenty thousand
years ago. The 7R variant occurs in about 23 percent of Europeans and
European Americans. And in East Asians? 1 percent.

279

Y. Ding et al., “Evidence of Positive Selection Acting at the Human Dopamine
Receptor D4 Gene Locus,” PNAS 99 (2002): 309.
Visit bit.ly/2nsuHz9 for a larger version of this graph.

So which came first, 7R frequency or cultural style? The 4R and 7R
variants, along with the 2R, occur worldwide, implying they already
existed when humans radiated out of Africa 60,000 to 130,000 years ago.
Classic work by Kenneth Kidd of Yale, examining the distribution of 7R,
shows something remarkable.
Starting at the left of the figure above, there’s roughly a 10 to 25
percent incidence of 7R in various African, European, and Middle
Eastern populations. Jumping to the right side of the figure, there’s a
slightly higher incidence among the descendants of those who started
island-hopping from mainland Asia to Malaysia and New Guinea. The
same for folks whose ancestors migrated to North America via the
Bering land bridge about fifteen thousand years ago—the Muskoke,
Cheyenne, and Pima tribes of Native Americans. Then the Maya in
Central America—up to around 40 percent. Then the Guihiba and

280

Quechua of the northern parts of South America, at around 55 percent.
Finally there are the descendants of folks who made it all the way to the
Amazon basin—the Ticuna, Surui, and Karitiana—with a roughly 70
percent incidence of 7R, the highest in the world. In other words, the
descendants of people who, having made it to the future downtown
Anchorage, decided to just keep going for another six thousand miles.*
A high incidence of 7R, associated with impulsivity and novelty seeking,
is the legacy of humans who made the greatest migrations in human
history.
And then in the middle of the chart is the near-zero incidence of 7R
in China, Cambodia, Japan, and Taiwan (among the Ami and Atayal).
When East Asians domesticated rice and invented collectivist society,
there was massive selection against the 7R variant; in Kidd’s words, it
was “nearly lost” in these populations.* Maybe the bearers of 7R broke
their necks inventing hang gliding or got antsy and tried to walk to
Alaska but drowned because there was no longer a Bering land bridge.
Maybe they were less desirable mates. Regardless of the cause, East
Asian cultural collectivism coevolved with selection against the 7R
variant.*
Thus, in this most studied of cultural contrasts, we see clustering of
ecological factors, modes of production, cultural differences, and
differences in endocrinology, neurobiology, and gene frequencies.* The
cultural contrasts appear in likely ways—e.g., morality, empathy, childrearing practices, competition, cooperation, definitions of happiness—
but also in unexpected ones—e.g., where, within milliseconds, your eyes
look at a picture, or you’re thinking about bunnies and carrots.

281

PASTORALISTS AND SOUTHERNERS

A

nother important link among ecology, mode of production, and
culture is seen in dry, hardscrabble, wide-open environments too
tough for agriculture. This is the world of nomadic pastoralism—people
wandering the desert, steppes, or tundra with their herds.
There are Bedouins in Arabia, Tuareg in North Africa, Somalis and
Maasai in East Africa, Sami of northern Scandinavia, Gujjars in India,
Yörük in Turkey, Tuvans of Mongolia, Aymara in the Andes. There are
herds of sheep, goats, cows, llamas, camels, yaks, horses, or reindeer,
with the pastoralists living off their animals’ meat, milk, and blood and
trading their wool and hides.
Anthropologists have long noted similarities in pastoralist cultures
born of their tough environments and the typically minimal impact of
centralized government and the rule of law. In that isolated toughness
stands a central fact of pastoralism: thieves can’t steal the crops on
someone’s farm or the hundreds of edible plants eaten by huntergatherers, but they can steal someone’s herd. This is the vulnerability of
pastoralism, a world of rustlers and raiders.
This generates various correlates of pastoralism:26
Militarism abounds. Pastoralists, particularly in deserts, with
their far-flung members tending the herds, are a spawning
ground for warrior classes. And with them typically come (a)
military trophies as stepping-stones to societal status; (b) death
in battle as a guarantee of a glorious afterlife; (c) high rates of
economic polygamy and mistreatment of women; and (d)
authoritarian parenting. It is rare for pastoralists to be pastoral, in
the sense of Beethoven’s Sixth Symphony.
Worldwide, monotheism is relatively rare; to the extent that it
does occur, it is disproportionately likely among desert
pastoralists (while rain forest dwellers are atypically likely to be
polytheistic). This makes sense. Deserts teach tough, singular

282

things, a world reduced to simple, desiccated, furnace-blasted
basics that are approached with a deep fatalism. “I am the Lord
your God” and “There is but one god and his name is Allah” and
“There will be no gods before me”—dictates like these
proliferate. As implied in the final quote, desert monotheism
does not always come with only one supernatural being—
monotheistic religions are replete with angels and djinns and
devils. But they sure come with a hierarchy, minor deities paling
before the Omnipotent One, who tends to be highly
interventionist both in the heavens and on earth. In contrast,
think of tropical rain forest, teeming with life, where you can
find more species of ants on a single tree than in all of Britain.
Letting a hundred deities bloom in equilibrium must seem the
most natural thing in the world.
Pastoralism fosters cultures of honor. As introduced in chapter 7,
these are about rules of civility, courtesy, and hospitality,
especially to the weary traveler because, after all, aren’t all
herders often weary travelers? Even more so, cultures of honor
are about taking retribution after affronts to self, family, or clan,
and reputational consequences for failing to do so. If they take
your camel today and you do nothing, tomorrow they will take
the rest of your herd, plus your wives and daughters.*
Few of humanity’s low or high points are due to the culturally based
actions of, say, Sami wandering the north of Finland with their reindeer,
or Maasai cow herders in the Serengeti. Instead the most pertinent
cultures of honor are ones in more Westernized settings. “Culture of
honor” has been used to describe the workings of the Mafia in Sicily, the
patterns of violence in rural nineteenth-century Ireland, and the causes
and consequences of retributive killings by inner-city gangs. All occur in
circumstances of resource competition (including the singular resource
of being the last side to do a retributive killing in a vendetta), of a power
vacuum provided by the minimal presence of the rule of law, and where
prestige is ruinously lost if challenges are left unanswered and where the
answer is typically a violent one. Amid those, the most famous example
of a Westernized culture of honor is the American South, the subject of

283

books, academic journals, conferences, and Southern studies majors in
universities. Much of this work was pioneered by Nisbett.27
Hospitality, chivalry toward women, and emphasis on social decorum
and etiquette are long associated with the South.28 In addition, the South
traditionally emphasizes legacy, long cultural memory, and continuity of
family—in rural Kentucky in the 1940s, for example, 70 percent of men
had the same first name as their father, far more than in the North. When
coupled with lesser mobility in the South, honor in need of defense
readily extends to family, clan, and place. For example, by the time the
Hatfields and McCoys famously began their nearly thirty-year feud in
1863,* they had lived in the same region of the West Virginia/Kentucky
border for nearly a century. The Southern sense of honor in place is also
seen in Robert E. Lee; he opposed Southern secession, even made some
ambiguous statements that could be viewed as opposed to slavery. Yet
when offered the command of the Union Army by Lincoln, Lee wrote, “I
wish to live under no other government and there is no sacrifice I am not
ready to make for the preservation of the Union save that of honor.”
When Virginia chose secession, he regretfully fulfilled his sense of honor
to his home and led the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia.
In the South, defense of honor was, above all, an act of selfreliance.29 The Southerner Andrew Jackson was advised by his dying
mother to never seek redress from the law for any grievances, to instead
be a man and take things into his own hands. That he certainly did, with
a history of dueling (even fatally) and brawling; on his final day as
president, he articulated two regrets in leaving office—that he “had been
unable to shoot Henry Clay or to hang John C. Calhoun.” Carrying out
justice personally was viewed as a requirement in the absence of a
functional legal system. At best, legal justice and individual justice were
in uneasy equilibrium in the nineteenth-century South; in the words of
the Southern historian Bertram Wyatt-Brown, “Common law and lynch
law were ethically compatible. The first enabled the legal profession to
present traditional order, and the second conferred upon ordinary men
the prerogative of ensuring that community values held ultimate
sovereignty.”
The core of retribution for honor violations was, of course, violence.
Sticks and stones might break your bones, but names will cause you to
break the offender’s bones. Dueling was commonplace, the point being
not that you were willing to kill but that you were willing to die for your
284

honor. Many a Confederate boy went off to war advised by his mother
that better he come back in a coffin than as a coward who fled.
The result of this all is a long, still-extant history of high rates of
violence in the South. But crucially, violence of a particular type. I once
heard it summarized by a Southern studies scholar describing the
weirdness of leaving the rural South to start grad school in a strange
place, Cambridge, Massachusetts, where families would get together at
Fourth of July picnics and no one would shoot each other. Nisbett and
Dov Cohen have shown that the high rates of violence, particularly of
murder, by white Southern males are not features of large cities or about
attempts to gain material goods—we’re not talking liquor store stickups.
Instead the violence is disproportionately rural, among people who know
each other, and concerns slights to honor (that sleazebag cousin thought
it was okay to flirt with your wife at the family reunion, so you shot
him). Moreover, Southern juries are atypically forgiving of such acts.30

285

R. Nisbett and D. Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the
South (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996).
Visit bit.ly/2neHKTg for a larger version of this graph.

286

Southern, but not Northern, college studies show strong physiological responses
to a social provocation.
Visit bit.ly/2mNCQ4g for a larger version of this graph.

Southern violence was explored in one of the all-time coolest
psychology studies, involving the use of a word rare in science journals,
conducted by Nisbett and Cohen. Undergraduate male subjects had a
blood sample taken. They then filled out a questionnaire about
something and were then supposed to drop it off down the hall. It was in
the narrow hallway, filled with file cabinets, that the experiment
happened. Half the subjects traversed the corridor uneventfully. But with
half, a confederate (get it? ha-ha) of the psychologists, a big beefy guy,
approached from the opposite direction. As the subject and the plant
squeezed by each other, the latter would jostle the subject and, in an
irritated voice, say the magic word—“asshole”—and march on. Subject
would continue down the hall to drop off the questionnaire.
What was the response to this insult? It depended. Subjects from the
South, but not from elsewhere, showed massive increases in levels of
testosterone and glucocorticoids—anger, rage, stress. Subjects were then
told a scenario where a guy observes a male acquaintance making a pass
at his fiancée—what happens next in the story? In control subjects,
Southerners were a bit more likely than Northerners to imagine a violent
outcome. And after being insulted? No change in Northerners and a
massive boost in imagined violence among Southerners.
287

Where do these Westernized cultures of honor come from? Violence
between the Crips and the Bloods in LA is not readily traced to
combatants’ mind-sets from growing up herding yak. Nonetheless,
pastoralist roots have been suggested to explain the Southern culture of
honor. The theory as first propounded by historian David Hackett Fischer
in 1989: Early American regionalism arose from colonists in different
parts of America coming from different places.31 There were the
Pilgrims from East Anglia in New England. Quakers from North
Midlands going to Pennsylvania and Delaware. Southern English
indentured servants to Virginia. And the rest of the South?
Disproportionately herders from Scotland, Ireland, and northern
England.
Naturally, the idea has some problems. Pastoralists from the British
Isles mostly settled in the hill country of the South, whereas the honor
culture is stronger in the Southern lowlands. Others have suggested that
the Southern ethos of retributive violence was born from the white
Southern nightmare scenario of slave uprisings. But most historians have
found a lot of validity in Fischer’s idea.

Violence Turned Inward
Culture-of-honor violence is not just about outside threat—the camel
rustlers from the next tribe, the jerk at the roadhouse who came on to
some guy’s girlfriend. Instead it is equally defined by its role when honor
is threatened from within. Chapter 11 examines when norm violations by
members of your own group provoke cover-ups, excuses, or leniency,
and when they provoke severe public punishment. The latter is when
“you’ve dishonored us in front of everyone,” a culture-of-honor
specialty. Which raises the issue of honor killings.
What constitutes an honor killing? Someone does something
considered to tarnish the reputation of the family. A family member then
kills the despoiler, often publicly, thereby regaining face. Mind-boggling.
Some characteristics of honor killings:
While they have been widespread historically,
contemporary ones are mostly restricted to traditional
Muslim, Hindu, and Sikh communities.

288

Victims are usually young women.
Their most common crimes? Refusing an arranged
marriage. Seeking to divorce an abusive spouse and/or a
spouse to whom they were forcibly married as a child.
Seeking education. Resisting constraining religious
orthodoxy, such as covering their head. Marrying, living
with, dating, interacting with, or speaking to an
unapproved male. Infidelity. Religious conversion. In
other words, a woman resisting being the property of her
male relatives. And also, stunningly, staggeringly, a
frequent cause of honor killings is being raped.
In the rare instances of men being subject to honor
killings, the typical cause is homosexuality.
There has been debate as to whether honor killings are “just”
domestic violence, and whether morbid Western fascination with them
reflects anti-Muslim bias;32 if some Baptist guy in Alabama murders his
wife because she wants a divorce, no one frames it as a “Christian honor
killing” reflecting deep religious barbarity. But honor killings typically
differ from garden-variety domestic violence in several ways: (a) The
latter is usually committed by a male partner; the former are usually
committed by male blood relatives, often with the approval of and
facilitation by female relatives. (b) The former is rarely an act of
spontaneous passion but instead is often planned with the approval of
family members. (c) Honor killings are often rationalized on religious
grounds, presented without remorse, and approved by religious leaders.
(d) Honor killings are carried out openly—after all, how else can
“honor” be regained for the family?—and the chosen perpetrator is often
an underage relative (e.g., a younger brother), to minimize the extent of
sentencing for the act.
By some pretty meaningful criteria, this is not “just” domestic
violence. According to estimates by the UN and advocacy groups, five to
twenty thousand honor killings occur annually. And they are not
restricted to far-off, alien lands. Instead they occur throughout the West,
where patriarchs expect their daughters to be untouched by the world
they moved them to, where a daughter’s successful assimilation into this
world proclaims the irrelevance of that patriarch.

289

Left to right, starting top column: Shafilea Ahmed, England, killed by father and
mother after resisting an arranged marriage; age 17. Anooshe Sediq Ghulam,
Norway, married at 13; killed by husband after requesting a divorce; age 22.
Palestina Isa, USA, killed by parents for dating someone outside the faith,
listening to American music, and secretly getting a part-time job; age 16. Aqsa
Parvez, Canada, killed by father and brother for refusing to wear a hajib; age 16.
Ghazala Khan, Denmark, killed by nine family members for refusing an
arranged marriage; age 19. Fadime Sahindal, Sweden, killed by father for
refusing an arranged marriage; age 27. Hatun Surucu Kird, Germany, killed by
brother after divorcing the cousin she was forced to marry at age 16; age 23.
Hina Salem, Italy, killed by father for refusing an arranged marriage; age 20.
Amina and Sarah Said, USA, both sisters killed by parents who perceived them
as becoming too Westernized; ages 18 and 17.

290

STRATIFIED VERSUS EGALITARIAN
CULTURES

A

nother meaningful way to think about cross-cultural variation
concerns how unequally resources (e.g., land, food, material
goods, power, or prestige) are distributed.33 Hunter-gatherer societies
have typically been egalitarian, as we’ll soon see, throughout hominin
history. Inequality emerged when “stuff”—things to possess and
accumulate—was invented following animal domestication and the
development of agriculture. The more stuff, reflecting surplus, job
specialization, and technological sophistication, the greater the potential
inequality. Moreover, inequality expands enormously when cultures
invent inheritance within families. Once invented, inequality became
pervasive. Among traditional pastoralist or small-scale agricultural
societies, levels of wealth inequality match or exceed those in the most
unequal industrialized societies.
Why have stratified cultures dominated the planet, generally
replacing more egalitarian ones? For population biologist Peter Turchin,
the answer is that stratified cultures are ideally suited to being
conquerors—they come with chains of command.34 Both empirical and
theoretical work suggests that in addition, in unstable environments
stratified societies are “better able to survive resource shortages [than
egalitarian cultures] by sequestering mortality in the lower classes.” In
other words, when times are tough, the unequal access to wealth
becomes the unequal distribution of misery and death. Notably, though,
stratification is not the only solution to such instability—this is where
hunter-gatherers benefit from being able to pick up and move.
A score of millennia after the invention of inequality, Westernized
societies at the extremes of the inequality continuum differ strikingly.
One difference concerns “social capital.” Economic capital is the
collective quantity of goods, services, and financial resources. Social
capital is the collective quantity of resources such as trust, reciprocity,
and cooperation. You learn a ton about a community’s social capital with
two simple questions. First: “Can people usually be trusted?” A

291

community in which most people answer yes is one with fewer locks,
with people watching out for one another’s kids and intervening in
situations where one could easily look away. The second question is how
many organizations someone participates in—from the purely
recreational (e.g., a bowling league) to the vital (e.g., unions, tenant
groups, co-op banks). A community with high levels of such
participation is one where people feel efficacious, where institutions
work transparently enough that people believe they can effect change.
People who feel helpless don’t join organizations.
Put simply, cultures with more income inequality have less social
capital.35 Trust requires reciprocity, and reciprocity requires equality,
whereas hierarchy is about domination and asymmetry. Moreover, a
culture highly unequal in material resources is almost always also
unequal in the ability to pull the strings of power, to have efficacy, to be
visible. (For example, as income inequality grows, the percentage of
people who bother voting generally declines.) Almost by definition, you
can’t have a society with both dramatic income inequality and plentiful
social capital. Or translated from social science–ese, marked inequality
makes people crummier to one another.
This can be shown in various ways, studied on the levels of
Westernized countries, states, provinces, cities, and towns. The more
income inequality, the less likely people are to help someone (in an
experimental setting) and the less generous and cooperative they are in
economic games. Early in the chapter, I discussed cross-cultural rates of
bullying and of “antisocial punishment,” where people in economic
games punish overly generous players more than they punish cheaters.*
Studies of these phenomena show that high levels of inequality and/or
low levels of social capital in a country predict high rates of bullying and
of antisocial punishment.36
Chapter 11 examines the psychology with which we think about
people of different socioeconomic status; no surprise, in unequal
societies, people on top generate justifications for their status.37 And the
more inequality, the more the powerful adhere to myths about the hidden
blessings of subordination—“They may be poor, but at least they’re
happy/honest/loved.” In the words of the authors of one paper, “Unequal
societies may need ambivalence for system stability: Income inequality
compensates groups with partially positive social images.”

292

Thus unequal cultures make people less kind. Inequality also makes
people less healthy. This helps explain a hugely important phenomenon
in public health, namely the “socioeconomic status (SES)/health
gradient”—as noted, in culture after culture, the poorer you are, the
worse your health, the higher the incidence and impact of numerous
diseases, and the shorter your life expectancy.38
Extensive research has examined the SES/health gradient. Four quick
rule-outs: (a) The gradient isn’t due to poor health driving down people’s
SES. Instead low SES, beginning in childhood, predicts subsequent poor
health in adulthood. (b) It’s not that the poor have lousy health and
everyone else is equally healthy. Instead, for every step down the SES
ladder, starting from the top, average health worsens. (c) The gradient
isn’t due to less health-care access for the poor; it occurs in countries
with universal health care, is unrelated to utilization of health-care
systems, and occurs for diseases unrelated to health-care access (e.g.,
juvenile diabetes, where having five checkups a day wouldn’t change its
incidence). (d) Only about a third of the gradient is explained by lower
SES equaling more health risk factors (e.g., lead in your water, nearby
toxic waste dump, more smoking and drinking) and fewer protective
factors (e.g., everything from better mattresses for overworked backs to
health club memberships).
What then is the principal cause of the gradient? Key work by Nancy
Adler at UCSF showed that it’s not so much being poor that predicts
poor health. It’s feeling poor—someone’s subjective SES (e.g., the
answer to “How do you feel you’re doing financially when you compare
yourself with other people?”) is at least as good a predictor of health as is
objective SES.
Crucial work by the social epidemiologist Richard Wilkinson of the
University of Nottingham added to this picture: it’s not so much that
poverty predicts poor health; it’s poverty amid plenty—income
inequality. The surest way to make someone feel poor is to rub their nose
in what they don’t have.
Why should high degrees of income inequality (independent of
absolute levels of poverty) make the poor unhealthy? Two overlapping
pathways:
A psychosocial explanation has been championed by Ichiro
Kawachi of Harvard. When social capital decreases (thanks to
293

inequality), up goes psychological stress. A mammoth amount of
literature explores how such stress—lack of control,
predictability, outlets for frustration, and social support—
chronically activates the stress response, which, as we saw in
chapter 4, corrodes health in numerous ways.
A neomaterialist explanation has been offered by Robert Evans
of the University of British Columbia and George Kaplan of the
University of Michigan. If you want to improve health and
quality of life for the average person in a society, you spend
money on public goods—better public transit, safer streets,
cleaner water, better public schools, universal health care. But
the more income inequality, the greater the financial distance
between the wealthy and the average and thus the less direct
benefit the wealthy feel from improving public goods. Instead
they benefit more from dodging taxes and spending on their
private good—a chauffeur, a gated community, bottled water,
private schools, private health insurance. As Evans writes, “The
more unequal are incomes in a society, the more pronounced will
be the disadvantages to its better-off members from public
expenditure, and the more resources will those members have
[available to them] to mount effective political opposition” (e.g.,
lobbying). Evans notes how this “secession of the wealthy”
promotes “private affluence and public squalor.” Meaning worse
health for the have-nots.39
The inequality/health link paves the way for understanding how
inequality also makes for more crime and violence. I could copy and
paste the previous stretch of writing, replacing “poor health” with “high
crime,” and I’d be set. Poverty is not a predictor of crime as much as
poverty amid plenty is. For example, extent of income inequality is a
major predictor of rates of violent crime across American states and
across industrialized nations.40
Why does income inequality lead to more crime? Again, there’s the
psychosocial angle—inequality means less social capital, less trust,
cooperation, and people watching out for one another. And there’s the
neomaterialist angle—inequality means more secession of the wealthy
from contributing to the public good. Kaplan has shown, for example,
294

that states with more income inequality spend proportionately less
money on that key crime-fighting tool, education. As with inequality and
health, the psychosocial and neomaterial routes synergize.
A final depressing point about inequality and violence. As we’ve
seen, a rat being shocked activates a stress response. But a rat being
shocked who can then bite the hell out of another rat has less of a stress
response. Likewise with baboons—if you are low ranking, a reliable way
to reduce glucocorticoid secretion is to displace aggression onto those
even lower in the pecking order. It’s something similar here—despite the
conservative nightmare of class warfare, of the poor rising up to
slaughter the wealthy, when inequality fuels violence, it is mostly the
poor preying on the poor.
This point is made with a great metaphor for the consequences of
societal inequality.41 The frequency of “air rage”—a passenger majorly,
disruptively, dangerously losing it over something on a flight—has been
increasing. Turns out there’s a substantial predictor of it: if the plane has
a first-class section, there’s almost a fourfold increase in the odds of a
coach passenger having air rage. Force coach passengers to walk through
first class when boarding, and you more than double the chances further.
Nothing like starting a flight by being reminded of where you fit into the
class hierarchy. And completing the parallel with violent crime, when air
rage is boosted in coach by reminders of inequality, the result is not a
crazed coach passenger sprinting into first class to shout Marxist slogans.
It’s the guy being awful to the old woman sitting next to him, or to the
flight attendant.*

295

POPULATION SIZE, POPULATION
DENSITY, POPULATION
HETEROGENEITY

T

he year 2008 marked a human milestone, a transition point nine
thousand years in the making: for the first time, the majority of
humans lived in cities.
The human trajectory from semipermanent settlements to the
megalopolis has been beneficial. In the developed world, when
compared with rural populations, city dwellers are typically healthier and
wealthier; larger social networks facilitate innovation; because of
economies of scale, cities leave a smaller per-capita ecological
footprint.42
Urban living makes for a different sort of brain. This was shown in a
2011 study of subjects from a range of cities, towns, and rural settings
who underwent an experimental social stressor while being brainscanned. The key finding was that the larger the population where
someone lived, the more reactive their amygdala was during that
stressor.*43
Most important for our purposes, urbanized humans do something
completely unprecedented among primates—regularly encountering
strangers who are never seen again, fostering the invention of the
anonymous act. After all, it wasn’t until nineteenth-century urbanization
that crime fiction was invented, typically set in cities—in traditional
settings there’s no whodunit, since everyone knows what everyone dun.
Growing cultures had to invent mechanisms for norm enforcement
among strangers. For example, across numerous traditional cultures, the
larger the group, the greater the punishment for norm violations and the
more cultural emphases on equitable treatment of strangers. Moreover,
larger groups evolved “third-party punishment” (stay tuned for more in
the next chapter)—rather than victims punishing norm violators,
punishment is meted out by objective third parties, such as police and
courts. At an extreme, a crime not only victimizes its victim but also is

296

an affront to the collective population—hence “The People Versus Joe
Blow.”*44
Finally, life in larger populations fosters the ultimate third-party
punisher. As documented by Ara Norenzayan of the University of British
Columbia, it is only when societies grow large enough that people
regularly encounter strangers that “Big Gods” emerge—deities who are
concerned with human morality and punish our transgressions.45
Societies with frequent anonymous interactions tend to outsource
punishment to gods.* In contrast, hunter-gatherers’ gods are less likely
than chance to care whether we’ve been naughty or nice. Moreover, in
further work across a range of traditional cultures, Norenzayan has
shown that the more informed and punitive people consider their
moralistic gods to be, the more generous they are to coreligionist
strangers in a financial allocation game.
Separate from the size of a population, how about its density? One
study surveying thirty-three developed countries characterized each
nation’s “tightness”—the extent to which the government is autocratic,
dissent suppressed, behavior monitored, transgressions punished, life
regulated by religious orthodoxy, citizens viewing various behaviors as
inappropriate (e.g., singing in an elevator, cursing at a job interview).46
Higher population density predicted tighter cultures—both high density
in the present and, remarkably, historically, in the year 1500.
The issue of population density’s effects on behavior gave rise to a
well-known phenomenon, mostly well known incorrectly.
In the 1950s John Calhoun at the National Institute of Mental Health
asked what happens to rat behavior at higher population densities,
research prompted by America’s ever-growing cities.47 And in papers for
both scientists and the lay public, Calhoun gave a clear answer: highdensity living produced “deviant” behavior and “social pathology.” Rats
became violent; adults killed and cannibalized one another; females were
aggressive to their infants; there was indiscriminate hypersexuality
among males (e.g., trying to mate with females who weren’t in estrus).
The writing about the subject, starting with Calhoun, was colorful.
The bloodless description of “high-density living” was replaced with
“crowding.” Aggressive males were described as “going berserk,”
aggressive females as “Amazons.” Rats living in these “rat slums”
became “social dropouts,” “autistic,” or “juvenile delinquents.” One
expert on rat behavior, A. S. Parkes, described Calhoun’s rats as
297

“unmaternal mothers, homosexuals and zombies” (quite the trio you’d
invite to dinner in the 1950s).48
The work was hugely influential, taught to psychologists, architects,
and urban planners; more than a million reprints were requested of
Calhoun’s original Scientific American report; sociologists, journalists,
and politicians explicitly compared residents of particular housing
projects and Calhoun’s rats. The take-home message sent ripples through
the American heartland destined for the chaotic sixties: inner cities breed
violence, pathology, and social deviance.
Calhoun’s rats were more complicated than this (something
underemphasized in his lay writing). High-density living doesn’t make
rats more aggressive. Instead it makes aggressive rats more aggressive.
(This echoes the findings that neither testosterone, nor alcohol, nor
media violence uniformly increases violence. Instead they make violent
individuals more sensitive to violence-evoking social cues.) In contrast,
crowding makes unaggressive individuals more timid. In other words, it
exaggerates preexisting social tendencies.
Calhoun’s erroneous conclusions about rats don’t even hold for
humans. In some cities—Chicago, for example, circa 1970—higher
population density in neighborhoods does indeed predict more violence.
Nevertheless, some of the highest-density places on earth—Hong Kong,
Singapore, and Tokyo—have miniscule rates of violence. High-density
living is not synonymous with aggression in rats or humans.

—
The preceding sections examined the effects of living with lots of people,
and in close quarters. How about the effects of living with different kinds
of people? Diversity. Heterogeneity. Admixture. Mosaicism.
Two opposite narratives come to mind:
Mister Rogers’ neighborhood: When people of differing
ethnicities, races, or religions live together, they experience the
similarities rather than the differences and view one another as
individuals, transcending stereotypes. Trade flows, fostering
fairness and mutuality. Inevitably, dichotomies dissolve with
intermarriage, and soon you’re happily watching your grandkid
in the school play on “their” side of town. Just visualize whirled
peas.
298

Sharks versus the Jets: Differing sorts of people living in close
proximity rub, and thus abrade, elbows regularly. One side’s act
of proud cultural identification feels like a hostile dig to the other
side, public spaces become proving grounds for turf battles,
commons become tragedies.
Surprise: both outcomes occur; the final chapter explores
circumstances where intergroup contact leads to one rather than the
other. Most interesting at this juncture is the importance of the spatial
qualities of the heterogeneity. Consider a region filled with people from
Elbonia and Kerplakistan, two hostile groups, each providing half the
population. At one extreme, the land is split down the middle, each
group occupying one side, producing a single boundary between the two.
At the other extreme is a microcheckerboard of alternating ethnicities,
where each square on the grid is one person large, producing a vast
quantity of boundaries between Elbonians and Kerplakis.
Intuitively, both scenarios should bias against conflict. In the
condition of maximal separation, each group has a critical mass to be
locally sovereign, and the total length of border, and thus of the amount
of intergroup elbow rubbing, is minimized. In the scenario of maximal
mixing, no patch of ethnic homogeneity is big enough to foster a selfidentity that can dominate a public space—big deal if someone raises a
flag between their feet and declares their square meter to be the Elbonian
Empire or a Kerplakistani Republic.
But in the real world things are always in between the two extremes,
and with variation in the average size of each “ethnic patch.” Does patch
size, and thus amount of border, influence relations?
This was explored in a fascinating paper from the aptly named New
England Complex Systems Institute, down the block from MIT.49 The
authors first constructed an Elbonian/Kerplaki mixture, with individuals
randomly distributed as pixels on a grid. Pixels were given a certain
degree of mobility plus a tendency to assort with other pixels of the same
type. As self-assortment progresses, something emerges—islands and
peninsulas of Elbonians amid a sea of Kerplakis, or the reverse, a
condition that intuitively seems rife with potential intergroup violence.
As self-assortment continues, the number of such isolated islands and
peninsulas declines. The intermediate stage that maximizes the number

299

of islands and peninsulas maximizes the number of people living within
a surrounded enclave.*
The authors then considered a balkanized region, namely the
Balkans, ex-Yugoslavia, in 1990. This was just before Serbians,
Bosnians, Croatians, and Albanians commenced Europe’s worst war
since World War II, the war that taught us the names of places like
Srebrenica and people like Slobodan Milošević. Using a similar analysis,
with ethnic island size varying from roughly twenty to sixty kilometers
in diameter, they identified the spots theoretically most rife for violence;
remarkably, this predicted the sites of major fighting and massacres in
the war.
In the words of the authors, violence can arise “due to the structure of
boundaries between groups rather than as a result of inherent conflicts
between the groups themselves.” They then showed that the clarity of
borders matters as well. Good, clear-cut fences—e.g., mountain ranges
or rivers between groups—make for good neighbors. “Peace does not
depend on integrated coexistence, but rather on well defined
topographical and political boundaries separating groups, allowing for
partial autonomy within a single country,” the authors concluded.
Thus, not only do size, density, and heterogeneity of populations help
explain intergroup violence, but patterns and clarity of fragmentation do
as well. These issues will be revisited in the final chapter.

300

THE RESIDUES OF CULTURAL CRISES

I

n times of crisis—the London Blitz, New York after 9/11, San
Francisco after the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake—people pull
together.* That’s cool. But in contrast, chronic, pervasive, corrosive
menace doesn’t necessarily do the same to people or cultures.
The primal menace of hunger has left historical marks. Back to that
study of differences between countries’ tightness (where “tight”
countries were characterized by autocracy, suppression of dissent, and
omnipresence and enforcement of behavior norms).50 What sorts of
countries are tighter?* In addition to the high population-density
correlates mentioned earlier, there are also more historical food
shortages, lower food intake, and lower levels of protein and fat in the
diet. In other words, these are cultures chronically menaced by empty
stomachs.
Cultural tightness was also predicted by environmental degradation
—less available farmland or clean water, more pollution. Similarly,
habitat degradation and depletion of animal populations worsens conflict
in cultures dependent on bush meat. And a major theme of Jared
Diamond’s magisterial Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or
Succeed is how environmental degradation explains the violent collapse
of many civilizations.
Then there’s disease. In chapter 15 we’ll touch on “behavioral
immunity,” the ability of numerous species to detect cues of illness in
other individuals; as we’ll see, implicit cues about infectious disease
make people more xenophobic. Similarly, historical prevalence of
infectious disease predicts a culture’s openness to outsiders. Moreover,
other predictors of cultural tightness include having high historical
incidence of pandemics, of high infant and child mortality rates, and of
higher cumulative average number of years lost to communicable
disease.
Obviously, weather influences the incidence of organized violence—
consider the centuries of European wars taking a hiatus during the worst
of winter and the growing season.51 Even broader is the capacity of
weather and climate to shape culture. The Kenyan historian Ali Mazrui
301

has suggested that one reason for Europe’s historical success, relative to
Africa, has been the weather—Western-style planning ahead arose from
the annual reality of winter coming.* Larger-scale changes in weather
are known to be consequential. In the tightness study, cultural tightness
was also predicted by a history of floods, droughts, and cyclones.
Another pertinent aspect of weather concerns the Southern Oscillation,
known as El Niño, the multiyear fluctuation of average water
temperatures in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. El Niños, occurring about
every dozen years, involve warmer, drier weather (with the opposite
during La Niña years) and are associated in many developing countries
with droughts and food shortages. Over the last fifty years El Niños have
roughly doubled the likelihood of civil conflict, mostly by stoking the
fires of preexisting conflicts.
The relationship between drought and violence is tricky. The civil
conflict referred to in the previous paragraph concerned deaths caused by
battle between governmental and nongovernmental forces (i.e., civil
wars or insurgencies). Thus, rather than fighting over a watering hole or
a field for grazing, this was fighting for modern perks of power. But in
traditional settings drought may mean spending more time foraging or
hauling water for your crops. Raiding to steal the other group’s women
isn’t a high priority, and why rustle someone else’s cows when you can’t
even feed your own? Conflict declines.
Interestingly, something similar occurs in baboons. Normally,
baboons in rich ecosystems like the Serengeti need forage only a few
hours a day. Part of what endears baboons to primatologists is that this
leaves them about nine hours daily to devote to social machinations—
trysting and jousting and backbiting. In 1984 there was a devastating
drought in East Africa. Among baboons, while there was still sufficient
food, it took every waking moment to get enough calories; aggression
decreased.52
So ecological duress can increase or decrease aggression. This raises
the key issue of what global warming will do to our best and worst
behaviors. There will definitely be some upsides. Some regions will have
longer growing seasons, increasing the food supply and reducing
tensions. Some people will eschew conflict, being preoccupied with
saving their homes from the encroaching ocean or growing pineapples in
the Arctic. But amid squabbling about the details in predictive models,
the consensus is that global warming won’t do good things to global

302

conflict. For starters, warmer temperatures rile people up—in cities
during the summers, for every three degree increase in temperature, there
was a 4 percent increase in interpersonal violence and 14 percent in
group violence. But global warming’s bad news is more global—
desertification, loss of arable land due to rising seas, more droughts. One
influential meta-analysis projected 16 percent and 50 percent increases in
interpersonal and group violence, respectively, in some regions by
2050.53

303

OH, WHY NOT: RELIGION

T

ime for a quick hit-and-run about religion before considering it in
the final chapter.
Theories abound as to why humans keep inventing religions. It’s
more than a human pull toward the supernatural; as stated in one review,
“Mickey Mouse has supernatural powers, but no one worships or would
fight—or kill—for him. Our social brains may help explain why children
the world over are attracted to talking teacups, but religion is much more
than that.” Why does religion arise? Because it makes in-groups more
cooperative and viable (stay tuned for more in the next chapter). Because
humans need personification and to see agency and causality when
facing the unknown. Or maybe inventing deities is an emergent byproduct of the architecture of our social brains.54
Amid these speculations, far more boggling is the variety of the
thousands of religions we’ve invented. They vary as to number and
gender of deities; whether there’s an afterlife, what it’s like, and what it
takes to enter; whether deities judge or interfere with humans; whether
we are born sinful or pure and whether sexuality changes those states;
whether the myth of a religion’s founder is of sacredness from the start
(so much so that, say, wise men visit the infant founder) or of a sybarite
who reforms (e.g., Siddhārtha’s transition from palace life to being the
Buddha); whether the religion’s goal is attracting new followers (say,
with exciting news—e.g., an angel visited me in Manchester, New York,
and gave me golden plates) or retaining members (we’ve got a covenant
with God, so stick with us). On and on.
There are some pertinent patterns amid this variation. As noted,
desert cultures are prone toward monotheistic religions; rain forest
dwellers, polytheistic ones. Nomadic pastoralists’ deities tend to value
war and valor in battle as an entrée to a good afterlife. Agriculturalists
invent gods who alter the weather. As noted, once cultures get large
enough that anonymous acts are possible, they start inventing moralizing
gods. Gods and religious orthodoxy dominate more in cultures with
frequent threats (war, natural disasters), inequality, and high infant
mortality rates.
304

Before turfing this subject to the final chapter, three obvious points:
(a) a religion reflects the values of the culture that invented or adopted it,
and very effectively transmits those values; (b) religion fosters the best
and worst of our behaviors; (c) it’s complicated.

—
We’ve now looked at various cultural factors—collectivism versus
individualism, egalitarian versus hierarchical distribution of resources,
and so on. While there are others to consider, it’s time to shift to the
chapter’s final topic. This is one that has generated shit storms of debate
as old as the weathered layers of Olduvai Gorge and as fresh as a
newborn baby’s tush, a topic that has scientists who study peace at one
another’s throats.

305

HOBBES OR ROUSSEAU

Y

es, those guys.
To invoke some estimates, anatomically modern humans
emerged about 200,000 years ago, and behaviorally modern ones about
40,000 to 50,000 years ago; animal domestication is 10,000 to 20,000
years old, agriculture around 12,000. After plant domestication, it was
roughly 5,000 more years until “history” began with civilizations in
Egypt, the Mideast, China, and the New World. When in this arc of
history was war invented? Does material culture lessen or worsen
tendencies toward war? Do successful warriors leave more copies of
their genes? Has the centralization of authority by civilization actually
civilized us, providing a veneer of socially contractual restraint? Have
humans become more or less decent to one another over the course of
history? Yes, it’s short/nasty/brutish versus noble savage.
In contrast to the centuries of food fights among philosophers,
contemporary Hobbes-versus-Rousseau is about actual data. Some of it
is archaeological, where researchers have sought to determine the
prevalence and antiquity of warfare from the archaeological record.
Predictably, half of each conference on the subject consists of
definitional squabbles. Is “war” solely organized and sustained violence
between groups? Does it require weapons? A standing army (even if
only seasonally)? An army with hierarchy and chain of command? If
fighting is mostly along lines of relatedness, is it a vendetta or clan feud
instead of a war?

Fractured Bones
For most archaeologists the operational definition has been
streamlined to numerous people simultaneously meeting violent deaths.
In 1996 the archaeologist Lawrence Keeley of the University of Illinois
synthesized the existing literature in his highly influential War Before
Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage, ostensibly showing that
the archaeological evidence for war is broad and ancient.55

306

A similar conclusion comes in the 2011 book The Better Angels of
Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined, by Harvard’s Steven Pinker.56
Cliché police be damned, you can’t mention this book without calling it
“monumental.” In this monumental work Pinker argued that (a) violence
and the worst horrors of inhumanity have been declining for the last half
millennium, thanks to the constraining forces of civilization; and (b) the
warfare and barbarity preceding that transition are as old as the human
species.
Keeley and Pinker document savagery galore in prehistoric tribal
societies—mass graves filled with skeletons bearing multiple fractures,
caved-in skulls, “parrying” fractures (which arise from raising your arm
to fend off a blow), stone projectiles embedded in bone. Some sites
suggest the outcome of battle—a preponderance of young adult male
skeletons. Others suggest indiscriminate massacre—butchered skeletons
of both sexes and all ages. Other sites suggest cannibalism of the
vanquished.
In their separate surveys of the literature, Keeley and Pinker present
evidence of prestate tribal violence comes from sites in Ukraine, France,
Sweden, Niger, India, and numerous precontact American locations.57
This collection of sites includes the oldest such massacre, the 12,000- to
14,000-year-old Jebel Sahaba site along the Nile in northern Sudan, a
cemetery of fifty-nine men, women, and children, nearly half of whom
have stone projectiles embedded in their bones. And it includes the
largest massacre site, the 700-year-old Crow Creek in South Dakota, a
mass grave of more than four hundred skeletons, with 60 percent
showing evidence of violent deaths. Across the twenty-one sites
surveyed, about 15 percent of skeletons showed evidence of “death in
warfare.” One can, of course, be killed in war in a way that doesn’t leave
fractures or projectiles embedded in bone, suggesting that the percentage
of deaths due to warfare was higher.

307

Otzi, in his current state (left), and in an artist’s reconstruction (right). Note: his
killer, still at large, probably looked pretty much the same.

Keeley and Pinker also document how prehistoric settlements
frequently protected themselves with defensive palisades and
fortifications. And, of course, as the poster child for prehistoric violence,
there is Otzi, the 5,300-year-old Tyrolean “iceman” found in a melting
glacier in 1991 on the Italian/Austrian border. In his shoulder was a
freshly embedded arrowhead.
Thus, Keeley and Pinker document mass casualties of warfare long
predating civilization. Just as important, both (starting with Keeley’s
subtitle) suggest a hidden agenda among archaeologists to ignore that
evidence. Why had there been, to use Keeley’s phrase, “pacification of
the past”? In chapter 7 we saw how World War II produced a generation
of social scientists trying to understand the roots of fascism. In Keeley’s
view, the post–World War II generations of archaeologists recoiled from
the trauma of the war by recoiling from the evidence that humans had
been prepping a long time for World War II. For Pinker, writing from a
younger generation’s perspective, the current whitewashing of

308

prehistoric violence has the flavor of today’s archaeological graybeards
being nostalgic about getting stoned in high school and listening to John
Lennon’s “Imagine.”
Keeley and Pinker generated a strong backlash among many notable
archaeologists, who charged them with “war-ifying the past.” Most vocal
has been R. Brian Ferguson of Rutgers University, with publications with
titles like “Pinker’s List: Exaggerating Prehistoric War Mortality.”
Keeley and Pinker are criticized for numerous reasons:58
a. Some of the sites supposedly presenting evidence for
warfare actually contain only a single case of violent
death, suggesting homicide, not war.
b. The criteria for inferring violent death include skeletons
in close proximity to arrowheads. However, many such
artifacts were actually tools used for other purposes, or
simply chips and flakes. For example, Fred Wendorf,
who excavated Jebel Sahaba, considered most of the
projectiles associated with skeletons to have been mere
debris.59
c. Many fractured bones were actually healed. Instead of
reflecting war, they might indicate the ritualized club
fighting seen in many tribal societies.
d. Proving that a human bone was gnawed on by a fellow
human instead of another carnivore is tough. One tourde-force paper demonstrated cannibalism in a Pueblo
village from around the year 1100—human feces there
contained the human version of the muscle-specific
protein myoglobin.60 In other words, those humans had
been eating human meat. Nonetheless, even when
cannibalism is clearly documented, it doesn’t indicate
whether there was exo- or endocannibalism (i.e., eating
vanquished enemies versus deceased relatives, as is
done in some tribal cultures).
e. Most important, Keeley and Pinker are accused of
cherry-picking their data, discussing only sites of
putative war deaths, rather than the entire literature.*
When you survey the thousands of prehistoric skeletal
remains from hundreds of sites worldwide, rates of
309

violent deaths are far lower than 15 percent. Moreover,
there are regions and periods lacking any evidence of
warlike violence. The glee in refuting the broadest
conclusions of Keeley and Pinker is unmistakable (e.g.,
Ferguson in the previously cited work: “For 10,000
years in the Southern Levant, there is not one single
instance where it can be said with confidence, ‘war was
there.’ [his emphasis] Am I wrong? Name the place.”).
Thus these critics conclude that wars were rare prior to
human civilizations. Supporters of Keeley and Pinker
retort that you can’t ignore bloodbaths like Crow Creek
or Jebel Sahaba and that the absence of proof (of early
war in so many of these sites) is not proof of absence.
This suggests a second strategy for contemporary Hobbes-versusRousseau debates, namely to study contemporary humans in prestate
tribal societies. How frequently do they war?

Prehistorians in the Flesh
Well, if researchers endlessly argue about who or what gnawed on a
ten-thousand-year-old human bone, imagine the disagreements about
actual living humans.
Keeley and Pinker, along with Samuel Bowles of the Santa Fe
Institute, conclude that warfare is nearly universal in contemporary
nonstate societies. This is the world of headhunters in New Guinea and
Borneo, Maasai and Zulu warriors in Africa, Amazonians on raiding
parties in the rain forest. Keeley estimates that, in the absence of
pacification enforced by outside forces such as a government, 90 to 95
percent of tribal societies engage in warfare, many constantly, and a
much higher percentage are at war at any time than is the case for state
societies. For Keeley the rare peaceful tribal societies are usually so
because they have been defeated and dominated by a neighboring tribe.
Keeley charges that there has been systematic underreporting of violence
by contemporary anthropologists intent on pacifying living relics of the
past.

310

Clockwise, top left: New Guinea, Masai, Amazonian, Zulu

Keeley also tries to debunk the view that tribal violence is mostly
ritualistic—an arrow in someone’s thigh, a head or two bashed with a
war club, and time to call it a day. Instead violence in nonstate cultures is
lethal. Keeley seems to take pride in this, documenting how various
cultures use weapons designed for warfare, meant to cause festering
damage. He often has an almost testy, offended tone about those
pacifying anthropologists who think indigenous groups lack the

311

organization, self-discipline, and Puritan work ethic to inflict bloodbaths.
He writes about the superiority of tribal warriors to Westernized armies,
e.g., describing how in the Anglo-Zulu War, Zulu spears were more
accurate than nineteenth-century British guns, and how the Brits won the
war not because they were superior fighters but because their logistical
sophistication allowed them to fight prolonged wars.
Like Keeley, Pinker concludes that warfare is nearly ubiquitous in
traditional cultures, reporting 10 to 30 percent of deaths as being war
related in New Guinea tribes such as the Gebusi and Mae Enga, and a 35
to 60 percent range for Waorani and Jivaro tribes in the Amazon. Pinker
estimates rates of death due to violence. Europe currently is in the range
of 1 death per 100,000 people per year. During the crime waves of the
1970s and 1980s, the United States approached 10; Detroit was around
45. Germany and Russia, during their twentieth-century wars, averaged
144 and 135, respectively. In contrast, the twenty-seven nonstate
societies surveyed by Pinker average 524 deaths. There are the Grand
Valley Dani of New Guinea, the Piegan Blackfoot of the American Great
Plains, and the Dinka of Sudan, all of whom in their prime approached
1,000 deaths, roughly equivalent to losing one acquaintance per year.
Taking the gold are the Kato, a California tribe that in the 1840s crossed
the finish line near 1,500 deaths per 100,000 people per year.
No tour of violence in indigenous cultures is complete without the
Yanomamö, a tribe living in the Brazilian and Venezuelan Amazon.
According to dogma, there is almost always raiding between villages; 30
percent of adult male deaths are due to violence; nearly 70 percent of
adults have had a close relative killed by violence; 44 percent of men
have murdered.61 Fun folks.
The Yanomamö are renowned because of Napoleon Chagnon, one of
the most famous and controversial anthropologists, a tough, pugnacious,
no-holds-barred academic brawler who first studied them in the 1960s.
He established the Yanomamös’ street cred with his 1967 monograph
Yanomamo: The Fierce People, an anthropology classic. Thanks to his
publications and his ethnographic films about Yanomamö violence, both
their fierceness and his are well-known tropes in anthropology.*
A central concept in the next chapter is that evolution is about
passing copies of your genes into the next generation. In 1988 Chagnon
published the remarkable report that Yanomamö men who were killers
had more wives and offspring than average—thus passing on more

312

copies of their genes. This suggested that if you excel at waging it, war
can do wonders for your genetic legacy.
Thus, among these nonstate tribal cultures standing in for our
prehistoric past, nearly all have histories of lethal warfare, some virtually
nonstop, and those who excel at killing are more evolutionarily
successful. Pretty grim.
And numerous anthropologists object strenuously to every aspect of
that picture:62
Again with the cherry-picking. In Pinker’s analysis of
violence among hunter-horticulturalists and other tribal
groups, all but one of his examples come from the
Amazon or the New Guinea highlands. Global surveys
yield much lower rates of warfare and violence.
Pinker had foreseen this criticism by playing the Keeley
pacification-of-the-past card, questioning those lower
rates. In particular he has leveled this charge against the
anthropologists (whom he somewhat pejoratively calls
“anthropologists of peace,” somewhat akin to “believers
in the Easter Bunny”) who have reported on the
remarkably nonviolent Semai people of Malaysia. This
produced a testy letter to Science from this group that, in
addition to saying that they are “peace anthropologists,”
not “anthropologists of peace,”* stated that they are
objective scientists who studied the Semai without
preconceived notions, rather than a gaggle of hippies
(they even felt obliged to declare that most of them are
not pacifists). Pinker’s response was “It is encouraging
that ‘anthropologists of peace’ now see their discipline
as empirical rather than ideological, a welcome change
from the days when many anthropologists signed
manifestos on which their position on violence was
‘correct,’ and censured, shut down, or spread libelous
rumors about colleagues who disagreed.” Whoof,
accusing your academic adversaries of signing
manifestos is like a sharp knee to the groin.63
Other anthropologists have studied the Yanomamö, and
no one else reports violence like Chagnon has.64
313

Moreover, his report of increased reproductive success
among more murderous Yanomamö has been
demolished by the anthropologist Douglas Fry of the
University of Alabama at Birmingham, who showed that
Chagnon’s finding is an artifact of poor data analysis:
Chagnon compared the number of descendants of older
men who had killed people in battle with those who had
not, finding significantly more kids among the former.
However: (a) Chagnon did not control for age
differences—the killers happened to be an average of
more than a decade older than the nonkillers, meaning
more than a decade more time to accumulate
descendants. (b) More important, this was the wrong
analysis to answer the question posed—the issue isn’t
the reproductive success of elderly men who had been
killers in their youth. You need to consider the
reproductive success of all killers, including the many
who were themselves killed as young warriors, distinctly
curtailing their reproductive success. Not doing so is
like concluding that war is not lethal, based solely on
studies of war veterans.
Moreover, Chagnon’s finding does not generalize—at
least three studies of other cultures fail to find a
violence/reproductive success link. For example, a study
by Luke Glowacki and Richard Wrangham of Harvard
examined a nomadic pastoralist tribe, the Nyangatom of
southern Ethiopia. Like other pastoralists in their region,
the Nyangatom regularly raid one another for cattle.65
The authors found that frequent participation in large,
open battle raiding did not predict increased lifelong
reproductive success. Instead such success was
predicted by frequent participation in “stealth raiding,”
where a small group furtively steals cows from the
enemy at night. In other words, in this culture being a
warrior on ’roids does not predict amply passing on your
genes; being a low-down sneaky varmint of a cattle
rustler does.

314

These indigenous groups are not stand-ins for our
prehistoric past. For one thing, many have obtained
weapons more lethal than those of prehistory (a damning
criticism of Chagnon is that he often traded axes,
machetes, and shotguns to Yanomamö for their
cooperation in his studies). For another, these groups
often live in degraded habitats that increase resource
competition, thanks to being increasingly hemmed in by
the outside world. And outside contact can be
catastrophic. Pinker cites research showing high rates of
violence among the Amazonian Aché and Hiwi tribes.
However, in examining the original reports, Fry found
that all of the Aché and Hiwi deaths were due to killings
by frontier ranchers intent on forcing them off their
land.66 This tells nothing about our prehistoric past.
Both sides in these debates see much at stake. Near the end of his
book, Keeley airs a pretty weird worry: “The doctrines of the pacified
past unequivocally imply that the only answer to the ‘mighty scourge of
war’ is a return to tribal conditions and the destruction of all
civilization.” In other words, unless this tomfoolery of archaeologists
pacifying the past stops, people will throw away their antibiotics and
microwaves, do some scarification rituals, and switch to loincloths—and
where will that leave us?
Critics on the other side of these debates have deeper worries. For
one thing, the false picture of, say, Amazonian tribes as ceaselessly
violent has been used to justify stealing their land. According to Stephen
Corry of Survival International, a human-rights organization that
advocates for indigenous tribal peoples, “Pinker is promoting a fictitious,
colonialist image of a backward ‘Brutal Savage’, which pushes the
debate back over a century and is still used to destroy tribes.”67

—
Amid these roiling debates, let’s keep sight of what got us to this point.
A behavior has occurred that is good, bad, or ambiguous. How have
cultural factors stretching back to the origins of humans contributed to
that behavior? And rustling cattle on a moonless night; or setting aside
tending your cassava garden to raid your Amazonian neighbors; or
315

building fortifications; or butchering every man, woman, and child in a
village is irrelevant to that question. That’s because all these study
subjects are pastoralists, agriculturalists, or horticulturalists, lifestyles
that emerged only in the last ten thousand to fourteen thousand years,
after the domestication of plants and animals. In the context of hominin
history stretching back hundreds of thousands of years, being a camel
herder or farmer is nearly as newfangled as being a lobbyist advocating
for legal rights for robots. For most of history, humans have been huntergatherers, a whole different kettle of fish.

War and Hunter-Gatherers, Past and Present
Roughly 95 to 99 percent of hominin history has been spent in small,
nomadic bands that foraged for edible plants and hunted cooperatively.
What is known about hunter-gatherer (for sanity’s sake, henceforth HG)
violence?
Given that prehistoric HGs didn’t have lots of material possessions
that have lasted tens of thousands of years, they haven’t left much of an
archaeological record. Insight into their minds and lifestyle comes from
cave paintings dating back as much as forty thousand years. Though
paintings from around the world show humans hunting, hardly any
unambiguously depict interhuman violence.
The paleontological record is even sparser. To date, there has been
discovered one site of an HG massacre, dating back ten thousand years
in northern Kenya; this will be discussed later.
What to do with this void of information? One approach is
comparative, inferring the nature of our distant ancestors by comparing
them with extant nonhuman primates. Early versions of this approach
were the writings of Konrad Lorenz and of Robert Ardrey, who argued in
his 1966 best seller The Territorial Imperative that human origins are
rooted in violent territoriality.68 The most influential modern incarnation
comes from Richard Wrangham, particularly in his 1997 book (with Dale
Peterson) Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of Human Violence. For
Wrangham chimps provide the clearest guide to the behavior of earliest
humans, and the picture is a bloody one. He essentially leapfrogs HGs
entirely: “So we come back to the Yanomamo. Do they suggest to us that
chimpanzee violence is linked to human war? Clearly they do.”
Wrangham summarizes his stance:
316

The mysterious history before history, the blank slate of
knowledge about ourselves before Jericho, has licensed our
collective imagination and authorized the creation of primitive
Edens for some, forgotten matriarchies for others. It is good to
dream, but a sober, waking rationality suggests that if we start
with ancestors like chimpanzees and end up with modern humans
building walls and fighting platforms, the 5-million-year-long
trail to our modern selves was lined, along its full stretch, by a
male aggression that structured our ancestors’ social lives and
technology and minds.
It’s Hobbes all the way down, plus Keeley-esque contempt for
pacification-of-the-past dreamers.
This view has been strongly criticized: (a) We’re neither chimps nor
their descendants; they’ve been evolving at nearly the same pace as
humans since our ancestral split. (b) Wrangham picks and chooses in his
cross-species linkages; for example, he argues that the human
evolutionary legacy of violence is rooted not only in our close
relationship to chimps but also in our nearly-as-close kinship with
gorillas, who practice competitive infanticide. The problem is that,
overall, gorillas display minimal aggression, something Wrangham
ignores in linking human violence to gorillas. (c) As the most significant
species cherry-picking, Wrangham pretty much ignores bonobos, with
their far lower levels of violence than chimps, female social dominance,
and absence of hostile territoriality. Crucially, humans share as much of
their genes with bonobos as with chimps, something unknown when
Demonic Males was published (and, notably, Wrangham has since
softened his views).
For most in the field, most insights into the behavior of our HG
ancestors come from study of contemporary HGs.
Once, the world of humans consisted of nothing but HGs; today the
remnants of that world are in the few remaining pockets of peoples who
live pure HG lives. These include the Hadza of northern Tanzania, Mbuti
“Pygmies” in the Congo, Batwa in Rwanda, Gunwinggu of the
Australian outback, Andaman Islanders in India, Batak in the
Philippines, Semang in Malaysia, and various Inuit cultures in northern
Canada.

317

To start, it was once assumed that among HGs, women do the
gathering while men supply most of the calories by hunting. In actuality,
the majority of calories come from foraging; men spend lots of time
talking about how awesome they were in the last hunt and how much
awesomer they’ll be in the next—among some Hadza, maternal
grandmothers supply more calories to families than do the Man the
Hunter men.69
The arc of human history is readily equated with an arc of progress,
and key to the latter is the view that agriculture was the best thing
humans ever invented; I’ll rant about that later. A cornerstone of the
agriculture lobby is the idea that primordial HGs were half starved. In
reality, HGs typically work fewer hours for their daily bread than do
traditional farmers and are longer-lived and healthier. In the words of
anthropologist Marshall Sahlins, HGs were the original affluent society.

318

Clockwise from top: Hadza; Mbuti, Andaman, Semang

There are some demographic themes shared among contemporary
HGs.70 Dogma used to be that HG bands had fairly stable group
membership, producing considerable in-group relatedness. More recent
work suggests less relatedness than thought, reflecting fluid
fusion/fission groupings in nomadic HGs. The Hadza show one
consequence of such fluidity, namely that particularly cooperative
hunters find one another and work together. More on this in the next
chapter.
What about our best and worst behaviors in contemporary HGs? Up
into the 1970s, the clear answer was that HGs are peaceful, cooperative,
and egalitarian. Interband fluidity serves as a safety valve preventing
individual violence (i.e., when people are at each other’s throats,

319

someone moves to another group), and nomadicism as a safety valve
preventing intergroup violence (i.e., rather than warring with the
neighboring band, just hunt in a different valley from them).
The standard-bearers for HG grooviness were the Kalahari !Kung.*71
The title of an early monograph about them—Elizabeth Marshall
Thomas’s 1959 The Harmless People—says it all.* !Kung are to the
Yanomamö as Joan Baez is to Sid Vicious and the Sex Pistols.
Naturally, this picture of the !Kung in particular and HGs in general
was ripe for revisionism. This occurred when field studies were
sufficiently long term to document HGs killing one another, as
summarized in an influential 1978 publication by Carol Ember of Yale.72
Basically, if you’re observing a band of thirty people, it will take a long
time to see that, on a per-capita basis, they have murder rates
approximating Detroit’s (the standard comparison always made).
Admitting that HGs were violent was seen as a purging of sixties
anthropological romanticism, a bracing slap in the face for
anthropologists who had jettisoned objectivity in order to dance with
wolves.
By the time of Pinker’s synthesis, HG violence was established, and
the percentage of their deaths attributed to warfare averaged around 15
percent, way more than in modern Western societies. Contemporary HG
violence constitutes a big vote for the Hobbesian view of warfare and
violence permeating all of human history.

320

Kalahari !Kung hunter-gatherers

Time for the criticisms:73
Mislabeling—some HGs cited by Pinker, Keeley, and
Bowles are, in fact, hunter-horticulturalists.

321

Many instances of supposed HG warfare, on closer
inspection, were actually singular homicides.
Some violent Great Plains HG cultures were
untraditional in the sense of using something crucial that
didn’t exist in the Pleistocene—domesticated horses
ridden into battle.
Like non-Western agriculturalists or pastoralists,
contemporary HG are not equivalent to our ancestors.
Weapons invented in the last ten thousand years have
been introduced through trade; most HG cultures have
spent millennia being displaced by agriculturalists and
pastoralists, pushed into ever tougher, resource-sparse
ecosystems.
Once again, the cherry-picking issue, i.e., failure to cite
cases of peaceful HGs.
Most crucially, there’s more than one type of HG.
Nomadic HGs are the original brand, stretching back
hundreds of thousands of years.74 But in addition to HG
2.0 equestrians, there are “complex HGs,” who are
different—violent, not particularly egalitarian, and
sedentary, typically because they’re sitting on a rich
food source that they defend from outsiders. In other
words, a transitional form from pure HGs. And many of
the cultures cited by Ember, Keeley, and Pinker are
complex HGs. This difference is relevant to Nataruk,
that northern Kenyan site of a ten-thousand-year-old
massacre—skeletons of twenty-seven unburied people,
killed by clubbing, stabbing, or stone projectiles. The
victims were sedentary HGs, living alongside a shallow
bay on Lake Turkana, prime beachfront property with
easy fishing and plentiful game animals coming to the
water to drink. Just the sort of real estate that someone
else would try to muscle in on.
The most thoughtful and insightful analyses of HG violence come
from Fry and from Christopher Boehm of the University of Southern
California. They paint a complex picture.

322

D. P. Fry and P. Söderberg, “Lethal Aggression in Mobile Forager Bands and
Implications for the Origins of War,” Sci 341 (2013): 270.
Visit bit.ly/2oeg96t for a larger version of this graph.

Fry has provided what I consider the cleanest assessment of warfare
in such cultures. In a notable 2013 Science paper, he and Finnish
anthropologist Patrik Söderberg reviewed all cases of lethal violence in
the ethnographic literature in “pure” nomadic HGs (i.e., well studied
before extensive contact with outsiders and living in a stable ecosystem).
The sample consisted of twenty-one such groups from around the world.
Fry and Söderberg observed what might be called warfare (defined by
the fairly unstringent criterion of conflict producing multiple casualties)
in only a minority of the cultures. Not exactly widespread. This is
probably the best approximation we’ll ever get about warfare in our HG
323

ancestors. Nonetheless, these pure HGs are no tie-dyed pacifists; 86
percent of the cultures experienced lethal violence. What are their
causes?
In his 2012 book Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism,
and Shame, Boehm also surveys the literature, using slightly less
stringent criteria than Fry uses, producing a list of about fifty relatively
“pure” nomadic HG cultures (heavily skewed toward Inuit groups from
the Arctic).75 As expected, violence is mostly committed by men. Most
common is killing related to women—two men fighting over a particular
woman, or attempts to kidnap a woman from a neighboring group.
Naturally, there are men killing their wives, usually over accusations of
adultery. There’s female infanticide and killing arising from accusations
of witchcraft. There are occasional killings over garden-variety stealing
of food or refusals to share food. And lots of revenge killings by relatives
of someone killed.
Both Fry and Boehm report killings akin to capital punishment for
severe norm violations. What norms do nomadic HGs value most?
Fairness, indirect reciprocity, and avoidance of despotism.
Fairness. As noted, HGs pioneered human cooperative hunting and
sharing among nonrelatives.76 This is most striking with meat. It’s
typically shared by successful hunters with unsuccessful ones (and their
families); individuals playing dominant roles in hunts don’t necessarily
get much more meat than everyone else; crucially, the most successful
hunter rarely decides how the meat is divided—instead this is typically
done by a third party. There are fascinating hints about the antiquity of
this. Big-game hunting by hominins 400,000 years ago has been
documented; bones from animals butchered then show cut marks that are
chaotic, overlapping at different angles, suggesting a free-for-all. But by
200,000 years ago the contemporary HG pattern is there—cut marks are
evenly spaced and parallel, suggesting that single individuals butchered
and dispensed the meat.
This does not mean, though, that sharing is effortless for pure HGs.
Boehm notes how, for example, the !Kung perpetually kvetch about
being shortchanged on meat. It’s the background hum of social
regulation.
Indirect reciprocity. The next chapter discusses reciprocal altruism
between pairs of individuals. Boehm emphasizes how nomadic HGs
specialize, instead, in indirect reciprocity. Person A is altruistic to B; B’s

324

social obligation now isn’t necessarily as much being altruistic to A as
paying the altruism forward to C. C pays it forward to D, etc. . . . This
stabilizing cooperation is ideal for big-game hunters, where two rules
hold: (a) your hunts are usually unsuccessful; and (b) when they are
successful, you typically have more meat than your family can consume,
so you might as well share it around. As has been said, an HG’s best
investment against future hunger is to put meat in other people’s
stomachs now.
Avoidance of despotism. As also covered in the next chapter, there’s
considerable evolutionary pressure for detecting cheating (when
someone reneges on their half of a reciprocal relationship). For nomadic
HGs, policing covert cheating is less of a concern than overt evidence of
intimidation and powermongering. HGs are constantly on guard against
bullies throwing their weight around.
HG societies expend lots of collective effort on enforcing fairness,
indirect reciprocity, and avoidance of despotism. This is accomplished
with that terrific norm-enforcement mechanism, gossip. HGs gossip
endlessly, and as studied by Polly Wiessner of the University of Utah,
it’s mostly about the usual: norm violation by high-status individuals.77
People magazine around the campfire.* Gossiping serves numerous
purposes. It helps for reality testing (“Is it just me, or was he being a
total jerk?”), passing news (“Two guesses who just happened to get a
foot cramp during the hairiest part of the hunt today”), and building
consensus (“Something needs to be done about this guy”). Gossip is the
weapon of norm enforcement.
HG cultures take similar actions—collectively subjecting miscreants
to criticism, shaming and mockery, ostracizing and shunning, refusing to
share meat, nonlethal physical punishment, expulsion from the group, or,
as a last resort, killing the person (done either by the whole group or by a
designated executioner).
Boehm documents such judicial killings in nearly half the pure HG
cultures. What transgressions merit them? Murder, attempts at grabbing
power, use of malicious sorcery, stealing, refusal to share, betrayal of the
group to outsiders, and of course breaking of sexual taboos. All typically
punished this way after other interventions have failed repeatedly.

—
325

So, Hobbes or Rousseau? Well, a mixture of the two, I say unhelpfully.
This lengthy section makes clear that you have to make some careful
distinctions: (a) HGs versus other traditional ways of making a living;
(b) nomadic HGs versus sedentary ones; (c) data sets that canvass an
entire literature versus those that concentrate on extreme examples; (d)
members of traditional societies killing one another versus members
being killed by gun-toting, land-grabbing outsiders; (e) chimps as our
cousins versus chimps erroneously viewed as our ancestors; (f) chimps
as our closest ancestors versus chimps and bonobos as our closest
ancestors; (g) warfare versus homicide, where lots of the former can
decrease the latter in the name of in-group cooperation; (h) contemporary
HGs living in stable, resource-filled habitats with minimal interactions
with the outside world versus contemporary HGs pushed into marginal
habitats and interacting with non-HGs. Once you’ve done that, I think a
pretty clear answer emerges. The HGs who peopled earth for hundreds of
thousands of years were probably no angels, being perfectly capable of
murder. However, “war”—both in the sense that haunts our modern
world and in the stripped-down sense that haunted our ancestors—seems
to have been rare until most humans abandoned the nomadic HG
lifestyle. Our history as a species has not been soaked in escalated
conflict. And ironically Keeley tacitly concludes the same—he estimates
that 90 to 95 percent of societies engage in war. And whom does he note
as the exceptions? Nomadic HGs.
Which brings us to agriculture. I won’t pull any punches—I think
that its invention was one of the all-time human blunders, up there with,
say, the New Coke debacle and the Edsel. Agriculture makes people
dependent on a few domesticated crops and animals instead of hundreds
of wild food sources, creating vulnerability to droughts and blights and
zoonotic diseases. Agriculture makes for sedentary living, leading
humans to do something that no primate with a concern for hygiene and
public health would ever do, namely living in close proximity to their
feces. Agriculture makes for surplus and thus almost inevitably the
unequal distribution of surplus, generating socioeconomic status
differences that dwarf anything that other primates cook up with their
hierarchies. And from there it’s just a hop, skip, and a jump until we’ve
got Mr. McGregor persecuting Peter Rabbit and people incessantly
singing “Oklahoma.”

326

Maybe this is a bit over the top. Nonetheless, I do think it is
reasonably clear that it wasn’t until humans began the massive
transformation of life that came from domesticating teosinte and wild
tubers, aurochs and einkorn, and of course wolves, that it became
possible to let loose the dogs of war.

327

SOME CONCLUSIONS

T

he first half of the chapter explored where we are; the second, how
we most likely got here.
“Where we are” is awash in cultural variation. From our biological
perspective, the most fascinating point is how brains shape cultures,
which shape brains, which shape . . . That’s why it’s called coevolution.
We’ve seen some evidence of coevolution in the technical sense—where
there are significant differences between different cultures in the
distribution of gene variants pertinent to behavior. But those influences
are pretty small. Instead what is most consequential is childhood, the
time when cultures inculcate individuals into further propagating their
culture. In that regard, probably the most important fact about genetics
and culture is the delayed maturation of the frontal cortex—the genetic
programming for the young frontal cortex to be freer from genes than
other brain regions, to be sculpted instead by environment, to sop up
cultural norms. To hark back to a theme from the first pages of this book,
it doesn’t take a particularly fancy brain to learn how to motorically, say,
throw a punch. But it takes a fancy, environmentally malleable frontal
cortex to learn culture-specific rules about when it’s okay to throw
punches.
In another theme from the first half, cultural differences manifest
themselves in monumentally important, expected ways—say, whom it is
okay to kill (an enemy soldier, a cheating spouse, a newborn of the
“wrong” sex, an elderly parent too old to hunt, a teenage daughter who is
absorbing the culture around her rather than the culture her parents
departed). But the manifestations can occur in unlikely places—e.g.,
where your eyes look within milliseconds of seeing a picture, or whether
thinking of a rabbit prompts you to think of other animals or of what
rabbits eat.
Another key theme is the paradoxical influence of ecology.
Ecosystems majorly shape culture—but then that culture can be exported
and persist in radically different places for millennia. Stated most
straightforwardly, most of earth’s humans have inherited their beliefs

328

about the nature of birth and death and everything in between and
thereafter from preliterate Middle Eastern pastoralists.
The second half of the chapter, just concluded, addresses the key
issue of how we got here—has it been hundreds of thousands of years of
Hobbes or of Rousseau? Your answer to that question greatly shapes
what you’ll make of something we’ll consider in the final chapter,
namely that over the last half millennium people have arguably gotten a
lot less awful to one another.

329

Ten

The Evolution of
Behavior

A

t last we reach the foundations. Genes and promoters evolve. As
do transcription factors, transposases, and splicing enzymes. As
has every trait touched by genetic influences (i.e., everything). In the
words of the geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky, “Nothing in biology
makes sense except in the light of evolution.” Including this book.1

330

EVOLUTION 101

E

volution rests on three steps: (a) certain biological traits are
inherited by genetic means; (b) mutations and gene recombination
produce variation in those traits; (c) some of those variants confer more
“fitness” than others. Given those conditions, over time the frequency of
more “fit” gene variants increases in a population.
We start by trashing some common misconceptions.
First, that evolution favors survival of the fittest. Instead evolution is
about reproduction, passing on copies of genes. An organism living
centuries but not reproducing is evolutionarily invisible.* The difference
between survival and reproduction is shown with “antagonistic
pleiotropy,” referring to traits that increase reproductive fitness early in
life yet decrease life span. For example, primates’ prostates have high
metabolic rates, enhancing sperm motility. Upside: enhanced fertility;
downside: increased risk of prostate cancer. Antagonistic pleiotropy
occurs dramatically in salmon, who epically journey to their spawning
grounds to reproduce and then die. If evolution were about survival
rather than passing on copies of genes, there’d be no antagonistic
pleiotropy.2
Another misconception is that evolution can select for preadaptations
—neutral traits that prove useful in the future. This doesn’t happen;
selection is for traits pertinent to the present. Related to this is the
misconception that living species are somehow better adapted than
extinct species. Instead, the latter were just as well adapted, until
environmental conditions changed sufficiently to do them in; the same
awaits us. Finally, there’s the misconception that evolution directionally
selects for greater complexity. Yes, if once there were only single-celled
organisms and there are multicellular ones now, average complexity has
increased. Nonetheless, evolution doesn’t necessarily select for greater
complexity—just consider bacteria decimating humans with some
plague.
The final misconception is that evolution is “just a theory.” I will
boldly assume that readers who have gotten this far believe in evolution.
Opponents inevitably bring up that irritating canard that evolution is
331

unproven, because (following an unuseful convention in the field) it is a
“theory” (like, say, germ theory). Evidence for the reality of evolution
includes:
Numerous examples where changing selective pressures
have changed gene frequencies in populations within
generations (e.g., bacteria evolving antibiotic
resistance). Moreover, there are also examples (mostly
insects, given their short generation times) of a species
in the process of splitting into two.
Voluminous fossil evidence of intermediate forms in
numerous taxonomic lineages.
Molecular evidence. We share ~98 percent of our genes
with the other apes, ~96 percent with monkeys, ~75
percent with dogs, ~20 percent with fruit flies. This
indicates that our last common ancestor with other apes
lived more recently than our last common ancestor with
monkeys, and so on.
Geographic evidence. To use Richard Dawkins’s
suggestion for dealing with a fundamentalist insisting
that all species emerged in their current forms from
Noah’s ark—how come all thirty-seven species of
lemurs that made landfall on Mt. Ararat in the Armenian
highlands hiked over to Madagascar, none dying and
leaving fossils in transit?
Unintelligent design—oddities explained only by
evolution. Why do whales and dolphins have vestigial
leg bones? Because they descend from a four-legged
terrestrial mammal. Why should we have arrector pili
muscles in our skin that produce thoroughly useless
gooseflesh? Because of our recent speciation from other
apes whose arrector pili muscles were attached to hair,
and whose hair stands up during emotional arousal.
Enough. Don’t get me started.

—
332

Evolution sculpts the traits of an organism in two broad ways. “Sexual
selection” selects for traits that attract members of the opposite sex,
“natural selection” for traits that enhance the passing on of copies of
genes through any other route—e.g., good health, foraging skills,
predator avoidance.
The two processes can work in opposition.3 For example, among
wild sheep one gene influences the size of horns in males. One variant
produces large horns, improving social dominance, a plus for sexual
selection. The other produces small horns, which are metabolically
cheaper, allowing males to live and mate (albeit at low rates) longer.
Which wins—transient but major reproductive success, or persistent but
minor success? An intermediate form.* Or consider male peacocks
paying a price, in terms of natural selection, for their garish plumage—it
costs a fortune metabolically to grow, restricts mobility, and is
conspicuous to predators. But it sure boosts fitness via sexual selection.
Importantly, neither type of selection necessarily selects for “the”
most adaptive version of a trait, which replaces all others. There can be
frequency-dependent selection, where the rarer version of two traits is
preferable, or balanced selection, where multiple versions of traits are
maintained in equilibrium.

333

BEHAVIOR CAN BE SHAPED BY
EVOLUTION

O

rganisms are amazingly well adapted. A desert rodent has kidneys
that excel at retaining water; a giraffe’s huge heart can pump blood
up to its brain; elephants’ leg bones are strong enough to support an
elephant. Well, yes—it has to work that way: desert rodents whose
kidneys weren’t great at retaining water didn’t pass on copies of their
genes. Thus there is a logic to evolution, where natural selection sculpts
traits into adaptiveness.
Importantly, natural selection works not only on anatomy and
physiology but on behavior as well—in other words, behavior evolves,
can be optimized by selection into being adaptive.
Various branches of biology focus on the evolution of behavior.
Probably best known is sociobiology, premised on social behavior being
sculpted by evolution to be optimized, just as biomechanical
optimization sculpts the size of a giraffe’s heart.4 Sociobiology emerged
in the 1970s, eventually generating the offshoot evolutionary psychology
—the study of the evolutionary optimization of psychological traits; as
we’ll see, both have been plenty controversial. As a simplifying
convenience, I’ll refer to people who study the evolution of social
behavior as “sociobiologists.”

334

THE DEMISE OF GROUP SELECTION

W

e start by grappling with an entrenched misconception about the
evolution of behavior. This is because Americans were taught
about the subject in the 1960s by Marlin Perkins on the TV program
Mutual of Omaha’s Wild Kingdom.
It was great. Perkins would host. Jim, his sidekick, did dangerous
things with snakes. And there were always seamless segues from the
program to ads from Mutual of Omaha—“Just as lions mate for hours,
you’ll want fire insurance for your home.”
Unfortunately, Perkins espoused wildly wrong evolutionary thinking.
Here’s how it looked on the program: It’s dawn on the savanna; there’s a
herd of wildebeest on a river’s edge. The grass is greener on the other
side, and everyone wants some, but the river teems with predatory
crocodiles. The wildebeest are hemming and hawing in agitation when
suddenly an elderly wildebeest pushes to the front, says, “I sacrifice
myself for you, my children,” and leaps in. And while the crocs are busy
with him, the other wildebeest cross the river.
Why would the old wildebeest do that? Marlin Perkins would answer
with patrician authority: because animals behave For the Good of the
Species.
Yes, behavior evolves by “group selection” for the good of the
species. This idea was championed in the early 1960s by V. C. WynneEdwards, whose wrongness made him modern evolutionary biology’s
Lamarck.*5
Animals don’t behave for the good of the species. But what about
that wildebeest? Look closely and you’ll see what really happens. Why
did he wind up saving the day? Because he was old and weak. “Good of
the species” my keister. They pushed the old guy in.
Group selection was done in by theoretical and empirical studies
showing patterns of behavior incompatible with it. Key work was done
by two gods of evolutionary biology, George Williams of SUNY Stony
Brook and Oxford’s Bill (“W.D.”) Hamilton.6 Consider “eusocial
insects,” where most individuals are nonreproductive workers. Why
forgo reproduction to aid the queen? Group selection, obviously.
335

Hamilton showed that eusocial insects’ unique genetic system makes a
colony of ants, bees, or termites a single superorganism; asking why
worker ants forgo reproduction is like asking why your nose cells forgo
reproduction. In other words, eusocial insects constitute a unique type of
“group.” Williams then elaborated on how the more standard genetic
system, in species from noneusocial insects to us, was incompatible with
group selection. Animals don’t behave for the good of the species. They
behave to maximize the number of copies of their genes passed into the
next generation.*
This is the cornerstone of sociobiology and was summarized in
Dawkins’s famed sound bite that evolution is about “selfish genes.” Time
to see its building blocks.

336

INDIVIDUAL SELECTION

P

assing on lots of copies of one’s genes is accomplished most
directly by maximizing reproduction. This is summarized by the
aphorism “A chicken is an egg’s way of making another egg”—behavior
is just an epiphenomenon, a means of getting copies of genes into the
next generation.
Individual selection fares better than group selection in explaining
basic behaviors. A hyena bears down on some zebras. What would the
nearest one do if she’s a group selectionist? Stand there, sacrificing
herself for the group. In contrast, an individual selectionist zebra would
run like hell. Zebras run like hell. Or consider hyenas that have just
killed a zebra. Group selection mind-set—everyone calmly takes turns
eating. Individual selection—frenzied free-for-all. Which is what occurs.
But wait, says the group selectionist, wouldn’t the zebra species
benefit if it is the fastest animals who survive and pass on those fastrunning genes? Ditto for the group benefits of the fiercest hyena getting
the most food.
As more nuances of behavior are observed, clinging to group
selection requires increasingly tortuous arguments. But one single
observation devastates group selection.
In 1977 the Harvard primatologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy documented
something remarkable—langur monkeys in the Mount Abu region of
India kill one another.7 People already knew that some male primates kill
one another, fighting for dominance—okay, makes sense, boys will be
boys. But that’s not what Hrdy reported; male langurs were killing
infants.
Once people believed her careful documentation, there was an easy
answer—since babies are cute and inhibit aggression, something
pathological must be happening.8 Maybe the Abu langur population
density was too high and everyone was starving, or male aggression was
overflowing, or infanticidal males were zombies. Something certifiably
abnormal.
Hrdy eliminated these explanations and showed a telling pattern to
the infanticide. Female langurs live in groups with a single resident
337

breeding male. Elsewhere are all-male groups that intermittently drive
out the resident male; after infighting, one male then drives out the rest.
Here’s his new domain, consisting of females with the babies of the
previous male. And crucially, the average tenure of a breeding male
(about twenty-seven months) is shorter than the average interbirth
interval. No females are ovulating, because they’re nursing infants; thus
this new stud will be booted out himself before any females wean their
kids and resume ovulating. All for nothing, none of his genes passed on.
What, logically, should he do? Kill the infants. This decreases the
reproductive success of the previous male and, thanks to the females
ceasing to nurse, they start ovulating.*
That’s the male perspective. What about the females? They’re also
into maximizing copies of genes passed on. They fight the new male,
protecting their infants. Females have also evolved the strategy of going
into “pseudoestrus”—falsely appearing to be in heat. They mate with the
male. And since males know squat about female langur biology, they fall
for it—“Hey, I mated with her this morning and now she’s got an infant;
I am one major stud.” They’ll often cease their infanticidal attacks.
Despite initial skepticism, competitive infanticide has been
documented in similar circumstances in 119 species, including lions,
hippos, and chimps.9
A variant occurs in hamsters; because males are nomadic, any infant
a male encounters is unlikely to be his, and thus he attempts to kill it
(remember that rule about never putting a pet male hamster in a cage
with babies?). Another version occurs among wild horses and gelada
baboons; a new male harasses pregnant females into miscarrying. Or
suppose you’re a pregnant mouse and a new, infanticidal male has
arrived. Once you give birth, your infants will be killed, wasting all the
energy of pregnancy. Logical response? Cut your losses with the “Bruce
effect,” where pregnant females miscarry if they smell a new male.10
Thus competitive infanticide occurs in numerous species (including
among female chimps, who sometimes kill infants of unrelated
females).11 None of this makes sense outside of gene-based individual
selection.
Individual selection is shown with heartbreaking clarity by mountain
gorillas, my favorite primate.12 They’re highly endangered, hanging on
in pockets of high-altitude rain forest on the borders of Uganda, Rwanda,
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There are only about a
338

thousand gorillas left, because of habitat degradation, disease caught
from nearby humans, poaching, and spasms of warfare rolling across
those borders. And also because mountain gorillas practice competitive
infanticide. Logical for an individual intent on maximizing the copies of
his genes in the next generation, but simultaneously pushing these
wondrous animals toward extinction. This isn’t behaving for the good of
the species.

339

KIN SELECTION

T

o understand the next foundational concept, reflect on what it
means to be related to someone and to pass on copies of “your”
genes.
Suppose you have an identical twin, with the same genome as you.
As a startling, irrefutable fact, in terms of the genes being passed on to
the next generation, it doesn’t matter if you reproduce or sacrifice
yourself so that your twin reproduces.
What about a full sibling who isn’t an identical twin? Recall from
chapter 8 that you’d share 50 percent of your genes with him.* Thus
reproducing once and dying so that he reproduces twice are
evolutionarily identical. Half sibling, 25 percent of genes in common,
calculate accordingly. . . .
The geneticist J. B. S. Haldane, who, when asked if he’d sacrifice his
life for a brother, is credited to have quipped, “I’ll gladly lay down my
life for two brothers or eight cousins.” You can leave copies of your
genes in the next generation by reproducing, but also by helping relatives
reproduce, especially closer relatives. Hamilton formalized this with an
equation factoring in the costs and benefits of helping someone,
weighted by their degree of relatedness to you. This is the essence of kin
selection.* This explains the crucial fact that in countless species, whom
you cooperate with, compete with, or mate with depends on their degree
of relatedness to you.
Mammals first encounter kin selection soon after birth, reflecting
something monumentally obvious: females rarely nurse someone else’s
infants. Next, among numerous primates the mother of a newborn and an
adolescent female may commence a relationship fraught with pluses and
minuses—the mother occasionally lets the adolescent care for her
offspring. For the mother the plus is getting time to forage without baby
on board; the minus is that the babysitter may be incompetent. For the
adolescent the plus is getting mothering experience; the minus, the effort
of child care. Lynn Fairbanks of UCLA has quantified the pluses and
minuses of such “allomothering” (including that adolescents who

340

practiced mothering have a better survival rate for their own kids). And
who is a frequent “allomother”? The female’s kid sister.13
An extension of allomothering is the cooperative breeding of New
World monkeys like marmosets. In their social groups only one female
breeds, while the others—typically younger relatives—help with child
care.14
The extent to which a male primate cares for infants reflects his
certainty of paternity.15 Among marmosets, who form stable pair-bonds,
males do most of the child care. In contrast, among baboons, where a
female mates with multiple males during her estrus cycle, it’s only the
likely fathers (i.e., males who mated on the female’s most fertile day,
when she had her most conspicuous estrus swelling) who invest in the
well-being of the child, aiding him in a fight.*
Among many primates, how often you groom someone depends on
how closely related they are to you. Among baboons, females spend their
whole life in their natal troop (whereas males migrate to a new troop at
puberty); as a result, adult females have complex cooperative kinship
relations and inherit their dominance rank from their mother. Among
chimps it’s the opposite; females leave home at puberty, and kin-based
adult cooperation occurs only among males (for example, where groups
of related males attack solitary males from neighboring groups). And
among langurs, when a female defends her infant against a new male,
she most often is helped by elderly female relatives.
Moreover, primates understand kinship. Dorothy Cheney and Robert
Seyfarth of the University of Pennsylvania, studying wild vervet
monkeys, have shown that if animal A is crummy to animal B,
afterward, B is more likely to be crummy to A’s relatives. And if A is
lousy to B, B’s relatives are more likely to be crummy to A.
Furthermore, if A is lousy to B, B’s relatives are more likely to be
crummy to A’s relatives.16
In beautiful “playback” experiments, Cheney and Seyfarth first
recorded vocalizations from each vervet in a group. They’d place a
speaker in some bushes, and when everyone was sitting around, they’d
play a recording of some kid giving a distress call. And the females
would all look at the kid’s mother—“Hey, that’s Madge’s kid. What’s she
going to do?” (Note that this also shows that monkeys recognize voices.)
In a study of wild baboons, Cheney and Seyfarth would wait for two
unrelated females to sit near the bush with the speaker and then play one
341

of three vocalizations: (a) sounds of the two females’ relatives fighting
with each other; (b) a relative of one fighting with a third party; (c) two
other random females fighting.17 If a female’s relative was involved in
the fighting, she’d look toward the speaker longer than if there were no
relatives involved. And if it was relatives of the two females fighting
each other, the higher-ranking one would remind the subordinate of her
place by supplanting her from her spot.
Another playback study created some baboon virtual reality.18
Baboon A dominates baboon B. Thanks to cutting and splicing of
recordings of vocalizations, baboon A is heard making a dominance
vocalization, B making a subordination one. When this happens, no
baboons looked at the bushes—A > B, boring status quo. But if baboon
A is heard making a subordination vocalization after B makes a
dominance one—a rank reversal—everyone orients to the bushes (“Did
you hear what I just heard?”). Then a third scenario—a dominance
reversal between two members of the same family. And no one looks,
because it’s uninteresting. (“Families, they’re crazy. You should see mine
—we have these huge dominance reversals and are hugging an hour
later.”) Baboons “classify others simultaneously according to both
individual rank and kinship.”
Thus other primates contemplate kinship with remarkable
sophistication, with kinship determining patterns of cooperation and
competition.
Nonprimates are also into kin selection. Consider this—sperm in a
female’s vaginal tract can aggregate, allowing them to swim faster.
Among a deer mouse species where females mate with multiple males,
sperm aggregate only with sperm from the same individual or a close
relative.19
As behavioral examples, squirrels and prairie dogs give alarm
vocalizations when spotting a predator. It’s risky, calling attention to the
caller, and such altruism is more common when in the proximity of
relatives. Social groups built around female relatives occur in numerous
species (e.g., lion prides, where related females nurse one another’s
cubs). Moreover, while prides typically contain a single breeding male,
on those occasions when it’s two males, better than chance that they’re
brothers. There is a striking similarity in humans. Most cultures have
historically allowed polygyny, with monogamy as the rarer beast. Even
rarer is polyandry—multiple men married to one woman. This occurs in
342

northern India, Tibet, and Nepal, where the polyandry is “adelphic” (aka
“fraternal”)—a woman marries all the brothers of one family, from the
strapping young man to his infant brother.*20

—
A challenging implication of kin selection arises.
Those hot cousins. If one accrues fitness benefits by helping relatives
pass on copies of their genes, why not help them do that by mating with
them? Yech; inbreeding produces decreased fertility and those genetic
unpleasantnesses in European royalty.*21 So the dangers of inbreeding
counter the kin-selection advantages. Theoretical models suggest that the
optimal balance is third-cousin matings. And indeed, numerous species
prefer to mate with between a first and a third cousin.22
This occurs in insects, lizards, and fish, where, on top of that, cousinmating pairs invest more in the rearing of their offspring than do
unrelated parents. A preference for cousin matings occurs in quail,
frigate birds, and zebra finches, while among pair-bonded barn swallows
and ground tits, females sneak out on their partner to mate with cousins.
Similar preferences occur in some rodents (including the Malagasy giant
jumping rat, a species that sounds disturbing even without cousins
shacking up with each other).23
And what about humans? Something similar. Women prefer the smell
of moderately related over unrelated men. And in a study of 160 years of
data concerning every couple in Iceland (which is a mecca for human
geneticists, given its genetic and socioeconomic homogeneity), the
highest reproductive success arose from third- and fourth-cousin
marriages.24

Recognizing Relatives?
These findings concerning kin selection require animals to recognize
degrees of relatedness. How do they do this?
Some species have innate recognition. For example, place a mouse in
an arena; at one end is an unrelated female, at the other, a full sister from
a different litter, never encountered before. The mouse spends more time
with the sister, suggesting genetically based kin recognition.

343

How does this work? Rodents produce pheromonal odors with
individual signatures, derived from genes called the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC). This is a super variable gene cluster
that produces unique proteins that form a signature for an individual.
This was first studied by immunologists. What does the immune system
do? It differentiates between you and invaders—“self” and “nonself”—
and attacks the latter. All your cells carry your unique MHC-derived
protein, and surveillance immune cells attack any cell lacking this
protein password. And MHC-derived proteins also wind up in
pheromones, producing a distinctive olfactory signature.
This system can indicate that this mouse is John Smith. How does it
also tell that he’s your never-before-encountered brother? The closer the
relative, the more similar their cluster of MHC genes and the more
similar their olfactory signature. Olfactory neurons in a mouse contain
receptors that respond most strongly to the mouse’s own MHC protein.
Thus, if the receptor is maximally stimulated, it means the mouse is
sniffing its armpit. If near maximally stimulated, it’s a close relative.
Moderately, a distant relative. Not at all (though the MHC protein is
being detected by other olfactory receptors), it’s a hippo’s armpit.*
Olfactory recognition of kin accounts for a fascinating phenomenon.
Recall from chapter 5 how the adult brain makes new neurons. In rats,
pregnancy triggers neurogenesis in the olfactory system. Why there? So
that olfactory recognition is in top form when it’s time to recognize your
newborn; if the neurogenesis doesn’t occur, maternal behavior is
impaired.25
Then there is kin recognition based on imprinted sensory cues. How
do I know which newborn to nurse? The one who smells like my vaginal
fluid. Which kid do I hang out near? The one who smells like Mom’s
milk. Many ungulates use such rules. So do birds. Which bird do I know
is Mom? The bird whose distinctive song I learned before hatching.
And there are species that figure out relatedness by reasoning; my
guess is that male baboons make statistical inferences when identifying
their likely offspring: “How much of this mom’s peak estrus swelling
was spent with me? All. Okay, this is my kid; act accordingly.” Which
brings us to the most cognitively strategic species, namely us. How do
we do kin recognition? In ways that are far from accurate, with
interesting consequences.

344

We start with a long theorized type of pseudo–kin recognition. What
if you operate with the rule that you cooperate with (i.e., act related to)
individuals who share conspicuous traits with you? This facilitates
passing on copies of genes if you possess a gene (or genes) with three
properties: (a) it generates that conspicuous signal; (b) recognizes it in
others; and (c) makes you cooperate with others who have that signal.
It’s a kind of primitive, stripped-down kin selection.
Hamilton speculated about the existence of such a “green-beard
effect”; if an organism has a gene that codes for both growing a green
beard and cooperating with other green bearders, green bearders will
flourish when mixed with non–green bearders.26 Thus, “the crucial
requirement for altruism is genetic relatedness at the altruism locus [i.e.,
merely a multifaceted green-beard gene] and not genealogical
relationship over the whole genome.”27
Green-beard genes exist. Among yeast, cells form cooperative
aggregates that need not be identical or even closely related. Instead, it
could be any yeast that expresses a gene coding for a cell-surface
adhesion protein that sticks to copies of the same molecule on other
cells.28
Humans show green-beard effects. Crucially, we differ as to what
counts as a green-beard trait. Define it narrowly, and we call it
parochialism. Include enmity toward those without that green-beard trait
and it’s xenophobia. Define the green-beard trait as being a member of
your species, and you’ve described a deep sense of humanity.

345

RECIPROCAL ALTRUISM

S

o sometimes a chicken is an egg’s way of making another egg,
genes can be selfish, and sometimes we gladly lay down our lives
for two brothers or eight cousins. Does everything have to be about
competition, about individuals or groups of relatives leaving more copies
of their genes than the others, being more fit, having more reproductive
success?* Is the driving force of behavioral evolution always that
someone be vanquished?
Not at all. One exception is elegant, if specialized. Remember
rock/paper/scissors? Paper envelops rock; rock breaks scissors; scissors
cut paper. Would rocks want to bash every scissors into extinction? No
way. Because then all those papers would enwrap the rocks into
extinction. Each participant has an incentive for restraint, producing an
equilibrium.
Remarkably, such equilibriums occur in living systems, as shown in a
study of the bacteria Escherichia coli.29 The authors generated three
colonies of E. coli, each with a strength and a weakness. To simplify:
Strain 1 secretes a toxin. Strength: it can kill competitor cells. Weakness:
making the toxin is energetically costly. Strain 2 is vulnerable to the
toxin, in that it has a membrane transporter that absorbs nutrients, and
the toxin slips in via that transporter. Strength: it’s good at getting food.
Weakness: vulnerability to the toxin. Strain 3 doesn’t have the
transporter and thus isn’t vulnerable to the toxin, and it doesn’t make the
toxin. Strength: it doesn’t bear the cost of making the toxin and is
insensitive to it. Weakness: it doesn’t absorb as much nutrients. Thus,
destruction of strain 2 by strain 1 causes the demise of strain 1 thanks to
strain 3. The study showed that the strains could exist in equilibrium,
each limiting its growth.
Cool. But it doesn’t quite fit our intuitions about cooperation.
Rock/paper/scissors is to cooperation as peace due to nuclear weapons–
based mutually assured destruction is to the Garden of Eden.
Which raises a third fundamental, alongside individual selection and
kin selection: reciprocal altruism. “I’ll scratch your back if you scratch

346

mine. I’d rather not actually scratch yours if I can get away with it. And
I’m watching you in case you try the same.”
Despite what you might expect from kin selection, unrelated animals
frequently cooperate. Fish swarm in a school, birds fly in formation.
Meerkats take risks by giving alarm calls that aid everyone, vampire bats
who maintain communal colonies feed one another’s babies.*30
Depending on the species, unrelated primates groom one another, mob
predators, and share meat.
Why should nonrelatives cooperate? Because many hands lighten the
load. School with other fish, and you’re less likely to be eaten
(competition for the safest spot—the center—produces what Hamilton
termed the “geometry of the selfish herd”). Birds flying in a V formation
save energy by catching the updraft of the bird in front (raising the
question of who gets stuck there).31 If chimps groom one another, there
are fewer parasites.
In a key 1971 paper biologist Robert Trivers laid out the evolutionary
logic and parameters by which unrelated organisms engage in
“reciprocal altruism”—incurring a fitness cost to enhance a nonrelative’s
fitness, with the expectation of reciprocation.32
It doesn’t require consciousness to evolve reciprocal altruism; back
to the metaphor of the airplane wing in the wind tunnel. But there are
some requirements for its occurrence. Obviously, the species must be
social. Furthermore, social interactions have to be frequent enough that
the altruist and the indebted are likely to encounter each other again. And
individuals must be able to recognize each other.
Amid reciprocal altruism occurring in numerous species, individuals
often attempt to cheat (i.e., to not reciprocate) and monitor attempts by
others to do the same to them. This raises the realpolitik world of
cheating and counterstrategies, the two coevolving in escalating arms
races. This is called a “Red Queen” scenario, for the Red Queen in
Through the Looking-Glass, who must run faster and faster to stay in
place.33
This raises two key interrelated questions:
Amid the cold calculations of evolutionary fitness, when
is it optimal to cooperate, when to cheat?
In a world of noncooperators it’s disadvantageous to be
the first altruist. How do systems of cooperation ever
347

start?*

Gigantic Question #1: What Strategy for
Cooperating Is Optimal?
While biologists were formulating these questions, other scientists
were already starting to answer them. In the 1940s “game theory” was
founded by the polymath John von Neumann, one of the fathers of
computer science. Game theory is the study of strategic decision making.
Framed slightly differently, it’s the mathematical study of when to
cooperate and when to cheat. The topic was already being explored with
respect to economics, diplomacy, and warfare. What was needed was for
game theorists and biologists to start talking. This occurred around 1980
concerning the Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD), introduced in chapter 3. Time
to see its parameters in detail.
Two members of a gang, A and B, are arrested. Prosecutors lack
evidence to convict them of a major crime but can get them on a lesser
charge, for which they’ll serve a year in prison. A and B can’t
communicate with each other. Prosecutors offer each a deal—inform on
the other and your sentence is reduced. There are four possible
outcomes:
Both A and B refuse to inform on each other: each
serves one year.
Both A and B inform on each other: each serves two
years.
A informs on B, who remains silent: A walks free and B
serves three years.
B informs on A, who remains silent: B walks and A
serves three years.
Thus, each prisoner’s dilemma is whether to be loyal to your partner
(“cooperate”) or betray him (“defect”). The thinking might go, “Best to
cooperate. This is my partner; he’ll also cooperate, and we’ll each serve
only a year. But what if I cooperate and he stabs me in the back? He
walks, and I’m in for three years. Better defect. But what if we both

348

defect—that’s two years. But maybe defect, in case he cooperates . . .”
Round and round.*
If you play PD once, there is a rational solution. If you, prisoner A,
defect, your sentence averages out to one year (zero years if B
cooperates, two years if B defects); if you cooperate, the average is two
years (one year if B cooperates, three years if B defects). Thus you
should defect. In single-round versions of PD, it’s always optimal to
defect. Not very encouraging for the state of the world.
Suppose there are two rounds of PD. The optimal strategy for the
second round is just like in a single-round version—always defect. Given
that, the first-round defaults into being like a single-round game—and
thus, defect during it also.
What about a three-round game? Defect in the third, meaning that
things default into a two-round game. In which case, defect in the
second, meaning defect in the first.
It’s always optimal to defect in round Z, the final round. And thus it’s
always optimal to defect in round Z−1, and thus round Z−2. . . . In other
words, when two individuals play for a known number of rounds, the
optimal strategy precludes cooperation.
But what if the number of rounds is unknown (an “iterated” PD)?
Things get interesting. Which is when the game theorists and biologists
met.
The catalyst was political scientist Robert Axelrod of the University
of Michigan. He explained to his colleagues how PD works and asked
them what strategy they’d use in a game with an unknown number of
rounds. The strategies offered varied enormously, with some being hairraisingly complicated. Axelrod then programmed the various strategies
and pitted them against each other in a simulated massive round-robin
tournament. Which strategy won, was most optimal?
It was provided by a mathematician at the University of Toronto,
Anatol Rapoport; as the mythic path-of-the-hero story goes, it was the
simplest strategy. Cooperate in the first round. After that, you do
whatever the other player did in the previous round. It was called Tit for
Tat. More details:
You cooperate (C) in the first round, and if the other player always
cooperates (C), you both happily cooperate into the sunset:
Example 1:
349

You: C C C C C C C C C C. . . .
Her: C C C C C C C C C C. . . .
Suppose the other player starts cooperating but then, tempted by
Satan, defects (D) in round 10. You cooperated, and thus you take a hit:
Example 2:
You: C C C C C C C C C C
Her: C C C C C C C C C D
Thus, you Tit for Tat her, punishing her in the next round:
Example 3:
You: C C C C C C C C C C D
Her: C C C C C C C C C D ?
If by then she’s resumed cooperating, you do as well; peace returns:
Example 4:
You: C C C C C C C C C C D C C C. . . .
Her: C C C C C C C C C D C C C C. . . .
If she continues defecting, you do as well:
Example 5:
You: C C C C C C C C C C D D D D D. . . .
Her: C C C C C C C C C D D D D D D. . . .
Suppose you play against someone who always defects. Things look
like this:
Example 6:
You: C D D D D D D D D D. . . .
Her: D D D D D D D D D D. . . .

350

This is the Tit for Tat strategy. Note that it can never win. Best case is
a draw, if playing against another person using Tit for Tat or someone
using an “always cooperate” strategy. Otherwise it loses by a small
margin. Every other strategy would always beat Tit for Tat by a small
margin. However, other strategies playing against each other can produce
catastrophic losses. And when everything is summed, Tit for Tat wins. It
lost nearly every battle but won the war. Or rather, the peace. In other
words, Tit for Tat drives other strategies to extinction.
Tit for Tat has four things going for it: Its proclivity is to cooperate
(i.e., that’s its starting state). But it isn’t a sucker and punishes defectors.
It’s forgiving—if the defector resumes cooperating, so will Tit for Tat.
And the strategy is simple.
Axelrod’s tournament launched a zillion papers about Tit for Tat in
PD and related games (more later). Then something crucial occurred—
Axelrod and Hamilton hooked up. Biologists studying the evolution of
behavior longed to be as quantitative as those studying the evolution of
kidneys in desert rats. And here was this world of social scientists
studying this very topic, even if they didn’t know it. PD provided a
framework for thinking about the strategic evolution of cooperation and
competition, as Axelrod and Hamilton explored in a 1981 paper (famous
enough that it’s a buzz phrase—e.g., “How’d your lecture go today?”
“Terrible, way behind schedule; I didn’t even get to Axelrod and
Hamilton”).34
As the evolutionary biologists started hanging with the political
scientists, they inserted real-world possibilities into game scenarios. One
addressed a flaw in Tit for Tat.
Let’s introduce signal errors—a message is misunderstood, someone
forgets to tell someone something, or there’s a hiccup of noise in the
system. Like in the real world.
There has been a signal error in round 5, with two individuals using a
Tit for Tat strategy. This is what everyone means:
Example 7:
You: C C C C C
Her: C C C C C
But thanks to a signal error, this is what you think happened:

351

Example 8:
You: C C C C C
Her: C C C C D
You think, “What a creep, defecting like that.” You defect in the next
round. Thus, what you think has happened:
Example 9:
You: C C C C C D
Her: C C C C D C
What she thinks is happening, being unaware of the signal error:
Example 10:
You: C C C C C D
Her: C C C C C C
She thinks, “What a creep, defecting like that.” Thus she defects the
next round. “Oh, so you want more? I’ll give you more,” you think, and
defect. “Oh, so you want more? I’ll give you more,” she thinks:
Example 11:
You: C C C C C D C D C D C D C D C D. . . .
Her: C C C C D C D C D C D C D C D C. . . .
When signal errors are possible, a pair of Tit for Tat players are
vulnerable to being locked forever in this seesawing of defection.*
The discovery of this vulnerability prompted evolutionary biologists
Martin Nowak of Harvard, Karl Sigmund of the University of Vienna,
and Robert Boyd of UCLA to provide two solutions.35 “Contrite Tit for
Tat” retaliates only if the other side has defected twice in a row.
“Forgiving Tit for Tat” automatically forgives one third of defections.
Both avoid doomsday signal-error scenarios but are vulnerable to
exploitation.*
A solution to this vulnerability is to shift the frequency of
forgiveness in accordance with the likelihood of signal error (“Sorry I’m

352

late again; the train was delayed” being assessed as more plausible and
forgivable than “Sorry I’m late again; a meteorite hit my driveway
again”).
Another solution to Tit for Tat’s signal-error vulnerability is to use a
shifting strategy. At the beginning, in an ocean of heterogeneous
strategies, many heavily biased toward defection, start with Tit for Tat.
Once they’ve become extinct, switch to Forgiving Tit for Tat, which
outcompetes Tit for Tat when signal errors occur. What is this transition
from hard-assed, punitive Tit for Tat to incorporating forgiveness?
Establishing trust.
Other elaborations simulate living systems. The computer scientist
John Holland of the University of Michigan introduced “genetic
algorithms”—strategies that mutate over time.
Another real-world elaboration was to factor in the “cost” of certain
strategies—for example, with Tit for Tat, the costs of monitoring for and
then punishing cheating—costly alarm systems, police salaries, and jail
construction. These are superfluous in a world of no signal errors and
nothing but Tit for Tat–ers, and Tit for Tat can be replaced by the cheaper
Always Cooperate.
Thus, when there are signal errors, differing costs to different
strategies, and the existence of mutations, a cycle emerges: a
heterogeneous population of strategies, including exploitative,
noncooperative ones, are replaced by Tit for Tat, then replaced by
Forgiving Tit for Tat, then by Always Cooperate—until a mutation
reintroduces an exploitative strategy that spreads like wildfire, a wolf
among Always Cooperate sheep, starting the cycle all over again. . . .*36
More and more modifications made the models closer to the real world.
Soon the computerized game strategies were having sex with each other,
which must have been the most exciting thing ever for the
mathematicians involved.
The evolutionary biologists were delighted to generate increasingly
sophisticated models with the theoretical economists and theoretical
diplomats and theoretical war strategists. The real question was whether
animal behavior actually fits any of these models.
One bizarre animal system suggests Tit for Tat enforcement of
cooperation involving the black hamlet fish, which form stable pairbonds.37 Nothing strange there. The fish can change sex (something that
occurs in some fish species). As per usual, reproduction is more

353

metabolically costly for the female than the male. So the fish in a pair
take turns being the more expensive female. Say fish A and fish B have
been doing their sex-change tango, and most recently A was the
expensive female and B the cheap male. Suppose B cheats by staying
male, forcing A to continue as female; A switches to male and stays that
way until B regains his social conscience and becomes female.
Another widely cited study suggested a Tit for Tat strategy among
stickleback fish.38 The fish is in a tank, and on the other side of a glass
partition is something scary—a bigger cichlid fish. The stickleback
tentatively darts forward and back, investigating. Now put a mirror in its
tank, perpendicular to the axis of the two fish. In other words, thanks to
the mirror, there appears to be a second cichlid next to the first.
Terrifying, except from out of nowhere there’s this mysterious second
stickleback who checks out the second cichlid every time our hero
checks out the first—“I have no idea who this guy is, but we’re an
amazing, coordinated team.”
Now convince the stickleback his partner is defecting. Angle the
mirror so that the stickleback’s reflection is deflected backward. Now
when the fish darts forward, his reflection does as well, but—that jerk!—
it looks like he’s hanging back safely (lagging back even half a body
length decreases the likelihood of a fish being predated). When the fish
believes his partner is defecting, he stops darting forward.
Greater complexity in Tit for Tat–ing is suggested by some animals
having multiple roles in their social groups.39 Back to the playback
technique with lions, where the roar of a strange male emanated from a
speaker in the bushes (or from a life-sized model of a lion). Lions
tentatively came forward to investigate, a risky proposition. Consistently,
certain lions hung back. The toleration of these habitual scaredy-cats
seemed to violate the demands of reciprocity, until it was recognized that
such animals took the lead in other domains (e.g., in hunts). A similar
punch line emerges concerning the Damaraland mole rat. The social
groups of it and its relative, the naked mole rat, resemble those of social
insects, with nonreproductive workers and a single breeding queen.*
Researchers noted some workers who never worked and were
considerably fatter than the rest. It turns out that they have two
specialized jobs—during the rains, they dig through flooded, collapsed
tunnels of the burrows, and when necessary, they disperse with the risky
task of starting a new colony.

354

I’m not convinced that a Tit for Tat reciprocity has been clearly
demonstrated in other species. But evidence of its strict use would be
hard for Martian zoologists to document in humans—after all, there are
frequently pairs where one human does all the labor, the other doing
nothing other than intermittently handing him some green pieces of
paper. The point is that animals have systems of reciprocity with
sensitivity to cheating.

Gigantic Question #2: How Can Cooperation Ever
Start?
So a handful of Tit for Tat–ers can outcompete a mix of other
strategies, including highly exploitative, uncooperative ones, losing the
battles but winning the war. But what if there’s only one Tit for Tat–er in
a population of ninety-nine Always Defect–ers? Tit for Tat doesn’t stand
a chance. Always Defect–ers playing each other produces the secondworst outcome for each. But a Tit for Tat–er playing an Always Defect–
er does worse, getting the sucker payoff that first round before becoming
a de facto Always Defect–er. This raises the second great challenge for
reciprocal altruism: forget which strategy is best at fostering cooperation
—how do you ever start any type? Amid a sea of Always Defect–ers, the
first black hamlet fish, mole rat, or Dictyostelium amoeba who, after
reading Gandhi, Mandela, Axelrod, and Hamilton, takes the first
altruistic step is screwed, lagging behind everyone else forever. One can
practically hear the Always Defect amoebas chortling derisively.
Let’s make it slightly easier for Tit for Tat to gain a foothold.
Consider two Tit for Tat–ers amid ninety-eight Always Defect–ers. Both
will crash and burn . . . unless they find each other and form a stable
cooperative core, where the Always Defect–ers either must switch to Tit
for Tat or go extinct. A nidus of cooperation crystallizes outward through
the population.
This is where green-beard effects help, conspicuous features of
cooperators that help them recognize one another. Another mechanism is
spatial, where the cooperative trait itself facilitates cooperators finding
one another.
Another route has been suggested for jump-starting reciprocal
altruism. Occasionally a geographic event occurs (say, a land bridge

355

disappears), isolating a subset of a population for generations. What
happens in such a “founder population”? Inbreeding, fostering
cooperation via kin selection. Eventually the land bridge reappears, the
inbred cooperative founder population rejoins the main group, and
cooperation propagates outward.*
We return to the issue of starting cooperation in the final chapter.

356

STANDING ON THREE LEGS

W

e’ve now seen the three foundations of thinking about the
evolution of behavior—individual selection, kin selection, and
reciprocal altruism. Moreover, we’ve seen how these three concepts can
explain otherwise puzzling behaviors. Some concern individual
selection, with competitive infanticide as the canonical example. Other
behaviors are most explicable with kin selection—why there’s male-male
aggression between groups in only some primate species; why many
species have hereditary ranking systems; why cousin matings are more
frequent than one might expect. And some behaviors are all about
reciprocal altruism. Why else would a vampire bat, aware of the
vanquishing power of group selection, regurgitate blood for someone
else’s kid?
Let’s consider a few more examples.

Pair-Bonding Versus Tournament Species
Suppose you’ve discovered two new species of primates. Despite
watching both for years, here’s all you know: In species A, male and
females have similar body sizes, coloration, and musculature; in species
B, males are far bigger and more muscular than females and have flashy,
conspicuous facial coloration (jargon: species B is highly “sexually
dimorphic”). We’ll now see how these two facts allow you to accurately
predict a ton of things about these species.

357

Male-female pairs of tamarins (top) and mandrills (bottom)

First off, which species has dramatic, aggressive conflict among
males for high dominance rank? Species B, where males have been
selected evolutionarily for fighting skills and display. Species A males,
in contrast, are minimally aggressive—that’s why males haven’t been
selected for muscle.

358

What about variability in male reproductive success? In one species 5
percent of the males do nearly all the mating; in the other, all males
reproduce a few times. The former describes species B—that’s what all
the rank competition is about—the latter, species A.
Next, in one species, if a male mates with a female and she
conceives, he’ll do a ton of child care. In contrast, no such male
“parental investment” is seen in the other species. No-brainer: the former
describes species A; the few species B males who father most of the kids
sure aren’t doing child care.
One species has a tendency to twin, the other not. Easy—the
twinning is in species A, with two sets of parental hands available.
How picky are males about whom they mate with? In species B,
males mate with anyone, anywhere, anytime—it only costs the price of
some sperm. In contrast, males of species A, with its rule of “You get her
pregnant, you do child care,” are more selective. Related to that, which
species forms stable pair-bonds? Species A, of course.
After correcting for body size, which species’ males have bigger
testes and higher sperm count? It’s species B, ever prepared for mating,
should the opportunity arise.
What do females look for in a potential mate? Species B females get
nothing from a male except genes, so they should be good ones. This
helps explain the flamboyant secondary sexual characteristics of males
—“If I can afford to waste all this energy on muscle plus these ridiculous
neon antlers, I must be in great shape, with the sorts of genes you’d want
in your kids.” In contrast, species A females look for stable, affiliative
behavior and good parenting skills in males. This is seen in bird species
with this pattern, where males display parenting expertise during
courtship—symbolically feeding the female with worms, proof that he’d
be a competent worm winner. Related to that, among bird versions of
species A and B, in which is a female more likely to abandon her
offspring, passing on more copies of her genes by breeding with another
male? Species A, where you see “cuckoldry”—because the male is going
to stick there, caring for the kids.
Related to that, in species A, females compete aggressively to pairbond with a particularly desirable (i.e., paternal) male. In contrast,
species B females don’t need to compete, since all they get from males is
sperm, and there’s enough to go around from desirable males.

359

Remarkably, what we’ve described here is a broad and reliable
dichotomy between two social systems, where A is a “pair-bonding”
species, B a “tournament” species.*
PairBonded

Tournament

Male parental behavior

Extensive

Minimal

Male mating pickiness

High

Low

Variability in male reproductive success

Low

High

Small/low

Large/high

Levels of male-male aggression

Low

High

Degree of sexual dimorphism in body weight, physiology,
coloration, and life span

Low

High

Females select for

Parenting
skill

Good genes

Rates of cuckoldry

High

Low

Testes size, sperm count

Primates that pair-bond include South American monkeys like
marmosets, tamarins, and owl monkeys, and among the apes, gibbons
(with nonprimate examples including swans, jackals, beavers, and, of
course, chapter 4’s prairie voles). Classic tournament species include
baboons, mandrills, rhesus monkeys, vervets, and chimps (with
nonprimate examples including gazelles, lions, sheep, peacocks, and
elephant seals). Not all species fit perfectly into either extreme (stay
tuned). Nonetheless, the point is the internal logic with which the traits
of each of these types of species cluster, based on these evolutionary
principles.

Parent-Offspring Conflict
Another feature of behavior turns kin selection on its head. The
emphasis until now has been on the fact that relatives share many genes
and evolutionary goals. Nonetheless, except for identical twins, just as
pertinent is relatives not sharing all their genes or goals. Which can
cause conflict.
There’s parent-offspring conflict. One classic example is whether a
female should give her child great nutrition, guaranteeing his survival,

360

but at the cost of nutrition for her other children (either current or future).
This is weaning conflict.40
This causes endless primate tantrums.41 Some female baboon looks
frazzled and cranky. Three steps behind is her toddler, making the most
pitiful whimpering and whining sounds imaginable. Every few minutes
the kid tries to nurse; Mom irritably pushes him away, even slaps him.
More wailing. It’s parent-offspring weaning conflict; as long as Mom
nurses, she’s unlikely to ovulate, curtailing her future reproductive
potential. Baboon moms evolved to wean their kids at the age where they
can feed themselves, and baboon kids evolved to try to delay that day.
Interestingly, as females age, with decreasing likelihood of a future child,
they become less forceful in weaning.*
There’s also mother-fetus conflict. You’re a fetus with an
evolutionary agenda. What do you want? Maximal nutrition from Mom,
and who cares if that impacts her future reproductive potential?
Meanwhile, Mom wants to balance current and future reproductive
prospects. Remarkably, fetus and Mom have a metabolic struggle
involving insulin, the pancreatic hormone secreted when blood glucose
levels rise, which triggers glucose entry into target cells. The fetus
releases a hormone that makes Mom’s cells unresponsive to insulin (i.e.,
“insulin resistant”), as well as an enzyme that degrades Mom’s insulin.
Thus Mom absorbs less glucose from her bloodstream, leaving more for
the fetus.*

Intersexual Genetic Conflict
In some species the fetus has an ally during maternal/fetal conflict—
the father. Consider a species where males are migratory, mating with
females and then moving on, never to be seen again. What’s a male’s
opinion about maternal/fetal conflict? Make sure the fetus, i.e., his child,
grabs as much nutrition as possible, even if that lessens Mom’s future
reproductive potential—who cares, that won’t be his kid down the line.
He’s more than just rooting for his fetus.
This helps explain a mysterious, quirky feature of genetics. Normally
a gene works the same way, regardless of which parent it comes from.
But certain rare genes are “imprinted,” working differently, or only being
activated, depending on the parent of origin. Their purpose was

361

discovered in a creative synthesis by evolutionary biologist David Haig
of Harvard. Paternal imprinted genes bias toward more fetal growth,
while maternal imprinted genes counter this. For example, some paternal
genes code for potent versions of growth factors, while the maternal
genes code for growth factor receptors that are relatively unresponsive.
A paternally derived gene expressed in the brain makes newborns more
avid nursers; the maternally derived version counters this. It’s an arms
race, with Dad genetically egging on his offspring toward more growth
at the cost of the female’s future reproductive plans, and Mom
genetically countering this with a more balanced reproductive strategy.*
Tournament species, where males have minimal investment in a
female’s future reproductive success, have numerous imprinted genes,
while pair-bonders don’t.42 What about humans? Stay tuned.

362

MULTILEVEL SELECTION

S

o we’ve got individual selection, kin selection, and reciprocal
altruism. And then what happened in recent years? Group selection
reappeared, sneaking in the back door.
“Neo–group selection” crashed a long-standing debate as to the “unit
of selection.”

Genotype Versus Phenotype, and the Most
Meaningful Level of Selection
To appreciate this, let’s contrast genotype and phenotype. Genotype =
someone’s genetic makeup. Phenotype = the traits observable to the
outside world produced by that genotype.*
Suppose there’s a gene that influences whether your eyebrows come
in two separate halves or form a continuous unibrow. You’ve noted that
unibrow prevalence is decreasing in a population. Which is the more
important level for understanding why—the gene variant or the eyebrow
phenotype? We know after chapter 8 that genotype and phenotype are
not synonymous, because of gene/environment interactions. Maybe some
prenatal environmental effect silences one version of the gene but not the
other. Maybe a subset of the population belongs to a religion where you
must cover your eyebrows when around the opposite sex, and thus
eyebrow phenotype is untouched by sexual selection.
You’re a grad student researching unibrow decline, and you must
choose whether to study things at the genotypic or phenotypic level.
Genotypic: sequencing eyebrow gene variants, trying to understand their
regulation. Phenotypic: examining, say, eyebrow appearance and mate
choice, or whether unibrows absorb more heat from sunlight, thereby
damaging the frontal cortex, producing inappropriate social behavior and
decreased reproductive success.
This was the debate—is evolution best understood by focusing on
genotype or phenotype?

363

The most visible proponent of
the gene-centered view has long
been Dawkins, with his iconic
“selfish gene” meme—it is the gene
that is passed to the next
generation, the thing whose variants
spread or decline over time.
Moreover, a gene is a clear and
distinctive sequence of letters,
reductive and irrefutable, while
phenotypic traits are much fuzzier
and less distinct.
This is the core of the concept
of “a chicken is just an egg’s way of making another egg”—the organism
is just a vehicle for the genome to be replicated in the next generation,
and behavior is just this wispy epiphenomenon that facilitates the
replication.
This gene-centered view can be divided in two. One is that the
genome (i.e., the collection of all the genes, regulatory elements, and so
on) is the best level to think about things. The more radical view, held by
Dawkins, is that the most appropriate level is that of individual genes—
i.e., selfish genes, rather than selfish genomes.
Amid some evidence for single-gene selection (an obscure
phenomenon called intragenomic conflict, which we won’t go into),
most people who vote for the importance of gene(s) over phenotype view
single-gene selfishness as a bit of a sideshow and vote for the genome
level of selection being most important.
Meanwhile, there’s the view that phenotype trumps genotype,
something championed by Ernst Mayr, Stephen Jay Gould, and others.
The core of their argument is that it’s phenotypes rather than genotypes
that are selected for. As Gould wrote, “No matter how much power
Dawkins wishes to assign to genes, there is one thing he cannot give
them—direct visibility to natural selection.” In that view, genes and the
frequencies of their variants are merely the record of what arose from
phenotypic selection.43
Dawkins introduced a great metaphor: a cake recipe is a genotype,
and how the cake tastes is the phenotype.* Genotype chauvinists
emphasize that the recipe is what is passed on, the sequence of words

364

that make for a stable replicator. But people select for taste, not recipe,
say the phenotypists, and taste reflects more than just the recipe—after
all, there are recipe/environment interactions where bakers differ in their
skill levels, cakes bake differently at various altitudes, etc. The recipeversus-taste question can be framed practically: Your cake company isn’t
selling enough cakes. Do you change the recipe or the baker?
Can’t we all get along? There’s the obvious bleeding-heart answer,
namely that there’s room for a range of views and mechanisms in our
rainbow-colored tent of evolutionary diversity. Different circumstances
bring different levels of selection to the forefront. Sometimes the most
informative level is the single gene, sometimes the genome, sometimes a
single phenotypic trait, sometimes the collection of all the organism’s
phenotypic traits.44 We’ve just arrived at the reasonable idea of
multilevel selection.

The Resurrection of Group Selection
Hooray, progress. Sometimes it makes the most sense to pay
attention to the recipe, sometimes to the baking process; the recipe is
what is replicated, the taste what is chosen.
But there’s another level. Sometimes cake sales can be changed most
consequentially by altering something other than recipe or taste—
advertisements, packaging, or the perception of whether the cake is a
staple or a luxury. Sometimes sales are changed by tying the product to a
particular audience—think of products that advertise fair-trade practices,
the Nation of Islam’s Your Black Muslim Bakery, or the Christian
fundamentalist ideology of Chick-fil-A restaurants. And in those cases
recipe and taste can both be trumped by ideology in purchasing
decisions.
This is where neo–group selection fits into multilevel selection—the
idea that some heritable traits may be maladaptive for the individual but
adaptive for a group. This has cooperation and prosociality written all
over it, straight out of the analysis of Tit for Tat–ers finding one another
in a sea of Always Defect–ers. Stated more formally, it’s when A
dominates B but a group of Bs dominates a group of As.
Here’s a great example of neo–group selectionism: As a poultry
farmer, you want your groups of chickens to lay as many eggs as
possible. Take the most prolific egg layer in each group, forming them
365

into a group of superstar chickens who, presumably, will be hugely
productive. Instead, egg production is miniscule.45
Why was each superstar the egg queen in her original group?
Because she would aggressively peck subordinates enough to stress them
into reduced fertility. Put all these mean ones together, and a group of
subordinated chickens will outproduce them.
This is a world away from “animals behave for the good of the
species.” Instead, this is the circumstance of a genetically influenced trait
that, while adaptive on an individual level, emerges as maladaptive when
shared by a group and where there is competition between groups (e.g.,
for an ecological niche).
There’s been considerable resistance to neo–group selectionism. Part
of it is visceral, often pronounced among the old guard—“Great, we’ve
finally confiscated all the Wild Kingdom videos, and now we’re back to
playing Whac-A-Mole with group selection sentimentality?” But the
more fundamental resistance is from people who distinguish bad old
group selection from neo–group selection, accept that the latter can
occur, but think it’s very rare.
Maybe so, across the animal kingdom. But neo–group selection plays
out with great frequency and consequence in humans. Groups compete
for hunting grounds, pastures, water sources. Cultures magnify the
intensity of between-group selection and lessen within-group selection
with ethnocentrism, religious intolerance, race-based politics, and so on.
The economist Samuel Bowles, of the Santa Fe Institute, emphasizes
how intergroup conflict like war is the driving force for intragroup
cooperation (“parochial altruism”); he refers to intergroup conflict as
“altruism’s midwife.”46
Most in the field now both accept multilevel selection and see room
for instances of neo–group selection, especially in humans. Much of this
reemergence is the work of two scientists. The first is David Sloan
Wilson of the State University of New York at Binghamton, who spent
decades pushing for neo–group selection (although he sees it not really
as “neo” but rather as old-style group selection finally getting some
scientific rigor), generally being dismissed, and arguing his case with
research of his own, studies ranging from fish sociality to the evolution
of religion. He slowly convinced some people, most importantly the
second scientist, Edward O. Wilson of Harvard (no relation). E. O.
Wilson is arguably the most important naturalist of the last half of the

366

twentieth century, an architect of the sociobiology synthesis along with a
number of other fields, a biology god. E. O. Wilson had long dismissed
David Sloan Wilson’s ideas. And then a few years back, the octogenarian
E. O. Wilson did something extraordinary—he decided he was wrong.
And then he published a key paper with the other Wilson—“Rethinking
the Theoretical Foundation of Sociobiology.” My respect for these two,
both as people and as scientists, is enormous.47
Thus something resembling détente has occurred among the
advocates for the importance of differing levels of selection. Our threelegged chair of individual selection, kin selection, and reciprocal
altruism seems more stable with four legs.

367

AND US

W

here do humans fit into all this? Our behavior closely matches
the predictions of these evolutionary models. Until you look
more closely.48
Let’s start by clearing up some misconceptions. First, we are not
descended from chimps. Or from any extant animal. We and chimps
share a common ancestor from roughly five million years ago (and
genomics show that chimps have been as busy evolving since then as we
have).49
And there are misconceptions as to which ape is our “closest
relative.” In my experience, someone who is fond of duck hunting and
country music usually votes chimp, but if you eat organic food and know
about oxytocin, it’s bonobo. The reality is that we’re equally related to
both, sharing roughly 98 to 99 percent of our DNA with each. Svante
Pääbo of the Max Planck Institutes in Germany has shown that 1.6
percent of the human genome is more related to bonobos than to chimps;
1.7 percent more to chimps than to bonobos.*50 Despite the combination
of some of our most fervent wishes and excuses, we’re neither bonobos
nor chimps.
On to how the conceptual building blocks of behavioral evolution
apply to humans.

Promiscuous Tournament or Monogamous PairBonded?
I can’t resist starting with an irresistible question—so, are we a pairbonded or tournament species?51
Western civilization doesn’t give a clear answer. We praise stable,
devoted relationships yet are titillated, tempted, and succumb to
alternatives at a high rate. Once divorces are legalized, a large percentage
of marriages end in them, yet a smaller percentage of married people get
divorced—i.e., the high divorce rate arises from serial divorcers.

368

Anthropology doesn’t help either. Most cultures have allowed
polygyny. But within such cultures most people are (socially)
monogamous. But most of those men would presumably be polygamous
if they could buy more wives.
What about human sexual dimorphism? Men are roughly 10 percent
taller and 20 percent heavier than women, need 20 percent more calories,
and have life spans 6 percent shorter—more dimorphic than
monogamous species, less than polygamous ones. Likewise with subtle
secondary sexual characteristics like canine length, where men average
slightly longer canines than women. Moreover, compared with, say,
monogamous gibbons, human males have proportionately bigger testes
and higher sperm counts . . . but pale in comparison with polygamous
chimps. And back to imprinted genes, reflecting intersexual genetic
competition, which are numerous in tournament species and nonexistent
in pair-bonders. What about humans? Some such genes, but not many.
Measure after measure, it’s the same. We aren’t classically
monogamous or polygamous. As everyone from poets to divorce
attorneys can attest, we are by nature profoundly confused—mildly
polygynous, floating somewhere in between.*

Individual Selection
At first pass we seem like a great example of a species where the
driving force on behavior is maximizing reproductive success, where a
person can be an egg’s way of making another egg, where selfish genes
triumph. Just consider the traditional perk of powerful men: being
polygamous. Pharaoh Ramses II, incongruously now associated with a
brand of condoms, had 160 children and probably couldn’t tell any of
them from Moses. Within half a century of his death in 1953, Ibn Saud,
the founder of the Saudi dynasty, had more than three thousand
descendants. Genetic studies suggest that around sixteen million people
today are descended from Genghis Khan. And in recent decades more
than one hundred children each were fathered by King Sobhuza II of
Swaziland, Ibn Saud’s son King Saud, the dictator Jean-Bédel Bokassa
of the Central African Republic, plus various fundamentalist Mormon
leaders.52
The human male drive to maximize reproductive success is shown by
a key fact—the most common cause of individual human violence is
369

male-male competition for direct or indirect reproductive access to
females. And then there is the dizzyingly common male violence against
females for coercive sex or as a response to rejection.
So plenty of human behaviors would make sense to a baboon or
elephant seal. But that’s only half the story. Despite Ramses, Ibn Saud,
and Bokassa, numerous people forgo reproducing, often because of
theology or ideology. And an entire sect—the United Society of
Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing, aka the Shakers, will soon be
extinct because of its adherents’ celibacy. And finally, the supposed
selfishness of human genes driving individual selection must
accommodate individuals sacrificing themselves for strangers.
Earlier in the chapter I presented competitive infanticide as stark
evidence of the importance of individual selection. Does anything like
that occur in humans? The psychologists Martin Daly and (the late)
Margo Wilson of McMaster University in Canada looked at patterns of
child abuse and made a striking observation—a child is far more likely to
be abused or killed by a stepparent than by a parent. This is readily
framed as parallel to competitive infanticide.53
This finding, termed the “Cinderella effect,” while embraced by
human sociobiologists, has also been robustly criticized. Some charge
that socioeconomic status was not sufficiently controlled for (homes with
a stepparent, rather than two biological parents, generally have less
income and more economic stress, known causes of displacement
aggression). Others think there’s a detection bias—the same degree of
abuse is more likely to be identified by authorities when it’s committed
by a stepparent. And the finding has been independently replicated in
some but not all studies. I think the jury is still out on the subject.

Kin Selection
Where do humans fit in terms of kin selection? We’ve already seen
examples that fit well—e.g., the fraternal polyandry in Tibet, the
weirdness of women liking the smell of their male cousins, the
universality of nepotism.
Moreover, humans are obsessed with kin relations in culture after
culture, with elaborate systems of kinship terms (just go into a store and
look at the Hallmark cards organized by kinship category—for a sister, a
brother, an uncle, and so on). And in contrast to other primates who
370

leave their natal group around adolescence, when humans in traditional
society marry someone from another group and go live with them, they
maintain contact with their family of origin.54
Moreover, from New Guinea highlanders to the Hatfields and
McCoys, feuds and vendettas occur along clan lines of relatedness. We
typically bequeath our money and land among our descendants rather
than among strangers. From ancient Egypt to North Korea and on to the
Kennedys and Bushes, we have dynastic rule. How’s this for a display of
human kin selection: Subjects were given a scenario of a bus hurtling
toward a human and a nondescript dog, and they could only save one.
Whom would they pick? It depended on degree of relatedness, as one
progressed from sibling (1 percent chose the dog over the sibling) to
grandparent (2 percent) to distant cousin (16 percent) to foreigner (26
percent).55
As another measure of the importance of kinship in human
interactions, people can’t be compelled to testify in court against a firstdegree relative in many countries and American states. And when
humans have damage to the (emotional) vmPFC, they become so
unemotionally utilitarian that they would choose to harm family
members in order to save strangers.56
There’s a fascinating historical example of how wrong it feels when
someone chooses strangers over kin. This is the story of Pavlik Morozov,
a boy in Stalin’s Soviet Union.57 Young Pavlik, according to the official
story, was a model citizen, an ardent flag-waving patriot. In 1932 he
chose the state over his kin, denouncing his father (for supposed black
marketeering), who was promptly arrested and executed. Soon afterward
the boy was killed, allegedly by relatives who felt more strongly about
kin selection than he did.
The regime’s propagandists embraced the story. Statues of the young
martyr to the revolution were erected. Poems and songs were written;
schools were named for him. An opera was composed, a hagiographic
movie made.
As the story emerged, Stalin was told about the boy. And what was
the response of the man most benefiting from such fealty to the state?
Was it “If only all my citizens were that righteous; this lad gives me hope
for our future”? No. According to historian Vejas Liulevicius of the
University of Tennessee, when told about Pavlik, Stalin snorted

371

derisively and said, “What a little pig, to have done such a thing to his
own family.” And then he turned the propagandists loose.
Thus even Stalin was of the same opinion as most mammals:
something’s wrong with that kid. Human social interactions are
profoundly organized around kin selection; with the rare exception of a
Pavlik Morozov, blood is thicker than water.
Naturally, until you look more closely.
For starters, yes, across cultures we are obsessed with kinship terms,
but the terms often don’t overlap with actual biological relatedness.
We certainly have clan vendettas, but we also have wars where
combatants on opposing sides have higher degrees of relatedness than do
fighters on the same side. Brothers fought on opposing sides in the Battle
of Gettysburg.58
Relatives and their armies battle over royal succession; the cousins
George V of England, Nicholas II of Russia, and Wilhelm II of Germany
happily oversaw and sponsored World War I. And intrafamily individual
violence occurs (although at extremely low rates when corrected for
amount of time spent together). There’s patricide, often an act of revenge
for a long history of abuse, and fratricide. Rarely due to conflicts over
issues of economic or reproductive importance—stolen birthrights of
biblical proportion, someone sleeping with their sibling’s spouse—
fratricide is most often about long-standing irritants and disagreements
that just happen to boil over into lethality (in early May 2016, for
example, a Florida man was charged with second-degree murder in the
killing of his brother—during a dispute over a cheeseburger). And then
there is the hideous commonness of honor killings in parts of the world,
as we’ve seen.59
The most puzzling cases of intrafamily violence, in terms of kin
selection, are of parents killing children, a phenomenon most commonly
arising from combined homicide/suicide, profound mental illness, or
abuse that unintentionally proves fatal.*60 And then there are cases
where a mother kills an unwanted child who is viewed as a hindrance—
parent/offspring conflict flecked with the spittle of madness.61
While we bequeath money to our descendants, we also give
charitably to strangers on the other side of the planet (thank you, Bill and
Melinda Gates) and adopt orphans from other continents. (Sure, as we’ll
see in a later chapter, being charitable is tinged with self-interest, and
most people who adopt kids do so because they cannot have biological
372

offspring—but the occurrence of either act violates strict kin selection.)
And in the primogeniture system of land inheritance, birth order trumps
degree of relatedness.
Thus we have textbook examples of kin selection, but also dramatic
exceptions.
Why do humans have such marked deviations from kin selection? I
think this often reflects how humans go about recognizing relatives. We
don’t do it with certainty, by innate recognition of MHC-derived
pheromones, the way rodents do (despite our being able to distinguish
degrees of relatedness to some extent by smell). Nor do we do it by
imprinting on sensory cues, deciding, “This person is my mother because
I remember that her voice was the loudest when I was a fetus.”
Instead we do kin recognition cognitively, by thinking about it. But
crucially, not always rationally—as a general rule, we treat people like
relatives when they feel like relatives.
One fascinating example is the Westermarck effect, demonstrated by
marriage patterns among people raised in the Israeli kibbutz system.62
Communal child rearing is central to the ethos of the traditional socialist
agricultural kibbutz approach. Children know who their parents are and
interact with them a few hours a day. But otherwise they live, learn, play,
eat, and sleep with the cohort of kids their age in communal quarters
staffed by nurses and teachers.
In the 1970s anthropologist Joseph Shepher examined records of all
the marriages that had ever occurred between people from the same
kibbutz. And out of the nearly three thousand occurrences, there was no
instance of two individuals marrying who had been in the same age
group during their first six years of life. Oh, people from the same peer
group typically had loving, close, lifelong relationships. But no sexual
attraction. “I love him/her to pieces, but am I attracted? Yech—he/she
feels like my sibling.” Who feels like a relative (and thus not like a
potential mate)? Someone with whom you took a lot of baths when you
both were kids.
How’s this for irrationality? Back to people deciding whether to save
the person or the dog. The decision depended not only on who the person
was (sibling, cousin, stranger) but also on who the dog was—a strange
dog or your own. Remarkably, 46 percent of women would save their
dog over a foreign tourist. What would any rational baboon, pika, or lion
conclude? That those women believe they are more related to a

373

neotenized wolf than to another human. Why else act that way? “I’ll
gladly lay down my life for eight cousins or my awesome labradoodle,
Sadie.”

—
Human irrationality in distinguishing kin from nonkin takes us to the
heart of our best and worst behaviors. This is because of something
crucial—we can be manipulated into feeling more or less related to
someone than we actually are. When it is the former, wonderful things
happen—we adopt, donate, advocate for, empathize with. We look at
someone very different from us and see similarities. It is called
pseudokinship. And the converse? One of the tools of the propagandist
and ideologue drumming up hatred of the out-group—blacks, Jews,
Muslims, Tutsis, Armenians, Roma—is to characterize them as animals,
vermin, cockroaches, pathogens. So different that they hardly count as
human. It’s called pseudospeciation, and as will be seen in chapter 15, it
underpins many of our worst moments.

Reciprocal Altruism and Neo–Group Selectionism
There’s not much to say here other than that this is the most
interesting stuff in the chapter. When Axelrod got his round-robin
tournament all fired up, he didn’t canvass, say, fish for their Prisoner’s
Dilemma strategies. He asked humans.
We’re the species with unprecedented cooperation among unrelated
individuals, even total strangers; Dictyostelium colonies are green with
envy at the human ability to do a wave in a football stadium. We work
collectively as hunter-gatherers or as IT execs. Likewise when we go to
war or help disaster victims a world away. We work as teams to hijack
planes and fly them into buildings, or to award a Nobel Peace Prize.
Rules, laws, treaties, penalties, social conscience, an inner voice,
morals, ethics, divine retribution, kindergarten songs about sharing—all
driven by the third leg of the evolution of behavior, namely that it is
evolutionarily advantageous for nonrelatives to cooperate. Sometimes.
One manifestation of this strong human tendency has been
appreciated recently by anthropologists. The standard view of huntergatherers was that their cooperative, egalitarian nature reflected high
degrees of relatedness within groups—i.e., kin selection. The man-the374

hunter version of hunter-gatherers viewed this as arising from
patrilocality (i.e., where a woman, when marrying, moves to live with
the group of her new husband), while the groovy-hunter-gatherers
version tied it to matrilocality (i.e., the opposite). However, a study of
more than five thousand people from thirty-two hunter-gatherer societies
from around the world* showed that only around 40 percent of people
within bands are blood relatives.63 In other words, hunter-gatherer
cooperativeness, the social building block of 99 percent of hominin
history, rests at least as much on reciprocal altruism among nonrelatives
as on kin selection (with chapter 9’s caveat that this assumes that
contemporary hunter-gatherers are good stand-ins for ancestral ones).
So humans excel at cooperation among nonrelatives. We’ve already
considered circumstances that favor reciprocal altruism; this will be
returned to in the final chapter. Moreover, it’s not just groups of nice
chickens outcompeting groups of mean ones that has revivified group
selectionism. It is at the core of cooperation and competition among
human groups and cultures.
Thus humans deviate from the strict predictions concerning the
evolution of behavior. And this is pertinent when considering three major
criticisms of sociobiology.

375

THE USUAL: WHERE ARE THE GENES?
pointed out earlier a requirement for neo–group selection, namely that
Igenes
be involved in a trait that differs more between than within groups.
This applies to everything in this chapter. The first requirement for a trait
to evolve is that it be heritable. But this is often forgotten along the way,
as evolutionary models tacitly assume genetic influences. Chapter 8
showed how tenuous is the idea that there is “the gene,” or even genes,
“for” aggression, intelligence, empathy, and so on. Given that, even more
tenuous would be the idea of a gene(s) for maximizing your reproductive
success by, say, “mating indiscriminately with every available female,”
or by “abandoning your kids and finding a new mate, because the father
will raise them.”
So critics will often demand, “Show me the gene that you assume is
there.” And sociobiologists will respond, “Show me a more
parsimonious explanation than this assumption.”

376

THE NEXT CHALLENGE: IS
EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE
CONTINUOUS AND GRADUAL?

T

he term “evolution” carries context-dependent baggage. If you’re in
the Bible Belt, evolution is leftist besmirching of God, morality,
and human exceptionalism. But to extreme leftists, “evolution” is a
reactionary term, the slow change that impedes real change—“All reform
undermines revolution.” This next challenge addresses whether evolution
is actually more about rapid revolution than about slow reform.
A basic sociobiological premise is that evolutionary change is
gradual, incremental. As a selective pressure gradually changes, a useful
gene variant grows more common in a population’s gene pool. As
enough changes accrue, the population may even constitute a new
species (“phyletic gradualism”). Over millions of years, dinosaurs
gradually turn into chickens, organisms emerge that qualify as mammals
as glandular secretions slowly evolve into milk, thumbs increasingly
oppose in proto-primates. Evolution is gradual, continuous.
In 1972 Stephen Jay Gould and paleontologist Niles Eldredge of the
American Museum of Natural History proposed an idea that simmered
and then caught fire in the 1980s. They argued that evolution isn’t
gradual; instead, most of the time nothing happens, and evolution occurs
in intermittent rapid, dramatic lurches.64

Punctuated Equilibrium
Their idea, which they called punctuated equilibrium, was anchored
in paleontology. Fossil records, we all know, show gradualism—human
ancestors show progressively larger skulls, more upright posture, and so
on. And if two fossils in chronological progression differ a lot, a jump in
the gradualism, there must be an intermediate form that is the “missing
link” from a time between those two fossils. With enough fossils in a
lineage, things will look gradualist.

377

Eldredge and Gould focused on there being plenty of fossil records
that were complete chronologically (for example, trilobites and snails,
Eldredge’s and Gould’s specialties, respectively) and didn’t show
gradualism. Instead there were long periods of stasis, of unchanged
fossils, and then, in a paleontological blink of an eye, there’d be a rapid
transition to a very different form. Maybe evolution is mostly like this,
they argued. What triggers punctuated events of sudden change? A
sudden, massive selective factor that kills most of a species, the only
survivors being ones with some obscure genetic trait that turned out to be
vital—an “evolutionary bottleneck.”
Why does punctuated equilibrium challenge sociobiological
thinking? Sociobiological gradualism implies that every smidgen of
difference in fitness counts, that every slight advantage of one individual
over another at leaving copies of genes in future generations translates
into evolutionary change. At every juncture, optimizing competition,
cooperation, aggression, parental investment, all of it, is evolutionarily
consequential. And if instead there is mostly evolutionary stasis, much of
this chapter becomes mostly irrelevant.*
The sociobiologists were not amused. They called the punctuated
equilibrium people “jerks” (while the punctuated equilibrium people
called them “creeps”—get it? PE = evolution in a series of jerks;
sociobiology = evolution as a gradual, creeping process).* Gradualist
sociobiologists responded with strong rebuttals, taking a number of
forms:
They’re just snail shells. First, there are some very complete fossil
lineages that are gradualist. And don’t forget, said the gradualists, these
punctuated equilibrium guys are talking about trilobite and snail fossils.
The fossil record we’re most interested in—primates, hominins—is too
spotty to tell if it is gradualist or punctuated.
How fast do their eyes blink? Next, said the gradualists, remember,
these punctuated equilibrium fans are paleontologists. They see long
periods of stasis and then extremely rapid blink-of-the-eye changes in the
fossil record. But with fossils the blink of an eye, a stretch of time
unresolvably short in the fossil record, could be 50,000 to 100,000 years.
That’s plenty of time for evolution bloody in tooth and claw to happen.
This is only a partial refutation, since if a paleontological blink of the eye
is so long, paleontological stasis is humongously long.

378

They’re missing the important stuff. A key rebuttal is to remind
everyone that paleontologists study things that are fossilized. Bones,
shells, bugs in amber. Not organs—brains, pituitaries, ovaries. Not cells
—neurons, endocrine cells, eggs, sperm. Not molecules—
neurotransmitters, hormones, enzymes. In other words, none of the
interesting stuff. Those punctuated equilibrium nudniks spend their
careers measuring zillions of snail shells and, based on that, say we’re
wrong about the evolution of behavior?
This opens the way for some compromise. Maybe the hominin pelvis
did indeed evolve in a punctuated manner, with long periods of stasis and
bursts of rapid change. And maybe the pituitary’s evolution was
punctuated as well, but with punctuations at different times. And maybe
steroid hormone receptors and the organization of frontocortical neurons
and the inventions of oxytocin and vasopressin all evolved that way also,
but each undergoing punctuated change at a different time. Overlap and
average these punctuated patterns, and it will be gradualist. This only
gets you so far, though, since it assumes the occurrence of numerous
evolutionary bottlenecks.
Where’s the molecular biology? One of the strongest gradualist
retorts was a molecular one. Micromutation, consisting of point,
insertion, and deletion mutations that subtly change the function of
preexisting proteins, is all about gradualism. But what mechanisms of
molecular evolution explain rapid, dramatic change and long periods of
stasis?
As we saw in chapter 8, recent decades have provided many possible
molecular mechanisms for rapid change. This is the world of
macromutations: (a) traditional point, insertion, and deletion mutations in
genes whose proteins have amplifying network effects (transcription
factors, splicing enzymes, transposes) in an exon expressed in multiple
proteins in genes for enzymes involved in epigenetics; (b) traditional
mutations in promoters, transforming the when/where/how-much of gene
expression (remember that promoter change that makes polygamous
voles monogamous); (c) untraditional mutations such as the duplication
or deletion of entire genes. All means for big, rapid changes.
But what about a molecular mechanism for the stasis? Plunk a
random mutation into a transcription-factor gene, thereby creating a new
cluster of genes never before expressed simultaneously. What are the
odds that it won’t be a disaster? Randomly mutate a gene for an enzyme

379

that mediates epigenetic changes, thereby producing randomly different
patterns of gene silencing. Right, that’s bound to work out swell.
Parachute a transposable genetic element into the middle of some gene,
change a splicing enzyme so that it mixes and matches different exons in
multiple proteins. Both asking for major trouble. Implicit in this is stasis,
a conservatism about evolutionary change—it takes very unique macro
changes during times of very unique challenge to luck out.
Show us some actual rapid change. A final rebuttal from gradualists
was to demand real-time evidence of rapid evolutionary change in
species. And plenty exist. One example was wonderful research by the
Russian geneticist Dmitry Belyaev, who in the 1950s domesticated
Siberian silver foxes.65 He bred captive ones for their willingness to be
in proximity to humans, and within thirty-five generations he’d
generated tame foxes who’d cuddle in your arms. Pretty punctuated, I’d
say. The problem here is that this is artificial rather than natural
selection.

Interestingly, the opposite has occurred in Moscow, which has a
population of thirty thousand feral dogs dating back to the nineteenth
century (and where some contemporary dogs have famously mastered
riding the Moscow subway system).66 Most Moscow dogs are now
descendants of generations of feral dogs, and over that time they have
380

evolved to have a unique pack structure, avoid humans, and no longer
wag their tails. In other words, they’re evolving into something wolflike.
Most likely, the first generations of these feral populations were subject
to fierce selection for these traits, and it’s their descendants who
comprise the current population.*67

Feral Moscow dogs

Rapid change in the human gene pool has occurred as well with the
spread of lactase persistence—a change in the gene for the enzyme
lactase, which digests lactose, such that it persists into adulthood,
allowing adults to consume dairy.68 The new variant is common in

381

populations that subsist on dairy—pastoralists like Mongolian nomads or
East African Maasai—and is virtually nonexistent in populations that
don’t use dairy after weaning—Chinese and Southeast Asians. Lactase
persistence evolved and spread in a fraction of a geologic blink of an eye
—in the last ten thousand years or so, coevolving with domestication of
dairy animals.
Other genes have spread in humans even faster. For example, a
variant of a gene called ASPM, which is involved in cell division during
brain development, has emerged and spread to about 20 percent of
humans in the last 5,800 years.69 And genes that confer resistance to
malaria (at the cost of other diseases, such as sickle-cell disease or the
thalassemias) are even younger.
Still, thousands of years counts as fast only for snail shell obsessives.
However, evolution has been observed in real time. A classic example is
the work of the Princeton evolutionary biologists Peter and Rosemary
Grant, who, over the course of decades of work in the Galapagos,
demonstrated substantial evolutionary change in Darwin’s finches.
Evolutionary change in humans has occurred in genes related to
metabolism, when populations transition from traditional to Westernized
diets (e.g., Pacific Islanders from Nauru, Native Americans of the Pima
tribe in Arizona). The first generations with Westernized diets develop
catastrophically high rates of obesity, hypertension, adult-onset diabetes,
and death at early ages, thanks to “thrifty” genotypes that are great at
storing nutrients, honed by millennia of sparser diets. But within a few
generations diabetes rates begin to subside, as there is an increased
prevalence in the population of “sloppier” metabolic genotypes.70
Thus, there are examples of rapid changes in gene frequencies in real
time. Are there examples of gradualism? That’s hard to show because
gradual change is, er, gradual. A great example, however, comes from
decades of work by Richard Lenski of Michigan State University. He has
cultured E. coli bacteria colonies under constant conditions for 58,000
generations, roughly equivalent to a million years of human evolution.
Over that time, different colonies have gradually evolved in distinctive
ways, becoming more adapted.71
Thus, both gradualism and punctuated change occur in evolution,
probably depending upon the genes involved—for example, there has
been faster evolution of genes expressed in some brain regions than
others. And no matter how rapid the changes, there’s always some
382

degree of gradualism—no female has ever given birth to a member of a
new species.72

383

A FINAL CHALLENGE LACED WITH
POLITICS: IS EVERYTHING ADAPTIVE?

A

s we’ve seen, variants of genes that make organisms more adapted
to their environment increase in frequency over time. But what
about the reverse—if a trait is prevalent in a population, must it mean
that it evolved in the past because it was adaptive?73
“Adaptationism” assumes this is typically the case; an adaptationist
approach is to determine whether a trait is indeed adaptive and, if so,
what the selective forces were that brought it about. Much of
sociobiological thinking is adaptationist in flavor.
This was subject to scathing criticism by the likes of Stephen Jay
Gould and Harvard geneticist Richard Lewontin, who mocked the
approach as “just so” stories, after Kipling’s absurdist fantasies about
how certain traits came to be: how the elephant got its trunk (because of
a tug-of-war with a crocodile), how the zebra got its stripes, how the
giraffe got a long neck. So why not, supposedly ask the sociobiologists
in this critique, how the baboon male got big cojones while the gorilla
male got little ones? Observe a behavior, generate a just-so story that
assumes adaptation, and the person with the best just-so story wins. How
the evolutionary biologist got his tenure. In their view, sociobiological
standards lack rigor. As one critic, Andrew Brown, stated, “The problem
was that sociobiology explained too much and predicted too little.”74
According to Gould, traits often evolve for one reason and are later
co-opted for another use (fancy term: “exaptation”); for example,
feathers predate the evolution of bird flight and originally evolved for
insulation.75 Only later did their aerodynamic uses become relevant.
Similarly, the duplication of a gene for a steroid hormone receptor (as
mentioned many chapters ago) allowed one copy to randomly drift in its
DNA sequence, producing an “orphan” receptor with no use—until a
novel steroid hormone was synthesized that happened to bind to it. This
haphazard, jury-rigged quality evokes the aphorism “Evolution is a
tinkerer, not an inventor.” It works with whatever’s available as selective
pressures change, producing a result that may not be the most adaptive

384

but is good enough, given the starting materials. Squid are not great
swimmers compared with sailfish (maximum speed: sixty-eight miles per
hour). But they’re damn good for something whose great-greatgrandparents were mollusks.
Meanwhile, ran the criticism, some traits exist not because they’re
adaptive, or were adapted for something else but got co-opted, but
because they’re baggage carried along with other traits that were selected
for. It was here that Gould and Lewontin famously introduced
“spandrels” in their 1979 paper “The Spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme.” A
spandrel is an architectural term for the space between two arches, and
Gould and Lewontin considered the artwork on the spandrels of the
Basilica San Marco in Venice.*
Gould and Lewontin’s
stereotypical adaptationist would
look at these spandrels and
conclude that they were built to
provide spaces for the artwork. In
other words, that these spandrels
evolved for their adaptive value in
providing space for art. In reality
they didn’t evolve for a purpose—if
you’re going to have a series of
arches (which most definitely exist
for the adaptive purpose of holding
up a dome), a space between each
pair is an inevitable by-product. No
adaptation. And as long as these
spaces were carried along as
evolutionary baggage as a result of
selection for the adaptive arches,
might as well paint on them. In that
view, male nipples are spandrels—they serve an adaptive role in females
and came along for the ride as baggage in males because there’s been no
particular selection against males having them.* Gould and Lewontin
argued that numerous traits that prompted just-so stories from
adaptationists are merely spandrels.

385

Sociobiologists responded to spandrelism by noting that the rigor in
pronouncing something a spandrel was not intrinsically greater than that
in pronouncing it adaptive.76 In other words, the former provide just-notso stories. Psychologist David Barash and psychiatrist Judith Lipton
compared spandrelites to the character Topsy in Uncle Tom’s Cabin, who
states that she “just growed”—when faced with evidence of adaptation in
traits, they’d conclude that those traits are mere baggage, without
adaptive purpose, providing explanations that explained nothing—“just
growed stories.”
Furthermore, sociobiologists argued, adaptationist approaches were
more rigorous than Gouldian caricature; rather than explaining
everything and predicting nothing, sociobiological approaches predict
plenty. Is, say, competitive infanticide a just-so story? Not when you can
predict with some accuracy whether it will occur in a species based on its
social structure. Nor is the pair-bond/tournament comparison, when you
can predict a vast amount of information about the behavior, physiology,
and genetics of species ranging across the animal kingdom simply by
knowing their degree of sexual dimorphism. Furthermore, evolution
leaves an echo of selection for adaptive traits when there is evidence of
“special design”—complex, beneficial functions where a number of
traits converge on the same function.

—
All this would be your basic, fun academic squabble, except that
underlying the criticisms of adaptationism, gradualism, and sociobiology
is a political issue. This is embedded in the title of the spandrel paper:
the “Panglossian paradigm.” This refers to Voltaire’s Dr. Pangloss and
his absurd belief, despite life’s miseries, that this is the “best of all
possible worlds.” In this criticism, adaptationism stinks of the
naturalistic fallacy, the view that if nature has produced something, it
must be a good thing. That furthermore, “good” in the sense of, say,
solving the selective problem of water retention in deserts, is in some
indefinable way also morally “good.” That if ant species make slaves, if
male orangutans frequently rape females, and if for hundreds of
thousands of years hominin males drink milk directly out of the
container, it is because it is somehow “meant” to be that way.
When aired as a criticism in this context, the naturalistic fallacy had
an edge to it. In its early years human sociobiology was wildly

386

controversial, with conferences picketed and talks disrupted, with
zoologists guarded by police at lectures, all sorts of outlandish things. On
one storied occasion, E. O. Wilson was physically attacked while giving
a talk.* Anthropology departments split in two, collegial relationships
were destroyed. This was particularly so at Harvard, where many of the
principals could be found—Wilson, Gould, Lewontin, Trivers, Hrdy, the
primatologist Irven DeVore, the geneticist Jonathan Beckwith.
Things were so febrile because sociobiology was accused of using
biology to justify the status quo—conservative social Darwinism that
implied that if societies are filled with violence, unequal distribution of
resources, capitalistic stratification, male dominance, xenophobia, and so
on, these things are in our nature and probably evolved for good reasons.
The critics used the “is versus ought” contrast, saying, “Sociobiologists
imply that when an unfair feature of life is the case, it is because it ought
to be.” And the sociobiologists responded by flipping is/ought around:
“We agree that life ought to be fair, but nonetheless, this is reality.
Saying that we advocate something just because we report it is like
saying oncologists advocate cancer.”
The conflict had a personal tinge. This was because by chance (or
not, depending on your viewpoint), that first generation of American
sociobiologists were all white Southerners—Wilson, Trivers,* DeVore,
Hrdy; in contrast, the first generation of its loudest critics were all
Northeastern, urban, Jewish leftists—Harvard’s Gould, Lewontin,
Beckwith, Ruth Hubbard, Princeton’s Leon Kamin, and MIT’s Noam
Chomsky. You can see how the “there’s a hidden agenda here” charge
arose from both sides.*
It’s easy to see how punctuated equilibrium generated similar
ideological battles, given its premise that evolution is mostly about long
periods of stasis pierced by revolutionary upheaval. In their original
publication, Gould and Eldredge asserted that the law of nature “holds
that a new quality emerges in a leap as the slow accumulation of
quantitative changes, long resisted by a stable system, finally forces it
rapidly from one state into another.” This was a bold assertion that the
heuristic of dialectical materialism not only extends beyond the
economic world into the naturalistic one, but is ontologically rooted in
the essential sameness of both worlds’ dynamic of resolution of
irresolvable contradictions.* It is Marx and Engels as trilobite and snail.*

387

—
Eventually the paroxysms about adaptationism versus spandrels,
gradualism versus punctuated change, and the very notion of a science of
human sociobiology subsided. The political posturing lost steam, the
demographic contrasts between the two camps softened, the general
quality of research improved considerably, and everybody got some gray
hair and a bit more calm.
This has paved the way for a sensible, middle-of-the-road middle age
for the field. There’s clear empirical evidence for both gradualism and
punctuated change, and for molecular mechanisms underlying both.
There’s less adaptation than extreme adaptationists claim, but fewer
spandrels than touted by spandrelites. While sociobiology may explain
too much and predict too little, it does predict many broad features of
behavior and social systems across species. Moreover, even though the
notion of selection happening at the level of groups has been resurrected
from the graves of self-sacrificial elderly wildebeest, it is probably a rare
occurrence; nonetheless, it is most likely to occur in the species that is
the focus of this book. Finally, all of this is anchored in evolution being a
fact, albeit a wildly complex one.

—
Remarkably, we’ve finished this first part of the book. A behavior has
occurred; what happened in everything from a second to a million years
earlier that helps explain why it happened? Some themes have come up
repeatedly:
The context and meaning of a behavior are usually more
interesting and complex than the mechanics of the
behavior.
To understand things, you must incorporate neurons and
hormones and early development and genes, etc., etc.
These aren’t separate categories—there are few clear-cut
causal agents, so don’t count on there being the brain
region, the neurotransmitter, the gene, the cultural
influence, or the single anything that explains a
behavior.

388

Instead of causes, biology is repeatedly about
propensities, potentials, vulnerabilities, predispositions,
proclivities, interactions, modulations, contingencies,
if/then clauses, context dependencies, exacerbation or
diminution of preexisting tendencies. Circles and loops
and spirals and Möbius strips.
No one said this was easy. But the subject matters.

—
And thus we transition to the second part, synthesizing this material in
order to look at realms of behavior where this matters the most.

389

Eleven

Us Versus Them

A

s a kid, I saw the original 1968 version of Planet of the Apes. As
a future primatologist, I was mesmerized, saw it repeatedly, and
loved the cheesy ape costumes.
Years later I discovered a great anecdote about the filming of the
movie, related by both Charlton Heston and Kim Hunter, its stars: at
lunchtime, the people playing chimps and those playing gorillas ate in
separate groups.1
As it’s been said (most often attributed to Robert Benchley), “There
are two kinds of people in the world: those who divide the world into
two kinds of people and those who don’t.” There are more of the first.
And it is vastly consequential when people are divided into Us and
Them, in-group and out-group, “the people” (i.e., our kind) and the
Others.
This chapter explores our tendency to form Us/Them dichotomies
and to favor the former. Is this mind-set universal? How malleable are
“Us” and “Them” categories? Is there hope that human clannishness and
xenophobia can be vanquished so that Hollywood-extra chimps and
gorillas break bread together?

390

THE STRENGTH OF US/THEM

O

ur brains form Us/Them
dichotomies (henceforth,
“Us/Them-ing,” for brevity) with
stunning speed.2 As discussed in
chapter 3, fifty-millisecond
exposure to the face of someone of
another race activates the
amygdala, while failing to activate
the fusiform face area as much as
same-race faces do—all within a
few hundred milliseconds.
Similarly, the brain groups faces by
gender or social status at roughly
the same speed.
Rapid, automatic biases against a Them can be demonstrated with the
fiendishly clever Implicit Association Test (IAT).3
Suppose you are unconsciously prejudiced against trolls. To simplify
the IAT enormously: A computer screen flashes either pictures of
humans or trolls or words with positive connotations (e.g., “honest”) or
negative ones (“deceitful”). Sometimes the rule is “If you see a human or
a positive term, press the red button; if it’s a troll or a negative term,
press the blue button.” And sometimes it’s “Human or negative term,
press red; troll or positive term, press blue.” Because of your antitroll
bias, pairing a troll with a positive term, or a human with a negative, is
discordant and slightly distracting. Thus you pause for a few
milliseconds before pressing a button.
It’s automatic—you’re not fuming about clannish troll business
practices or troll brutality in the Battle of Somewhere in 1523. You’re
processing words and pictures, and unconsciously you pause, stopped by
the dissonance linking troll and “lovely,” or human and “malodorous.”
Run enough rounds and that pattern of delay emerges, revealing your
bias.

391

The brain’s fault lines dividing Us from Them were shown in chapter
4’s discussion of oxytocin. Recall how the hormone prompts trust,
generosity, and cooperation toward Us but crappier behavior toward
Them—more preemptive aggression in economic play, more advocacy
of sacrificing Them (but not Us) for the greater good. Oxytocin
exaggerates Us/Them-ing.
This is hugely interesting. If you like broccoli but spurn cauliflower,
no hormone amplifies both preferences. Ditto for liking chess and
disdaining backgammon. Oxytocin’s opposing effects on Us and Them
demonstrate the salience of such dichotomizing.
Our depth of Us/Them-ing is supported further by something
remarkable—other species do it as well. Initially this doesn’t seem
profound. After all, chimps kill males from other groups, baboon troops
bristle when encountering each other, animals of all stripes tense at
strangers.
This simply reflects not taking kindly to someone new, a Them. But
some other species have a broader concept of Us and Them.4 For
example, chimp groups that have swollen in number might divide;
murderous animosities soon emerge between ex-groupmates.
Remarkably, you can show automatic Us/Them-ing in other primates
with a monkey equivalent of the IAT. In one study animals were shown
pictures of either members of their own or the neighboring group,
interspersed with positive things (e.g., fruit) or negative (e.g., spiders).
And monkeys looked longer at discordant pairings (e.g., group members
with spiders). These monkeys don’t just fight neighbors over resources.
They have negative associations with them—“Those guys are like yucky
spiders, but us, us, we’re like luscious tropical fruit.”*
Numerous experiments confirm that the brain differentially processes
images within milliseconds based on minimal cues about race or gender.5
Similarly, consider “minimal group” paradigms, pioneered in the 1970s
by Henri Tajfel of the University of Bristol. He showed that even if
groupings are based on flimsy differences (e.g., whether someone overor underestimated the number of dots in a picture), in-group biases, such
as higher levels of cooperation, still soon develop. Such prosociality is
about group identification—people preferentially allocate resources to
anonymous in-group individuals.
Merely grouping people activates parochial biases, no matter how
tenuous the basis of the grouping. In general, minimal group paradigms

392

enhance our opinion of Us rather than lessening our opinion of Them. I
guess that’s meager good news—at least we resist thinking that people
who came up heads on the coin toss (in contrast to our admirable tails)
eat their dead.
The power of minimal, arbitrary groupings to elicit Us/Them-ing
recalls “green-beard effects” from chapter 10. Recall how these hover
between prosociality due to kin selection and due to reciprocal altruism
—they require an arbitrary, conspicuous, genetically based trait (e.g., a
green beard) that indicates a tendency to act altruistically toward other
green-bearders—under those conditions, green-bearders flourish.
Us/Them-ing based on minimal shared traits is like psychological
rather than genetic green-beard effects. We feel positive associations
with people who share the most meaningless traits with us.
As a great example, in one study subjects conversed with a
researcher who, unbeknownst to them, did or didn’t mimic their
movements (for example, leg crossing).6 Not only is mimicry pleasing,
activating mesolimbic dopamine, but it also made subjects more likely to
help the researcher, picking up their dropped pen. An unconscious Usness born from someone slouching in a chair like you do.
Thus an invisible strategy becomes yoked to an arbitrary green-beard
marker. What helps define a particular culture? Values, beliefs,
attributions, ideologies. All invisible, until they are yoked with arbitrary
markers such as dress, ornamentation, or regional accent. Consider two
value-laden approaches to what to do to a cow: (A) eat it; (B) worship it.
Two As or two Bs would be more peaceful when sorting out cow options
than an A and B together. What might reliably mark someone who uses
approach A? Maybe a Stetson and cowboy boots. And a B person?
Perhaps a sari or a Nehru jacket. Those markers were initially arbitrary—
nothing about the object called a sari intrinsically suggests a belief that
cows are sacred because a god tends them. And there’s no inevitable link
between carnivory and a Stetson’s shape—it keeps the sun out of your
eyes and off your neck, useful whether you tend cows because you love
steak or because Lord Krishna tended cows. Minimal group studies show
our propensity for generating biased Us/Thems from arbitrary
differences. What we then do is link arbitrary markers to meaningful
differences in values and beliefs.
And then something happens with those arbitrary markers. We (e.g.,
primates, rats, Pavlov’s dogs) can be conditioned to associate something

393

arbitrary, like a bell, with a reward.7 As the association solidifies, is the
ringing bell still “just” a marker symbolizing impending pleasure, or
does it become pleasurable itself? Elegant work related to the
mesolimbic dopamine system shows that in a substantial subset of rats,
the arbitrary signal itself becomes rewarding. Similarly, an arbitrary
symbol of an Us core value gradually takes on a life and power of its
own, becoming the signified instead of the signifier. Thus, for example,
the scattering of colors and patterns on cloth that constitutes a nation’s
flag becomes something that people will kill and die for.*
The strength of Us/Them-ing is shown by its emergence in kids. By
age three to four, kids already group people by race and gender, have
more negative views of such Thems, and perceive other-race faces as
being angrier than same-race faces.8
And even earlier. Infants learn same-race faces better than other-race.
(How can you tell? Show an infant a picture of someone repeatedly; she
looks at it less each time. Now show a different face—if she can’t tell the
two apart, she barely glances at it. But if it’s recognized as being new,
there’s excitement, and longer looking).9
Four important thoughts about kids dichotomizing:
Are children learning these prejudices from their
parents? Not necessarily. Kids grow in environments
whose nonrandom stimuli tacitly pave the way for
dichotomizing. If an infant sees faces of only one skin
color, the salient thing about the first face with a
different skin color will be the skin color.
Racial dichotomies are formed during a crucial
developmental period. As evidence, children adopted
before age eight by someone of a different race develop
the expertise at face recognition of the adoptive parent’s
race.10
Kids learn dichotomies in the absence of any ill intent.
When a kindergarten teacher says, “Good morning, boys
and girls,” the kids are being taught that dividing the
world that way is more meaningful than saying, “Good
morning, those of you who have lost a tooth and those of
you who haven’t yet.” It’s everywhere, from “she” and
“he” meaning different things to those languages so
394

taken with gender dichotomizing that inanimate objects
are given honorary gonads.*11
Racial Us/Them-ing can seem indelibly entrenched in
kids because the parents most intent on preventing it are
often lousy at it. As shown in studies, liberals are
typically uncomfortable discussing race with their
children. Instead they counter the lure of Us/Them-ing
with abstractions that mean squat to kids—“It’s
wonderful that everyone can be friends” or “Barney is
purple, and we love Barney.”
Thus, the strength of Us/Them-ing is shown by: (a) the speed and
minimal sensory stimuli required for the brain to process group
differences; (b) the unconscious automaticity of such processes; (c) its
presence in other primates and very young humans; and (d) the tendency
to group according to arbitrary differences, and to then imbue those
markers with power.

395

US

U

s/Them-ing typically involves inflating the merits of Us
concerning core values—we are more correct, wise, moral, and
worthy when it comes to knowing what the gods want/running the
economy/raising kids/fighting this war. Us-ness also involves inflating
the merits of our arbitrary markers, and that can take some work—
rationalizing why our food is tastier, our music more moving, our
language more logical or poetic.
Perhaps even more than superiority, feelings about Us center on
shared obligations, on willingness and expectation of mutuality.12 The
essence of an Us mind-set is nonrandom clustering producing higherthan-expected frequencies of positive interactions. As we saw in chapter
10, the logical strategy in one-round Prisoner’s Dilemma is to defect.
Cooperation flourishes when games have an uncertain number of rounds,
and with the capacity for our reputations to precede us. Groups, by
definition, have multiple-round games and the means to spread news of
someone being a jerk.
This sense of obligation and reciprocity among Us is shown in
economic games, where players are more trusting, generous, and
cooperative with in-group than with out-group members (even with
minimal group paradigms, where players know that groupings are
arbitrary).13 Chimps even show this trust element where they have to
choose between (a) being guaranteed to receive some unexciting food
and (b) getting some fabulous food if another chimp will share it with
them. Chimps opt for the second scenario, requiring trust, when the other
chimp is a grooming partner.
Moreover, priming people to think of a victim of violence as an Us,
rather than a Them, increases the odds of their intervening. And recall
from chapter 3 how fans at a soccer match are more likely to aid an
injured spectator if he’s wearing home-team insignias.14
Enhanced prosociality for in-group members does not even require
face-to-face interactions. In one study subjects from an ethnically
polarized neighborhood encountered an open, stamped questionnaire on
the sidewalk near a mailbox. Subjects were more likely to mail it if the
396

questionnaire indicated support for a value of the subject’s ethnic
group.15
In-group obligation is shown by people feeling more need to make
amends for transgressions against an Us than against a Them. For the
former, people usually make amends to the wronged individual and act
more prosocially to the group overall. But people often make in-group
amends by being more antisocial to another group. Moreover, in such
scenarios, the guiltier the person feels about her in-group violation, the
worse she is to Thems.16
Thus, sometimes you help Us by directly helping Us, sometimes by
hurting Them. This raises a broad issue about in-group parochialism: is
the goal that your group do well, or simply better than Them? If the
former, maximizing absolute levels of in-group well-being is the goal,
and the levels of rewards to Them is irrelevant; if the latter, the goal is
maximizing the gap between Us and Them.
Both occur. Doing better rather than doing well makes sense in zerosum games where, say, only one team can win, and where winning with
scores of 1–0, 10–0, and 10–9 are equivalent. Moreover, for sectarian
sports fans, there is similar mesolimbic dopamine activation when the
home team wins or when a hated rival loses to a third party.*17 This is
schadenfreude, gloating, where their pain is your gain.
It’s problematic when non–zero sum games are viewed as zero-sum
(winner-take-all).18 It’s not a great mind-set to think you’ve won World
War III if afterward Us have two mud huts and three fire sticks and They
have only one of each.* A horrific version of this thinking occurred late
during World War I, when the Allies knew they had more resources (i.e.,
soldiers) than Germany. Therefore, the British commander, Douglas
Haig, declared a strategy of “ceaseless attrition,” where Britain went on
the offensive, no matter how many of his men were killed—as long as
the Germans lost at least as many.
So in-group parochialism is often more concerned about Us beating
Them than with Us simply doing well. This is the essence of tolerating
inequality in the name of loyalty. Consistent with that, priming loyalty
strengthens in-group favoritism and identification, while priming
equality does the opposite.19
Intertwined with in-group loyalty and favoritism is an enhanced
capacity for empathy. For example, the amygdala activates when
viewing fearful faces, but only of group members; when it’s an out-group
397

member, Them showing fear might even be good news—if it scares
Them, bring it on. Moreover, recall from chapter 3 the “isomorphic
sensorimotor” reflex of tensing your hand when watching a hand being
poked with a needle; the reflex is stronger if it is a same-race hand.20
As we saw, people are more likely to make amends for transgressions
against Us than against Them. What about responses to other in-group
members violating a norm?
Most common is forgiving Us more readily than Them. As we will
see, this is often rationalized—we screw up because of special
circumstances; They screw up because that’s how They are.
Something interesting can happen when someone’s transgression
constitutes airing the group’s dirty laundry that affirms a negative
stereotype. The resulting in-group shame can provoke high levels of
punishment as a signal to outsiders.21
The United States, with its rationalizations and ambivalences about
ethnicity, provides many such examples. Consider Rudy Giuliani, who
grew up in Brooklyn in an Italian American enclave dominated by
organized crime (Giuliani’s father served time for armed robbery and
then worked for his brother-in-law, a Mob loan shark). Giuliani rose to
national prominence in 1985 as the attorney prosecuting the “Five
Families” in the Mafia Commission Trial, effectively destroying them.
He was strongly motivated to counter the stereotype of “Italian
American” as synonymous with organized crime. When referring to his
accomplishment, he said, “And if that’s not enough to remove the Mafia
prejudice, then there probably could not be anything you could do to
remove it.” If you want someone to prosecute mafiosi with tireless
intensity, get a proud Italian American outraged by the stereotypes
generated by the Mob.22
Similar motivations were widely ascribed to Chris Darden, the
African American attorney who was cocounsel for the prosecution in the
O. J. Simpson trial. Ditto for the trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and
Morton Sobell, all Jewish, accused of spying for the Soviet Union. The
very public prosecution was by two Jews, Roy Cohn and Irving Saypol,
and presided over by a Jewish judge, Irving Kaufman, all eager to
counter the stereotype of Jews as disloyal “internationalists.” After death
sentences were doled out, Kaufman was honored by the American
Jewish Committee, the Anti-Defamation League, and the Jewish War
Veterans.*23 Giuliani, Darden, Cohn, Saypol, and Kaufman show that
398

being in a group means that someone else’s behaviors can make you look
bad.*24
This raises a larger issue, namely our sense of obligation and loyalty
to Us as a whole. At one extreme it can be contractual. This can be
literal, with professional athletes in team sports. It is expected that when
jocks sign contracts, they will play their hardest, putting the team’s
fortune above showboating. But the obligations are finite—they’re not
expected to sacrifice their lives for their team. And when athletes are
traded, they don’t serve as a fifth column, throwing games in their new
uniform to benefit their old team. The core of such a contractual
relationship is the fungibility of both employer and employee.
At the other extreme, of course, are Us memberships that are not
fungible and transcend negotiation. People aren’t traded from the Shiites
to the Sunnis, or from the Iraqi Kurds to the Sami herders in Finland. It
would be a rare Kurd who would want to be Sami, and his ancestors
would likely turn over in their graves when he nuzzled his first reindeer.
Converts are often subject to ferocious retribution by those they left—
consider Meriam Ibrahim, sentenced to death in Sudan in 2014 for
converting to Christianity—and suspicion from those they’ve joined.
With the sense of one’s lot being permanent come distinctive elements of
Us-ness. You don’t sign a faith-based baseball contract with vague
promises of a salary. But Us-ness based on sacred values, with wholes
bigger than sums of parts, where unenforceable obligations stretch across
generations, millennia, even into afterlives, where it’s Us, right or wrong,
is the essence of faith-based relationships.
Naturally, things are more complicated. Sometimes an athlete
choosing to switch teams is viewed as betraying a sacred trust. Consider
the perceived treachery when LeBron James chose to leave the Cavaliers
of his hometown, Cleveland, and the perception of his choice to return as
akin to the Second Coming. At the other extreme of group membership,
people do convert, emigrate, assimilate, and, especially in the United
States, wind up a pretty atypical Us—consider ex-Governor Bobby
Jindal of Louisiana, with his rich Southern accent and Christian faith,
born Piyush Jindal to Hindu immigrant parents from India. And consider
the complexities in, to use a horrible phrase, the unidirectionality of
fungibility—Muslim fundamentalists who would execute Meriam
Ibrahim while advocating forced conversions to Islam at the point of a
sword.

399

The nature of group membership can be bloodily contentious
concerning people’s relationship to the state. Is it contractual? The
people pay taxes, obey laws, serve in the army; the government provides
social services, builds roads, and helps after hurricanes. Or is it one of
sacred values? The people give absolute obedience and the state provides
the myths of the Fatherland. Few such citizens can conceive that if the
stork had arbitrarily deposited them elsewhere, they’d fervently feel the
innate rightness of a different brand of exceptionalism, goose-stepping to
different martial music.

400

THOSE THEMS

J

ust as we view Us in standardized ways, there are patterns in how we
view Them. A consistent one is viewing Them as threatening, angry,
and untrustworthy. Take space aliens in movies, as an interesting
example. In an analysis of nearly a hundred pertinent movies, starting
with Georges Méliès’s pioneering 1902 A Trip to the Moon, nearly 80
percent present aliens as malevolent, with the remainder either
benevolent or neutral.* In economic games people implicitly treat
members of other races as less trustworthy or reciprocating. Whites
judge African American faces as angrier than white faces, and racially
ambiguous faces with angry expressions are more likely to be
categorized as the other race. White subjects become more likely to
support juvenile criminals being tried as adults when primed to think
about black (versus white) offenders. And the unconscious sense of
Them as menacing can be remarkably abstract—baseball fans tend to
underestimate the distance to a rival team’s stadium, while Americans
hostile to Mexican immigrants underestimate the distance to Mexico
City.
But Thems do not solely evoke a sense of menace; sometimes it’s
disgust. Back to the insular cortex, which in most animals is about
gustatory disgust—biting into rotten food—but whose human portfolio
includes moral and aesthetic disgust. Pictures of drug addicts or the
homeless typically activate the insula, not the amygdala.25
Being disgusted by another group’s abstract beliefs isn’t naturally the
role of the insula, which evolved to care about disgusting tastes and
smells. Us/Them markers provide a stepping-stone. Feeling disgusted by
Them because they eat repulsive, sacred, or adorable things, slather
themselves with rancid scents, dress in scandalous ways—these are
things the insula can sink its teeth into. In the words of the psychologist
Paul Rozin of the University of Pennsylvania, “Disgust serves as an
ethnic or out-group marker.” Establishing that They eat disgusting things
provides momentum for deciding that They also have disgusting ideas
about, say, deontological ethics.26

401

The role of disgust in Them-ing explains some individual differences
in its magnitude. Specifically, people with the strongest negative
attitudes toward immigrants, foreigners, and socially deviant groups tend
to have low thresholds for interpersonal disgust (e.g., are resistant to
wearing a stranger’s clothes or sitting in a warm seat just vacated).27 We
will return to this finding in chapter 15.
Some Thems are ridiculous, i.e., subject to ridicule and mockery,
humor as hostility.28 Out-groups mocking the in-group is a weapon of
the weak, damaging the mighty and lessening the sting of subordination.
When an in-group mocks an out-group, it’s to solidify negative
stereotypes and reify the hierarchy. In line with this, individuals with a
high “social dominance orientation” (acceptance of hierarchy and group
inequality) are most likely to enjoy jokes about out-groups.
Thems are also frequently viewed as simpler and more homogeneous
than Us, with simpler emotions and less sensitivity to pain. David
Berreby, in his superb book Us and Them: The Science of Identity, gives
a striking example, namely that whether it was ancient Rome, medieval
England, imperial China, or the antebellum South, the elite had the
system-justifying stereotype of slaves as simple, childlike, and incapable
of independence.29
Essentialism is all about viewing Them as homogeneous and
interchangeable, the idea that while we are individuals, they have a
monolithic, immutable, icky essence. A long history of bad relations
with Thems fuels essentialist thinking—“They’ve always been like this
and always will be.” As does having few personal interactions with
Thems—after all, the more interactions with Thems, the more exceptions
accumulate that challenge essentialist stereotyping. But infrequency of
interactions is not required, as evidenced by essentialist thinking about
the opposite sex.30
Thus, Thems come in different flavors—threatening and angry,
disgusting and repellent, primitive and undifferentiated.

Thoughts Versus Feelings About Them
How much are our thoughts about Them post-hoc rationalizations for
our feelings about Them? Back to interactions between cognition and
affect.

402

Us/Them-ing is readily framed cognitively. John Jost of NYU has
explored one domain of this, namely the cognitive cartwheels of those on
top to justify the existing system’s unequal status quo. Cognitive
gymnastics also occur when our negative, homogeneous view of a type
of Them must accommodate the appealing celebrity Them, the Them
neighbor, the Them who has saved our ass—“Ah, this Them is different”
(no doubt followed by a self-congratulatory sense of openmindedness).31
Cognitive subtlety can be needed in viewing Thems as threats.32
Being afraid that the Them approaching you will rob you is rife with
affect and particularism. But fearing that those Thems will take our jobs,
manipulate the banks, dilute our bloodlines, make our children gay, etc.,
requires future-oriented cognition about economics, sociology, political
science, and pseudoscience.
Thus Us/Them-ing can arise from cognitive capacities to generalize,
imagine the future, infer hidden motivations, and use language to align
these cognitions with other Us-es. As we saw, other primates not only
kill individuals because they are Thems but have negative associations
about them as well. Nonetheless, no other primate kills over ideology,
theology, or aesthetics.
Despite the importance of thought in Us/Them-ing, its core is
emotional and automatic.33 In the words of Berreby in his book,
“Stereotyping isn’t a case of lazy, short-cutting cognition. It isn’t
conscious cognition at all.” Such automaticity generates statements like
“I can’t put my finger on why, but it’s just wrong when They do that.”
Work by Jonathan Haidt of NYU shows that in such circumstances,
cognitions are post-hoc justifications for feelings and intuitions, to
convince yourself that you have indeed rationally put your finger on
why.
The automaticity of Us/Them-ing is shown by the speed of the
amygdala and insula in making such dichotomies—the brain weighing in
affectively precedes conscious awareness, or there never is conscious
awareness, as with subliminal stimuli. Another measure of the affective
core of Them-ing is when no one even knows the basis of a prejudice.
Consider the Cagots, a minority in France whose persecution began in
the eleventh century and continued well into the last one.34 Cagots were
required to live outside villages, dress distinctively, sit separately in
church, and do menial jobs. Yet they didn’t differ in appearance, religion,
403

accent, or names, and no one knows why they were pariahs. They may
have descended from Moorish soldiers in the Islamic invasion of Spain
and thus were discriminated against by Christians. Or they might have
been early Christians, and discrimination against them was started by
non-Christians. No one knew the sins of ancestral Cagots or how to
recognize Cagots beyond community knowledge. During the French
Revolution, Cagots burned birth certificates in government offices to
destroy proof of their status.
The automaticity is seen in another way. Consider an individual with
an impassioned hatred for an array of out-groups.35 There are two ways
to explain this. Option 1: He has carefully concluded that group A’s trade
policies hurt the economy and just happens to also believe that group B’s
ancestors were blasphemous, and thinks that group C members don’t
express sufficient contrition for a war started by their grandparents, and
perceives group D members as pushy, and thinks that group E
undermines family values. That’s a lot of cognitive just-happens-to’s.
Option 2: The guy’s authoritarian temperament is unsettled by novelty
and ambiguity about hierarchies; this isn’t a set of coherent cognitions.
As we saw in chapter 7, Theodor Adorno, in trying to understand the
roots of fascism, formalized this authoritarian temperament. Individuals
prejudiced against one type of out-group tend toward being prejudiced
against other ones, and for affective reasons.*36 More on this in the next
chapter.
The strongest evidence that abrasive Them-ing originates in emotions
and automatic processes is that supposed rational cognitions about
Thems can be unconsciously manipulated. In an example cited earlier,
subjects unconsciously primed about “loyalty” sit closer to Us-es and
farther from Thems, while those primed about “equality” do the
opposite.* In another study, subjects watched a slide show of basic,
unexciting information about a country they knew nothing about
(“There’s a country called ‘Moldova’?”). For half the subjects, faces with
positive expressions were flashed at subliminal speeds between slides;
for the other half, it was negative expressions. The former developed
more positive views of the country than the latter.37
Conscious judgments about Thems are unconsciously manipulated in
the real world. In an important experiment discussed in chapter 3,
morning commuters at train stations in predominantly white suburbs
filled out questionnaires about political views. Then, at half the stations,
404

a pair of young Mexicans, conservatively dressed, appeared each
morning for two weeks, chatting quietly in Spanish before boarding the
train. Then commuters filled out second questionnaires.
Remarkably, the presence of such pairs made people more supportive
of decreasing legal immigration from Mexico and of making English the
official language, and more opposed to amnesty for illegal immigrants.
The manipulation was selective, not changing attitudes about Asian
Americans, African Americans, or Middle Easterners.
How’s this for a fascinating influence on Us/Them-ing, way below
the level of awareness: Chapter 4 noted that when women are ovulating,
their fusiform face areas respond more to faces, with the (“emotional”)
vmPFCs responding more to men’s faces in particular. Carlos Navarrete
at Michigan State University has shown that white women, when
ovulating, have more negative attitudes toward African American
men.*38 Thus the intensity of Us/Them-ing is being modulated by
hormones. Our feelings about Thems can be shaped by subterranean
forces we haven’t a clue about.
Automatic features of Us/Them-ing can extend to magical contagion,
a belief that the essentialism of people can transfer to objects or other
organisms.39 This can be a plus or a minus—one study showed that
washing a sweater worn by JFK would decrease its value at auction,
whereas sterilizing one worn by Bernie Madoff would increase its value.
This is sheer irrationality—it’s not like an unwashed JFK sweater still
contains his magical armpit essence, while an unwashed Madoff sweater
swarms with moral-taint cooties. And magical contagion has occurred
elsewhere—Nazis killed supposedly contaminated “Jewish dogs” along
with their owners.*40
The heart of cognition catching up with affect is, of course,
rationalization. A great example of this occurred in 2000, when everyone
learned the phrase “hanging chads” following the election of Al Gore
and the Supreme Court’s selection of George W. Bush.* For those who
missed that fun, a chad is the piece of paper knocked out of a punch-card
ballot when someone votes, and a hanging chad is one that doesn’t
completely detach; does this justify disqualifying the vote, even though it
is clear who the person voted for? And obviously, if one millisecond
before chads reared their hanging heads, you had asked pundits what
would be the hanging-chad stances of the party of Reagan and trickledown economics, and the party of FDR and the Great Society, they
405

wouldn’t have had a clue. And yet there we were, one millisecond
postchads, with each party passionately explaining why the view of the
opposing Thems threatened Mom, apple pie, and the legacy of the
Alamo.
The “confirmation biases” used to rationalize and justify automatic
Them-ing are numerous—remembering supportive better than opposing
evidence; testing things in ways that can support but not negate your
hypothesis; skeptically probing outcomes you don’t like more than ones
you do.
Moreover, manipulating implicit Them-ing alters justification
processes. In one study Scottish students read about a game where
Scottish participants either did or didn’t treat English participants
unfairly. Students who read about Scots being prejudicial became more
positive in their stereotypes about Scots and more negative about Brits—
justifying the bias by the Scottish participants.41
Our cognitions run to catch up with our affective selves, searching
for the minute factoid or plausible fabrication that explains why we hate
Them.42

Individual Intergroup Interactions Versus Group
Intergroup Interactions
Thus, we tend to think of Us as noble, loyal, and composed of
distinctive individuals whose failings are due to circumstance. Thems, in
contrast, seem disgusting, ridiculous, simple, homogeneous,
undifferentiated, and interchangeable. All frequently backed up by
rationalizations for our intuitions.
That is a picture of an individual navigating Us/Them in his mind.
Interactions between groups tend to be more competitive and aggressive
than are interactions between individual Us-es and Thems. In the words
of Reinhold Niebuhr, writing during World War II, “The group is more
arrogant, hypocritical, self-centered and more ruthless in the pursuit of
its ends than the individual.”43
There is often an inverse relationship between levels of intragroup
and intergroup aggression. In other words, groups with highly hostile
interactions with neighbors tend to have minimal internal conflict. Or, to

406

spin this another way, groups with high levels of internal conflict are too
distracted to focus hostility on the Others.44
Crucially, is that inverse relationship causal? Must a society be
internally peaceful to muster the large-scale cooperation needed for
major intergroup hostilities? Must a society suppress homicide to
accomplish genocide? Or to reverse the causality, do threats from Thems
make societies more internally cooperative? This is a view advanced by
the economist Samuel Bowles of the Santa Fe Institute who has framed
this as “Conflict: Altruism’s Midwife.”45 Stay tuned.

407

UNIQUE REALMS OF HUMAN US/THEMING

D

espite other primates displaying rudimentary abstractions of
Us/Them-ing, humans are in a stratosphere of uniqueness. In this
section I consider how:
we all belong to multiple categories of Us, and their
relative importance can rapidly change;
all Thems are not the same, and we have complex
taxonomies about different types of Thems and the
responses they evoke;
we can feel badly about Us/Them-ing and try to conceal
it;
cultural mechanisms can sharpen or soften the edges of
our dichotomizing.

Multiple Us-es
I am a vertebrate, mammal, primate, ape, human, male, scientist,
lefty, sun sneezer, Breaking Bad obsessive, and Green Bay Packers fan.*
All grounds for concocting an Us/Them. Crucially, which Us is most
important to me constantly shifts—if some octopus moved in next door, I
would feel hostile superiority because I have a spine and it didn’t, but
that animosity might melt into a sense of kinship when I discovered that
the octopus, like me, loved playing Twister as a kid.

—
We all belong to multiple Us/Them dichotomies. Sometimes one can be
a surrogate for another—for example, the dichotomy of people who
are/aren’t knowledgeable about caviar is a good stand-in for a dichotomy
about socioeconomic status.

408

As noted, the most important thing about our membership in multiple
Us/Thems is the ease with which their prioritizing shifts. A famed
example, discussed in chapter 3, concerned math performance in Asian
American women, built around the stereotypes of Asians being good at
math, and women not. Half the subjects were primed to think of
themselves as Asian before a math test; their scores improved. Half were
primed about gender; scores declined. Moreover, levels of activity in
cortical regions involved in math skills changed in parallel.*46
We also recognize that other individuals belong to multiple
categories, and shift which we consider most relevant. Not surprisingly,
lots of that literature concerns race, with the core question being whether
it is an Us/Them that trumps all others.
The primacy of race has a lot of folk-intuition appeal. First, race is a
biological attribute, a conspicuous fixed identity that readily prompts
essentialist thinking.47 This also fuels intuitions about evolution—
humans evolved under conditions where different skin color is the
clearest signal that someone is a distant Them. And the salience of race
is seen cross-culturally—an astonishing percentage of cultures have
historically made status distinctions by skin color, including in
traditional cultures before Western contact, where with few exceptions
(e.g., the low-status Ainu ethnic minority in Japan) lighter skin tone
confers higher status both within and between groups.
But these intuitions are flimsy. First, while there are obvious
biological contributions to racial differences, “race” is a biological
continuum rather than a discrete category—for example, unless you
cherry-pick the data, genetic variation within race is generally as great as
between races. And this really is no surprise when looking at the range of
variation with a racial rubric—compare Sicilians with Swedes or a
Senegalese farmer with an Ethiopian herder.*
The evolutionary argument doesn’t hold up either. Racial differences,
which have only relatively recently emerged, are of little Us/Them
significance. For the hunter-gatherers of our hominin history, the most
different person you’d ever encounter in your life came from perhaps a
couple of dozen miles away, while the nearest person of a different race
lived thousands of miles away—there is no evolutionary legacy of
humans encountering people of markedly different skin color.
Furthermore, the notion of race as a fixed, biologically based
classification system doesn’t work either. At various times in the history

409

of the U.S. census, “Mexican” and “Armenian” were classified as
distinctive races; southern Italians were of a different race from northern
Europeans; someone with one black great-grandparent and seven white
ones was classified as white in Oregon but not Florida. This is race as a
cultural rather than biological construct.48
Given facts like these, it is not surprising that racial Us/Them
dichotomies are frequently trumped by other classifications. The most
frequent is gender. Recall the finding that it is more difficult to
“extinguish” a conditioned fear association with an other- than a samerace face. Navarrete has shown that this occurs only when the
conditioned faces are male; gender outweighs race as an automatic
classification in this case.* Age as a classification readily trumps race as
well. Even occupation can—for example, in one study white subjects
showed an automatic preference for white politicians over black athletes
when they were primed to think of race, but the opposite when primed to
think of occupation.49
Race as a salient Us/Them category can be shoved aside by subtle
reclassification. In one study subjects saw pictures of individuals, each
black or white, each associated with a statement, and then had to recall
which face went with which statement.50 There was automatic racial
categorization—if subjects misattributed a quote, the face picked and the
one actually associated with the statement were likely to be of the same
race. Next, half the black and half the white individuals pictured wore
the same distinctive yellow shirt; the other half wore gray. Now subjects
most often confused faces by shirt color.
Wonderful research by Mary Wheeler and Susan Fiske of Princeton
showed how categorization is shifted, studying the phenomenon of
amygdala activation by pictures of other-race faces.51 In one group
subjects tried to find a distinctive dot in each picture. An other-race face
didn’t activate the amygdala; face-ness wasn’t being processed. In a
second group subjects judged whether each face looked older than some
age. Amygdaloid responses to other-race faces enlarged—thinking
categorically about age strengthened thinking categorically about race. In
a third group a vegetable was displayed before each face; subjects judged
whether the person liked that vegetable. The amygdala didn’t respond to
other-race faces.
At least two interpretations come to mind to explain this last result:

410

a. Distraction. Subjects were too busy thinking about, say,
carrots to do automatic categorization by race. This
would resemble the effect of searching for the dot.
b. Recategorization. You look at a Them face, thinking
about what food they’d like. You picture the person
shopping, ordering a meal in a restaurant, sitting down
to dinner at home and enjoying a particular food. . . . In
other words, you think of the person as an individual.
This is the readily accepted interpretation.
But recategorization can occur in the real world under the most brutal
and unlikely circumstances. Here are examples that I find to be intensely
poignant:
In the Battle of Gettysburg, Confederate general Lewis
Armistead was mortally wounded while leading a charge. As he
lay on the battlefield, he gave a secret Masonic sign, in hopes of
its being recognized by a fellow Mason. It was, by a Union
officer, Hiram Bingham, who protected him, got him to a Union
field hospital, and guarded his personal effects. In an instant the
Us/Them of Union/Confederate became less important than that
of Mason/non-Mason.*52
Another shifting of Thems also occurred during the Civil War.
Both armies were filled with Irish immigrant soldiers; Irish
typically had picked sides haphazardly, joining what they
thought would be a short conflict to gain some military training
—useful for returning home to fight for Irish independence.
Before battle, Irish soldiers put identifying sprigs of green in
their hats, so that, should they lie dead or dying, they’d shed the
arbitrary Us/Them of this American war and revert to the Us that
mattered—to be recognized and aided by their fellow Irish.53 A
green sprig as a green beard.
Rapid shifting of Us/Them dichotomies is seen during World
War II, when British commandos kidnapped German general
Heinrich Kreipe in Crete, followed by a dangerous eighteen-day
411

march to the coast to rendezvous with a British ship. One day the
party saw the snows of Crete’s highest peak. Kreipe mumbled to
himself the first line (in Latin) of an ode by Horace about a
snowcapped mountain. At which point the British commander,
Patrick Leigh Fermor, continued the recitation. The two men
realized that they had, in Leigh Fermor’s words, “drunk at the
same fountains.” A recategorization. Leigh Fermor had Kreipe’s
wounds treated and personally ensured his safety through the
remainder of the march. The two stayed in touch after the war
and were reunited decades later on Greek television. “No hard
feelings,” said Kreipe, praising Leigh Fermor’s “daring
operation.”54
And finally there is the World War I Christmas truce, something
I will consider at length in the final chapter. This is the famed
event where soldiers on both sides spent the day singing,
praying, and partying together, playing soccer, and exchanging
gifts, and soldiers up and down the lines struggled to extend the
truce. It took all of one day for British-versus-German to be
subordinated to something more important—all of us in the
trenches versus the officers in the rear who want us to go back to
killing each other.
Thus Us/Them dichotomies can wither away into being historical
trivia questions like the Cagots and can have their boundaries shifted at
the whims of a census. Most important, we have multiple dichotomies in
our heads, and ones that seem inevitable and crucial can, under the right
circumstances, have their importance evaporate in an instant.

Cold and/or Incompetent
That both a gibbering schizophrenic homeless man and a successful
businessman from a resented ethnic group can be a Them demonstrates
something crucial—different types of Thems evoke different feelings in
us, anchored in differences in the neurobiologies of fear and disgust.55
As but one example, fear-evoking faces cause us to watch vigilantly and
activate the visual cortex; disgust-evoking faces do the opposite.
412

We carry various taxonomies in our heads as to our relationships with
different types of Others. Thinking about some Thems is simple.
Consider someone who pushes all our judgmental buttons—say, a
homeless junkie whose wife threw him out of the house because of his
abusiveness, and who now mugs elderly people. Throw ’im under a
trolley—people are most likely to agree to sacrifice one to save five
when the five are in-group members and the one is this extreme of an
out-group.*56
But what about Thems who evoke more complex feelings?
Tremendously influential work has been done by Fiske, with her
“stereotype content model.”57 This entire section concerns that work.
We tend to categorize Thems along two axes: “warmth” (is the
individual or group a friend or foe, benevolent or malevolent?) and
“competence” (how effectively can the individual or group carry out
their intentions?).
The axes are independent. Ask subjects to assess someone about
whom they have only minimal information. Priming them with cues
about the person’s status alters ratings of competence but not of warmth.
Prime them about the person’s competitiveness and you do the opposite.
These two axes produce a matrix with four corners. There are groups that
we rate as being high in both warmth and competence—Us, naturally.
And Americans typically view this group as containing good Christians,
African American professionals, and the middle class.
And there’s the other extreme, low in both warmth and competence
—our homeless, addicted mugger. Subjects typically hand out lowwarmth/low-competence assessments for the homeless, people on
welfare, and poor people of any race.
Then there’s the high-warmth/low-competence categorization—the
mentally disabled, people with handicaps, the elderly.* And the
categorization of low warmth/high competence. It’s how people in the
developing world tend to view the European culture that used to rule
them,* and how many minority Americans view whites. It’s the hostile
stereotype of Asian Americans by white America, of Jews in Europe, of
Indo-Pakistanis in East Africa, of Lebanese in West Africa, and of ethnic
Chinese in Indonesia (and, to a lesser extent, of rich people by poorer
people everywhere). And it’s the same derogation—they’re cold, greedy,
cleverly devious, clannish, don’t assimilate,* have loyalties elsewhere—

413

but, dang, they sure know how to make money, and you probably should
go to one who is a doctor if you have something serious.
People tend toward consistent feelings evoked by each of the
extremes. For high warmth, high competence (i.e., Us), there’s pride.
Low warmth, high competence—envy. High warmth, low competence—
pity. Low warmth, low competence—disgust. Stick someone in a brain
scanner, show them pictures of low-warmth/low-competence people, and
there’s activation of the amygdala and insula but not of the fusiform face
area or the (emotional) vmPFC—a profile evoked by viewing disgusting
objects (although, once again, this pattern shifts if you get subjects to
individuate, asking them to think about what food this homeless person
likes, rather than “anything they can find in garbage cans”).* In contrast,
viewing low-warmth/high-competence or high-warmth/low-competence
individuals activates the vmPFC.
The places between the extremes evoke their own characteristic
responses. Individuals who evoke a reaction between pity and pride
evoke a desire to help them. Floating between pity and disgust is a desire
to exclude and demean. Between pride and envy is a desire to associate,
to derive benefits from. And between envy and disgust are our most
hostile urges to attack.
What fascinates me is when someone’s categorization changes. The
most straightforward ones concern shifts from high-warmth/highcompetence (HH) status:
HH to HL: This is watching a parent decline into dementia, a
situation evoking extremes of poignant protectiveness.
HH to LH: This is the business partner who turns out to have been
embezzling for decades. Betrayal.
And the rare transition from HH to LL—a buddy who made partner
in your law firm, but then “something happened” and now he’s
homeless. Disgust mingled with bafflement—what went wrong?
Equally interesting are shifts from other categorizations. There’s
when you shift your perception of someone from HL to LL—the janitor
whom you condescendingly greet each day turns out to think you’re a
jerk. Ingrate.
There’s the shift from LL to LH. When I was a kid in the sixties, the
parochial American view of Japan was LL—the shadow of World War II
generating dislike and contempt—“Made in Japan” was about cheap
plastic gewgaws. And then, suddenly, “Made in Japan” meant

414

outcompeting American car and steel manufacturers. Whoa. A sense of
alarm, of being caught napping at your post.
Then there’s the shift from LL to HL. This is when a homeless guy
finds someone’s wallet and does cartwheels to return it—and you realize
that he’s more decent than half your friends.
Most interesting to me is the transition from LH status to LL, which
invokes gloating, glee, schadenfreude. I remember a great example of
this in the 1970s, when Nigeria nationalized its oil industry and there
was the (delusionally misplaced, it turns out) belief that this would usher
in wealth and stability. I recall a Nigerian commentator crowing that
within the decade, Nigeria would be sending foreign aid to its ex–
colonial overlord, Great Britain (i.e., Brits would be shifting from LH to
LL).
The glee explains a feature of persecution of LH out-groups, namely
to first degrade and humiliate them to LL. During China’s Cultural
Revolution, resented elites were first paraded in dunce caps before being
shipped to labor camps. Nazis eliminated the mentally ill, already LL, by
unceremoniously murdering them; in contrast, premurder treatment of
the LH Jews involved forcing them to wear degrading yellow armbands,
to cut one another’s beards, to scrub sidewalks with toothbrushes before
jeering crowds. When Idi Amin expelled tens of thousands of LH IndoPakistani citizens from Uganda, he first invited his army to rob, beat, and
rape them. Turning LH Thems into LL Thems accounts for some of the
worst human savagery.
These variations are sure more complicated than chimps associating
rivals with spiders.
One strange human domain is the phenomenon of developing a
grudging respect, even a sense of camaraderie, with an enemy. This is
the world of the probably-apocryphal mutual respect between opposing
World War I flying aces: “Ah, monsieur, if it were another time, I would
delight in discussing aeronautics with you over some good wine.”
“Baron, it is an honor that it is you who shoots me out of the sky.”
This one’s easy to understand—these were knights, dueling to the
gallant death, their Us-ness being their shared mastery of the new art of
aerial combat, soaring above the little people below.
But surprisingly, the same is shown by combatants who, instead of
soaring, were cannon fodder, faceless cogs in their nation’s war machine.
In the words of a British infantry grunt serving in the bloodbath of trench

415

warfare in World War I, “At home one abuses the enemy, and draws
insulting caricatures. How tired I am of grotesque Kaisers. Out here, one
can respect a brave, skillful, and resourceful enemy. They have people
they love at home, they too have to endure mud, rain and steel.”
Whispers of Us-ness with people trying to kill you.58
And then there is the even stranger world of differing feelings about
the economic versus the cultural enemy, the relatively new enemy versus
the ancient one, or the distant alien enemy versus the neighboring enemy
whose miniscule differences have been inflated. These are the differing
subjugations that the British Empire inflicted on the Irish next door
versus on Australian aborigines. Or Ho Chi Minh, rejecting the offer of
Chinese troops on the ground during the Vietnam War, with a statement
to the effect of “The Americans will leave in a year or a decade, but the
Chinese will stay for a thousand years if we let them in.” And what’s
most pertinent about byzantine Iranian geopolitics—the millennia-old
Persian antipathy toward the Mesopotamians next door, the centuries-old
Shiite conflicts with Sunnis, or the decades-old Islamic hatred of the
Great Satan, the West?*
No discussion of the oddities of human Us/Them-ing is complete
without the phenomenon of the self-hating ________ (take your pick of
the out-group), where out-group members buy into the negative
stereotypes and develop favoritism for the in-group.59 This was shown
by psychologists Kenneth and Mamie Clark in their famed “doll
studies,” begun in the 1940s. They demonstrated with shocking clarity
that African American children, along with white children, preferred to
play with white dolls over black ones, ascribing more positive attributes
(e.g., nice, pretty) to them. That this effect was most pronounced in black
kids in segregated schools was cited in Brown v. Board of Education.*
Roughly 40 to 50 percent of African Americans, gays and lesbians, and
women show automatic IAT biases in favor of whites, heterosexuals, and
men, respectively.

Some of My Best Friends
The “honorable enemy” phenomenon raises another domain of
human peculiarity. Even if he could, no chimp would ever deny that the
neighboring chimps remind him of spiders. None would feel bad about

416

it, urge others to overcome that tendency, teach their children to never
call one of those neighboring chimps a “spider.” None would proclaim
that he can’t distinguish between Us chimps and Them chimps. And
these are all commonplace in progressive Western cultures.
Young humans are like chimps—six-year-olds not only prefer to be
with kids like themselves (by whatever criteria) but readily say so. It
isn’t until around age ten that kids learn that some feelings and thoughts
about Thems are expressed only at home, that communication about
Us/Them is charged and contextual.60
Thus there can be striking discrepancies in Us/Them relations
between what people claim they believe and how they act—consider
differences between election poll results and election results. This is
shown experimentally as well—in one depressing study, subjects
claimed they’d be very likely to proactively confront someone
expressing racist views; yet actual rates were far lower when they were
unknowingly put in that position (note—this is not to say that this
reflected racist sentiments; instead it likely reflected social-norm
inhibitions being stronger than the subjects’ principles).61
Attempts to control and repress Us/Them antipathies have the frontal
cortex written all over them. As we saw, a subliminal fifty-millisecond
exposure to the face of another can activate the amygdala, and if
exposure is long enough for conscious detection (about five hundred
milliseconds or more), the initial amygdala activation is followed by
PFC activation and amygdala damping; the more PFC activation,
particularly of the “cognitive” dlPFC, the more amygdala silencing. It’s
the PFC regulating discomfiting emotions.62
Behavioral data also implicate the frontal cortex. For example, for
the same degree of implicit racial prejudice (as shown with the IAT), the
bias is more likely to be expressed behaviorally in individuals with poor
frontal executive control (as shown with an abstract cognitive task).63
Chapter 2 introduced the concept of “cognitive load,” where a taxing
frontal executive task diminishes performance on a subsequent frontal
task. This occurs with Us/Them-ing. White subjects do better on certain
behavior tests when the tester is white as opposed to black; subjects
whose performance declines most dramatically in the latter scenario
show the greatest dlPFC activation when viewing other-race faces.64
The cognitive load generated by frontal executive control during
interracial interactions can be modulated. If white subjects are told,
417

“Most people are more prejudiced than they think they are,” before
taking the test with a black tester, performance plummets more than if
they are told, “Most people perform worse [on a frontal cortical
cognitive test] than they think they did.” Moreover, if white subjects are
primed with a command reeking of frontal regulation (“avoid prejudice”
during an interracial interaction), performance declines more than when
they are told to “have a positive intercultural exchange.”65
A different type of executive control can occur in minority Thems
when dealing with individuals of the dominant culture—be certain to
interact with them in a positive manner, to counter their assumed
prejudice against you. In one startling study African American subjects
were primed to think about either racial or age prejudice, followed by an
interaction with someone white.66 When the prime was racial, subjects
became more talkative, solicited the other person’s opinion more, smiled
more, and leaned forward more; the same didn’t occur when subjects
interacted with another African American. Think about chapter 3’s
African American grad student intentionally whistling Vivaldi each
evening on the way home.
Two points are worth making about these studies about executive
control and interactions with Thems:
Frontal cortical activation during an interracial interaction could
reflect: (a) being prejudiced and trying to hide it; (b) being
prejudiced and feeling bad about it; (c) feeling no prejudice and
working to communicate that; (d) who knows what else.
Activation merely implies that the interracial nature of the
interaction is weighing on the subject (implicitly or otherwise)
and prompting executive control.
As per usual, subjects in these studies were mostly university
students fulfilling some Psych 101 requirement. In other words,
individuals of an age associated with openness to novelty,
residing in a privileged place where Us/Them cultural and
economic differences are less than in society at large, and where
there is not only institutionalized celebration of diversity but also
some actual diversity (beyond the university’s home page with
the obligatory picture of smiling, conventionally good-looking

418

students of all races and ethnicities peering in microscopes plus,
for good measure, a cheerleader type fawning over a nerdy guy
in a wheelchair). That even this population demonstrates more
implicit antipathy to Thems than they like to admit is pretty
depressing.

419

MANIPULATING THE EXTENT OF
US/THEM-ING

W

hat situations lessen or exacerbate Us/Them-ing? (I define
“lessen” as decreased antipathy toward Thems and/or decreased
perception of the size or importance of contrasts between Us and Them.
Here are some brief summaries, a warm-up for the final two chapters.

The Subterranean Forces of Cuing and Priming
Subliminally flash a picture of a hostile and/or aggressive face, and
people are subsequently more likely to perceive a Them as the same (an
effect that does not occur in-group).67 Prime subjects subliminally with
negative stereotypes of Thems, and you exacerbate Them-ing. As noted
in chapter 3, amygdala activation* in white subjects seeing black faces is
increased if rap music is playing in the background and lessened if music
associated with negative white stereotypes—heavy metal—is played
instead. Moreover, implicit racial bias is lessened after subliminal
exposure to counterstereotypes—faces of popular celebrities of that race.
Such priming can work within seconds to minutes and can persist;
for example, the counterstereotype effect lasted at least twenty-four
hours.68 Priming can also be extraordinarily abstract and subtle. An
example concerned differences in electroencephalographic (EEG)
responses in the brain when looking at same- versus different-race faces.
In the study the other-race response lessened if subjects unconsciously
felt they were drawing the person toward them—if they were pulling a
joystick toward themselves (versus pushing it away) at the time.
Finally, priming is not equally effective at altering all domains of
Them-ing; it is easier to subliminally manipulate warmth than
competence ratings.
These can be powerful effects. And to be more than merely semantic,
the malleability of automatic responses (e.g., of the amygdala) shows
that “automatic” does not equal “inevitable.”

420

The Conscious, Cognitive Level
Various overt strategies have been found to decrease implicit biases.
A classic one is perspective taking, which enhances identification with
Them. For example, in a study concerning age bias, having subjects take
the perspective of older individuals more effectively reduced bias than
merely instructing subjects to inhibit stereotypical thoughts. Another is
to consciously focus on counterstereotypes. In one such study automatic
sexual biases were lessened more when men were instructed to imagine a
strong woman with positive attributes, than when they were instructed to
attempt stereotype suppression. Another strategy is to make implicit
biases explicit—show people evidence of their automatic biases. More to
come concerning these strategies.69

Changing the Rank Ordering of Us/Them
Categories
This refers to the multiple Us/Them dichotomies we carry and the
ease of shifting their priority—shifting automatic categorizing by race to
categorizing by shirt color or manipulating math performance by
emphasizing either gender or ethnicity. Shifting which categorization is
at the forefront isn’t necessarily a great thing and may just constitute six
of one, half a dozen of the other—for example, among European
American men, a photograph of an Asian woman applying makeup
makes gender automaticity stronger than ethnic automaticity, while a
picture of her using chopsticks does the opposite. More effective than
getting people to shift a Them of one category into merely another type
of Them, of course, is to shift the Them to being perceived as an Us—
emphasizing attributes in common.70 Which brings us to . . .

Contact
In the 1950s the psychologist Gordon Allport proposed “contact
theory.”71 Inaccurate version: if you bring Us-es and Thems together
(say, teenagers from two hostile nations brought together in a summer
camp), animosities disappear, similarities become more important than
differences, and everyone becomes an Us. More accurate version: put
421

Us-es and Thems together under very narrow circumstances and
something sort of resembling that happens, but you can also blow it and
worsen things.
Some of those effective narrower circumstances: there are roughly
equal numbers from each side; everyone’s treated equally and
unambiguously; contact is lengthy and on neutral, benevolent territory;
there are “superordinate” goals where everyone works together on a task
they care about (say, the summer campers turning an overgrown meadow
into a soccer field).72

Essentialism Versus Individuation
This harks back to two important earlier points. First, that Thems
tend to be viewed as homogeneous, simple, and having an unchangeable
(and negative) essence. Second, that being forced to think of a Them as
an individual can make them seem more like an Us. Decreasing
essentialist thinking via individuation is a powerful tool.
One elegant study showed this. White subjects were given a
questionnaire assessing the extent of their acceptance of racial
inequalities, after being given one of two primes.73 The first bolstered
essentialist thinking about race as invariant and homogeneous
—“Scientists pinpoint the genetic underpinnings of race.” The other
prime was antiessentialist—“Scientists reveal that race has no genetic
basis.” Being primed toward essentialism made subjects more accepting
of racial inequalities.

Hierarchy
Predictably, making hierarchies steeper, more consequential, or more
overt worsens Them-ing; the need for justification fuels those on top to
pour the stereotypes of, at best, high warmth/low competence or, worse,
low warmth/low competence onto the heads of those struggling at the
bottom, and those on the bottom reciprocate with the simmering time
bomb that is the perception of the ruling class as low warmth/high
competence.74 Fiske has explored how those on top perceiving the
underclass as high warmth/low competence can stabilize the status quo;
the powerful feel self-congratulatory about their presumed benevolence,
422

while the subordinated are placated by the sops of respect. Supporting
this, across thirty-seven countries, higher levels of income inequality
correlate with more of the condescension of HL perceptions trickling
down. Jost has explored this in a related way, examining how myths of
“No one has it all” can reinforce the status quo. For example, the cultural
trope of “poor but happy”—the poor are more carefree, more in touch
with and able to enjoy the simple things in life—and the myth of the rich
as unhappy, stressed, and burdened with responsibility (think of
miserable, miserly Scrooge and those warm, loving Cratchits) are great
ways to keep things from changing. The trope of “poor but honest,” by
throwing a sop of prestige to Thems, is another great means of
rationalizing the system.*
Individual differences in how people feel about hierarchy help
explain variation in the extent of Them-ing. This is shown in studies
examining social-dominance orientation (SDO: how much someone
values prestige and power) and right-wing authoritarianism (RWA: how
much someone values centralized authority, the rule of law, and
convention).75 High-SDO individuals show the greatest increases in
automatic prejudices when feeling threatened; more acceptance of bias
against low-status out-groups; if male, more tolerance of sexism. And as
discussed, people high in SDO (and/or in RWA) are less bothered by
hostile humor about out-groups.
Related to our all being part of multiple Us/Them dichotomies is our
simultaneous membership in multiple hierarchies.76 No surprise, people
emphasize the importance of the hierarchy in which they rank highest—
being captain of the company’s weekend softball team takes on more
significance than the lousy, lowly nine-to-five job during the week.
Particularly interesting are hierarchies that tend to map onto Us/Them
categories (for example, when race and ethnicity overlap heavily with
socioeconomic status). In those cases, those on top tend to emphasize the
convergence of the hierarchies and the importance of assimilating the
values of the core hierarchy (“Why can’t they all just call themselves
‘Americans’ instead of ‘Ethnicity-Americans’?”). Interestingly, this is a
local phenomenon—whites tend to favor assimilationist, unitary
adherence to national values while African Americans favor more
pluralism; however, the opposite occurs concerning campus life and
policies among white and African American students at traditionally

423

black universities. We can keep two contradictory things in our heads at
the same time if that works to our benefit.

—
Thus, in order to lessen the adverse effects of Us/Them-ing, a shopping
list would include emphasizing individuation and shared attributes,
perspective taking, more benign dichotomies, lessening hierarchical
differences, and bringing people together on equal terms with shared
goals. All to be revisited.

424

CONCLUSIONS

A

n analogy concerning health: Stress can be bad for you. We no
longer die of smallpox or the plague and instead die of stressrelated diseases of lifestyle, like heart disease or diabetes, where damage
slowly accumulates over time. It is understood how stress can cause or
worsen disease or make you more vulnerable to other risk factors. Much
of this is even understood on the molecular level. Stress can even cause
your immune system to abnormally target hair follicles, causing your
hair to turn gray.
All true. Yet stress researchers do not aim to eliminate, to “cure,” us
of stress. It can’t be done, and even if it could, we wouldn’t want that—
we love stress when it’s the right kind; we call it “stimulation.”
The analogy is obvious. From massive, breathtaking barbarity to
countless pinpricks of microaggression, Us versus Them has produced
oceans of pain. Yet our generic goal is not to “cure” us of Us/Them
dichotomizing. It can’t be done, unless your amygdala is destroyed, in
which case everyone seems like an Us. But even if we could, we
wouldn’t want to eliminate Us/Them-ing.
I’m a fairly solitary person—after all, I’ve spent a significant amount
of my life studying a different species from my own, living alone in a
tent in Africa. Yet some of the most exquisitely happy moments of my
life have come from feeling like an Us, feeling accepted and not alone,
safe and understood, feeling part of something enveloping and larger
than myself, filled with a sense of being on the right side and doing both
well and good. There are even Us/Thems that I—eggheady, meek, and
amorphously pacifistic—would be willing to kill or die for.77
If we accept that there will always be sides, it’s a nontrivial to-do list
item to always be on the side of angels. Distrust essentialism. Keep in
mind that what seems like rationality is often just rationalization, playing
catch-up with subterranean forces that we never suspect. Focus on the
larger, shared goals. Practice perspective taking. Individuate, individuate,
individuate. Recall the historical lessons of how often the truly malignant
Thems keep themselves hidden and make third parties the fall guy.

425

And in the meantime, give the right-of-way to people driving cars
with the “Mean people suck” bumper sticker, and remind everyone that
we’re all in it together against Lord Voldemort and the House Slytherin.

426

Twelve

Hierarchy, Obedience, and
Resistance

A

t first glance, this chapter simply complements the previous one.
Us/Them-ing is about relations between groups and our
automatic tendency to favor in-groups over out-groups. Similarly,
hierarchies are about a type of relations within groups, our automatic
tendency to favor people close in rank to us over those who are distant.
Other themes repeat as well—the appearance of these tendencies early in
life and in other species, and the intertwined cognitive and affective
underpinnings.
Moreover, Us/Them categorization and hierarchical position interact.
In one study subjects gave racial designations to pictures of racially
ambiguous individuals; those dressed in low-status attire were more
likely to be categorized as black, high-status attire, white.1 Thus, among
these American subjects, Us/Them dichotomizing by race and the
hierarchy of socioeconomic status overlap.
But as we’ll see, hierarchy heads in different directions from
Us/Them-ing, and in uniquely human ways: Like other hierarchical
species, we have alpha individuals, but unlike most others, we
occasionally get to choose them. Moreover, they often are not merely
highest ranking but also “lead,” attempting to maximize this thing called
the common good. Furthermore, individuals vie for leadership with
differing visions of how best to attain that common good—political
ideologies. And finally, we express obedience both to an authority and to
the idea of Authority.

427

THE NATURE AND VARIETIES OF
HIERARCHIES

F

or starters, a hierarchy is a ranking system that formalizes unequal
access to limited resources, ranging from meat to that nebulous
thing called “prestige.” We begin by examining hierarchies in other
species (with the proviso that not all social species have hierarchies).
The textbook 1960s picture of hierarchies in other species was
straightforward. A group forms a stable, linear hierarchy where the alpha
individual dominates everyone, the beta individual dominates everyone
except the alpha, gamma everyone except alpha and beta, and so on.
Hierarchies establish a status quo by ritualizing inequalities. Two
baboons encounter something good—say, a spot shaded from the sun.
Without stable dominance relations, there’s a potentially injurious fight.
Likewise over the figs in a fruiting tree an hour later, and for the chance
to be groomed by someone after that, etc. Instead, fights rarely occur,
and if a subordinate forgets his status, a “threat yawn”—a ritualistic
display of canines—from the dominant male usually suffices.*,*2
Why have ranking systems? The answer, circa 1960s, was Marlin
Perkins group selection, where a species benefits from a stable social
system in which everyone knows their place. This view was fostered by
the primatological belief that in a hierarchy the alpha individual (i.e., the
one who gets first dibs on anything good) was in some manner a “leader”
who does something useful for the group. This was emphasized by the
Harvard primatologist Irven DeVore, who reported that among savanna
baboons, the alpha male led the troop in each day’s direction of foraging,
led communal hunts, defended everyone against lions, disciplined the
kids, changed the lightbulbs, etc. This turned out to be nonsense. Alpha
males don’t know which direction to go (given that they transfer into
troops as adolescents). No one follows them anyway; instead everyone
follows the old females, who do know. Hunts are disorganized free-foralls. And an alpha male might face down a lion to protect a kid—if the
kid is probably his own. Otherwise, he’d grab the safest spot.

428

Male baboon giving a (hopefully) intimidating threat yawn.

When viewed without Perkins-colored glasses, the benefits of
hierarchy are individualistic. Interactions that proclaim the status quo
obviously help the upper crust. Meanwhile, for subordinates, better to
not get a shady spot than to not get it after receiving a canine slash. This
is logical in a static, hereditary ranking system. In systems where ranks
change, this caution must be balanced with occasionally challenging
things—because the alpha male may be past his prime and getting by on
bluff.
This is a classic “pecking order” (a term derived from the
hierarchical system of hens). Variations begin. A first concern is whether
there’s actually a hierarchy, in the sense of gradations of rank. Instead, in
some species (e.g., South American marmoset monkeys) there’s the
alpha and there’s everyone else, with fairly equal relations.
In species with gradations, there’s the issue of what a “rank” actually
means. If your rank is number six in a hierarchy, in your mind are
numbers one through five interchangeable guys you’d better kowtow to,
while seven through infinity are undifferentiated peons? If so, it would
be irrelevant to you if numbers two and three, or numbers nine and ten,
were having tensions; rank gradations would be in the eyes of the
primatologist, not the primate.

429

In reality, such primates think about gradations of rank. For example,
a baboon typically interacts differently with, say, the guy one step above
him in rank than the one five steps above. Furthermore, primates note
gradations that don’t directly concern them. Recall from chapter 10 how
researchers recorded vocalizations of individuals in a troop, splicing
them to invent social scenarios. Play a recording of number ten giving a
dominance call and number one responding with a subordination call,
and everyone pays attention: whoa, Bill Gates just panhandled a
homeless guy.
This can be abstracted further, as shown with ravens, which are
outrageously smart birds. As with baboons, vocalizations implying
dominance reversals command more attention than does the status quo.
Remarkably, this even occurs for reversals between birds in a
neighboring flock. Ravens discern dominance relations just by listening
and are interested in hierarchical gossip about a different group.
Next is the issue of variation within and among species as to what
life is like having a particular rank. Does being high ranking merely
mean that everyone keeps tabs on your mood or, at the other extreme,
that no one else is getting enough calories to ovulate, lactate, or survive?
How often do subordinates challenge dominant individuals? How readily
do dominant individuals vent their frustrations on subordinates? How
much do such subordinates have coping outlets (e.g., someone to groom
with)?
Then there is the issue of how high rank is attained. In many cases
(e.g., female baboons, as noted) rank is inherited, a system with kin
selection written all over it. In contrast, in other species/sexes (male
baboons, for example) ranks shift over time, changing as a function of
fights, showdowns, and Shakespearean melodrama, where rising in the
hierarchy is about brawn, sharp canines, and winning the right fight.*
Hurrah for clawing your way to the top, for sweaty, zero-sum,
muscular capitalism. But what about the more interesting issue of how
high rank, once attained, is maintained? As we’ll see, this has less to do
with muscle than with social skills.
This ushers in a key point—social competence is challenging, and
this is reflected in the brain. The British anthropologist Robin Dunbar
has shown that across various taxa (e.g., “birds,” “ungulates” or
“primates”), the bigger the average size of the social group in the
species, (a) the larger the brain, relative to total body size, and (b) the

430

larger the neocortex, relative to total brain size. Dunbar’s influential
“social brain hypothesis” posits that increases in social complexity and
the evolutionary expansion of the neocortex have been linked. This link
also occurs within species. Among some primates, group size can vary
tenfold (depending on the richness of the ecosystem). This was modeled
in a fascinating neuroimaging study, in which captive macaque monkeys
were housed in different-sized groups; the bigger the group, the more
thickening of the prefrontal cortex and the superior temporal gyrus, a
cortical region involved in Theory of Mind, and the tighter the activity
coupling between the two.*3
Thus primate social complexity and big brains go together. This is
shown further by examining fission-fusion species, where the size of the
social group regularly changes dramatically. Baboons, for example, start
and end the day in a large, coherent troop, whereas midday foraging
occurs in small groups. As other examples, hyenas hunt in groups but
scavenge individually, and wolves often do the opposite.
Sociality is more complex in fission-fusion species. You must
remember if someone’s rank differs when in a subgroup versus the entire
group. Being away from someone all day makes it tempting to see if
dominance relations have changed since breakfast.
One study compared fission-fusion primates (chimps, bonobos,
orangutans, spider monkeys) and non-fission-fusion (gorillas, capuchins,
long-tailed macaques).4 Among these captive animals, fission-fusion
species were better at frontocortical tasks and had larger neocortices
relative to total brain size. Studies of corvids (crows, ravens, magpies,
jackdaws) showed the same thing.
Thus “rank” and “hierarchy” in other animals is anything but
straightforward and varies considerably depending on the species,
gender, and social group.

431

RANK AND HIERARCHY IN HUMANS

H

uman hierarchies resemble those of other species in many ways.
For example, there’s the distinction between stable and unstable
hierarchies—centuries of czarist rule versus the first inning of the
Russian Revolution. As we’ll see below, those situations evoke different
patterns of brain activation.
Group size also matters—primate species with bigger social groups
have larger cortices relative to the rest of the brain (with humans topping
off both measures).5 If you graph the size of the neocortex against the
average size of the social group across primate species, you get
“Dunbar’s number,” the predicted average group size in traditional
human cultures. It’s 150 people, and there’s much evidence supporting
that prediction.
This also plays out in the Western world, where the larger the size of
someone’s social network (often calculated by the number of email/texting relationships), the larger the vmPFC, orbital PFC, and
amygdala, and the better the person’s Theory of Mind–related skills.6
Do these brain regions expand when someone has a larger social
network, or do larger sizes of these regions predispose people toward
forming larger networks? Naturally, some of both.
As with other species, human quality of life also varies with the
consequences of rank inequalities—there’s a big difference between the
powerful getting seated at a restaurant before you and the powerful
getting to behead you if the fancy strikes them. Recall the study of thirtyseven countries showing that the more income inequality, the more
preadolescent bullying in schools. In other words, countries with more
brutal socioeconomic hierarchies produce children who enforce their
own hierarchies more brutally.7
Amid these cross-species similarities, there are unique things about
humans, including the following.

Membership in Multiple Hierarchies

432

We belong to multiple hierarchies and can have very different ranks
in them.* Naturally, this invites rationalization and system justification—
deciding why hierarchies where we flounder are crap and the one where
we reign really counts.
Implicit in being part of multiple hierarchies is their potential
overlap. Consider socioeconomic status, which encompasses both local
and global hierarchies. I’m doing great socioeconomically—my car’s
fancier than yours. I’m doing terribly—I’m not richer than Bill Gates.

The Specialization of Some Ranking Systems
A high-ranking chimp is generally good at related things. But
humans can dwell in incredibly specialized hierarchies. Example:
There’s a guy named Joey Chestnut who’s a god in one subculture—he’s
the most successful competitive hot dog eater in history. However,
whether Chestnut’s gift generalizes to other domains is unclear.

Internal Standards
This is the circumstance of having internal standards independent of
the outside world. As an example, winning or losing at a team sport
generally increases or decreases, respectively, testosterone levels in men.
But things are subtler than that—testosterone more closely tracks
winning through skill (rather than luck), and also more closely tracks
individual (rather than team) performance.8

—
Thus, as usual, we are just like other animals but totally different. We
now consider the biology of individual ranks.

433

THE VIEW FROM THE TOP, THE VIEW
FROM THE BOTTOM
Detecting Rank
Much as with our ability to detect Thems, we’re intensely interested
in and adept at spotting rank differences. For example, forty milliseconds
is all we need to reliably distinguish between a dominant face (with
direct gaze) and a subordinate one (with averted gaze and lowered
eyebrows). Status is also signaled in the body, albeit to a less accurate
extent—dominance with an exposed torso with arms wide open,
subordination with arms sheltering a bent torso, intent on invisibility.
Again, we recognize those cues at automatic speeds.9
Human infants also recognize status differences, as shown in a truly
clever study. Show an infant a computer screen displaying a big square
and little square; each has eyes and a mouth.10 The two squares are at
opposite ends of the screen and repeatedly move to the other side,
passing each other in the process. Then show a version where the two
bump into each other—conflict. The squares bump repeatedly until one
of them “gives in” by lying down, letting the other one pass. Toddlers
look at the interaction longer when it’s the big square that gives in, rather
than the little one. The first scenario is more interesting because it
violates expectations—“Hey, I thought big squares dominated little
squares.” Just like monkeys and corvids.
But wait, this may just reflect folk physics, not attunement to
hierarchy—big things knock over little things, not the other way around.
This confound was eliminated. First, the adversarial squares were not
touching when one gave in. Second, the subordinating one would fall in
the opposite direction from that predicted by physics—rather than being
knocked backward, it prostrates itself before the alpha square.
Along with this expertise comes intense interest in hierarchy—as
emphasized in chapter 9, gossip is mostly about the status of status: Are
there any fallen mighty? Have the meek inherited anything lately?
Regardless of which square wins, infants look longer at the conflict
situation than when the squares peacefully glide past each other.
434

This is logical self-interest. Knowing the hierarchical lay of the land
helps you navigate it better. But there’s more to that than just selfinterest. Those monkeys and corvids not only pay attention when there
are rank reversals in their group; they do the same when eavesdropping
on the neighbors. Same with us.11
What’s happening in our brains when we contemplate rank?12
Naturally, the prefrontal cortex weighs in. Frontal damage impairs skill
at recognizing dominance relations (along with recognizing kinship,
deception, or intimacy in faces). The vlPFC and dlPFC activate and
become coupled when we figure out dominance relations or look at a
dominant face, reflecting the combined affective and cognitive
components to the process. These responses are most pronounced when
considering someone of the opposite sex (which may reflect mating
goals more than mere academic interest about hierarchy).
Seeing a dominant face also activates the superior temporal gyrus
(STG, with its role in Theory of Mind) and increases its coupling to the
PFC—we’re more interested in what dominant individuals are
thinking.13 Moreover, individual “social status” neurons occur in the
monkeys. And as noted in chapter 2, contemplating an unstable hierarchy
does all of the above, plus activates the amygdala, reflecting the
unsettling effects of instability. Of course, though, none of this tells us
what we are contemplating at these times.

Your Brain and Your Own Status
Your own rank does logical things to your brain. In macaque
monkeys an increase in rank increases mesolimbic dopamine signaling.
And back to that rhesus monkey study showing that being in a larger
social group causes expansion and functional coupling of the STG and
PFC. The study also showed that the higher the rank attained within each
group, the greater the expansion and coupling. Consistent with that, a
study of mice showed that higher-ranking animals had stronger
excitatory inputs into the mouse equivalent of the (cognitive) dlPFC.14
I love these findings. As I said, in lots of social species, attaining
high rank is about sharp teeth and good fighting skills. But maintaining
the high rank is about social intelligence and impulse control: knowing

435

which provocations to ignore and which coalitions to form,
understanding other individuals’ actions.
Does the monkey make history, or does history make the monkey?
Once groups were formed, did individuals who became dominant
respond with the biggest expansions of those brain regions? Or, prior to
group formation, were the individuals destined to become dominant
already endowed in those regions?
Unfortunately, animals weren’t imaged before and after group
formation in the study. However, subsequent work showed that the larger
the size of the group, the larger the association between dominance and
those brain changes, suggesting that attaining high rank drives the
enlargement.* In contrast, the mouse study showed that when synaptic
excitability was increased or decreased in the dlPFC, rank rose or
declined, respectively, suggesting that enlargement drives attainment of
high rank. The brain can shape behavior can shape the brain can
shape . . .15

Your Body and Your Own Status
What about biological differences outside the brain as a function of
rank? For example, do high- and low-ranking males differ in their
testosterone profiles and, if there are differences, are they causes,
consequences, or mere correlates of the rank differences?
Folk endocrinology has always held that high rank (in any species)
and elevated testosterone levels go hand in hand, with the latter powering
the former. But as covered at length in chapter 4, neither is the case in
primates. As a reminder:
In stable hierarchies high-ranking males typically don’t
have the highest testosterone concentrations. Instead it’s
usually low-ranking adolescent males, starting fights
they can’t finish. When there is an association between
high rank and high testosterone, it generally reflects the
higher rates of sexual behavior among dominant
individuals driving secretion.
An exception to the above is during unstable times. For
example, among a number of primate species, high-

436

ranking males have the highest testosterone levels for
the first months but not years after group formation.
During unstable times, the high-testosterone/high-rank
relationship is more a consequence of the high rates of
fighting among the high-ranking cohort than of rank
itself.16
Reiterating the “challenge hypothesis,” the elevation in
testosterone levels caused by fighting is not so much
about aggression as about challenge. If status is
maintained aggressively, testosterone fosters aggression;
if status were maintained by writing beautiful, delicate
haikus, testosterone would foster that.
Next we consider the relationship between rank and stress. Are
different ranks associated with different levels of stress hormones, styles
of coping, and incidences of stress-related disease? Is it more stressful to
be dominant or subordinate?
An extensive literature shows that a sense of control and
predictability reduces stress. Yet monkey research conducted by Joseph
Brady in 1958 produced a different view. Half the animals could press a
bar to delay shocks (“executive” monkeys); the passive other half
received a shock whenever the executive did. And the executive
monkeys, with their control and predictability, were more likely to
ulcerate. This birthed the “executive stress syndrome”—those on top are
burdened with the stressors of control, leadership, and responsibility.17
Executive stress syndrome became a meme. But a huge problem was
that monkeys were not randomly assigned to be “executives” and
“nonexecutives.” Instead, those that pressed the bar soonest in pilot
studies were made executives.* Such monkeys were subsequently shown
to be more emotionally reactive, so Brady had inadvertently stacked the
executive side with the ulcer-prone neurotics.
So much for ulcerating executives; contemporary studies show that
the worst stress-related health typically occurs in middle management,
with its killer combo of high work demands but little autonomy—
responsibility without control.
By the 1970s dogma held that subordinate organisms are the most
stressed and unhealthy. This was first shown with lab rodents, where
subordinate animals typically had elevated resting levels of
437

glucocorticoids. In other words, even in the absence of stress, they
showed signs of chronically activating the stress response. The same is
observed in primates ranging from rhesus monkeys to lemurs. Same for
hamsters, guinea pigs, wolves, rabbits, and pigs. Even fish. Even sugar
gliders, whatever they are. In a pair of unintentional studies of captive
monkeys in which subordinate individuals were basically subordinated to
death, such animals had extensive damage to the hippocampus, a brain
region very sensitive to the damaging effects of glucocorticoid excess.18
My own work with baboons in Africa showed the same (being the
first such studies of wild primates). In general, low-ranking male
baboons had elevated basal glucocorticoid levels. When something
stressful did occur, their glucocorticoid stress response was relatively
sluggish. When the stressor was over, their levels returned to that
elevated baseline more slowly. In other words, too much of the stuff in
the bloodstream when you don’t need it, and too little when you do.
Remarkably, at the nuts-and-bolts level of brain, pituitary, and adrenals,
the elevated basal glucocorticoid levels of a subordinate occurred for the
same reasons as the elevated levels in humans with major depression.
For a baboon, social subordination resembles the learned helplessness of
depression.
Excessive glucocorticoids get you into trouble in various ways,
helping explain why chronic stress makes you sick. Subordinate baboons
paid a price in other realms as well. They had (a) elevated blood pressure
and a sluggish cardiovascular response to a stressor; (b) lower levels of
“good” HDL cholesterol; (c) subtle immune impairments, a higher
frequency of getting sick and slower wound healing; (d) a testicular
system more easily disrupted by stress than that of dominant males; and
(e) lower circulating levels of a key growth factor. Try not to be a
subordinate baboon.
Chickens and eggs reappear—does a particular physiological
attribute contribute to rank, or the reverse? This is impossible to
determine in wild animals, but in captive primate populations the
distinctive physiological features of a rank generally follow, rather than
precede, the establishment of the rank.19
At that point I’d happily proclaim that these findings reflected the
nature of Hierarchy, with a capital H, and of the stressfulness of social
subordination. Which turned out to be totally wrong.

438

A first wrinkle was provided by Jeanne Altmann of Princeton and
Susan Alberts of Duke, studying wild baboons with stable hierarchies.
They found the familiar picture, namely of subordination associated with
elevated basal glucocorticoid levels. However, unexpectedly, levels in
alphas were elevated into the range seen in lowest-ranking males. Why is
life more stressful for alpha than beta males? The two ranks had similar
rates of being challenged by lower-ranking males (a source of stress) and
being groomed by females (a source of coping). However, alpha males
fight more often and spend more time in sexual consortships with
females (which is majorly stressful, as the male has to defend his
consortship from harassing males). Ironically, a chief benefit of
alphadom—sexual consortships—can be a major stressor. Be careful
what you wish for.20

Modified from R. Sapolsky, “Sympathy for the CEO,” Sci 333 (2011): 293.
Visit bit.ly/2ngWthp for a larger version of this graph.

Okay, so except for the curse of being alpha, social subordination is
generally stressful. But this is also wrong. It’s not just the rank that
matters but what the rank means.
Consider the primate species in which a relationship has been found
between rank and glucocorticoid levels. Across these species, basal

439

glucocorticoid levels are relatively elevated in subordinate animals if: (a)
dominant individuals in bad moods frequently displace aggression onto
subordinates; (b) subordinates lack coping outlets (such as a grooming
partner); and/or (c) the social structure is such that subordinate animals
have no relatives present. And when the profile was the opposite, it was
dominant animals with the highest glucocorticoid levels.21
The “meaning” of rank and its physiological correlates also vary
between different groups of the same species. For example, while health
of subordinate baboons fared particularly badly in a troop with high rates
of dominant males displacing aggression, the health of dominant males
fared badly in a troop during a period of instability centered around the
top of the hierarchy.
And superimposed on all this, personality shapes the perception of
the reality of rank. Using the word “personality” about other species used
to cost you tenure, but it’s now a hot topic in primatology. Individuals in
other species have stable differences in temperament—how likely
someone is to displace aggression when frustrated, how socially
affiliative they are, how rattled they get by novelty, and so on. Primates
differ as to whether they see watering holes as half empty or full; in the
context of hierarchy, some individuals who are number two care only
that they’re not number one, and some individuals who are number nine
gain comfort from at least not being number ten.
Not surprisingly, personality influences the rank/health relationship.
For the same high rank, an individual is likely to be less healthy if he (a)
is particularly reactive to novelty; (b) sees threats in benign
circumstances (e.g., his rival showing up and merely taking a nap
nearby); (c) doesn’t take advantage of social control (e.g., letting a rival
determine the start of an obvious showdown); (d) doesn’t differentiate
between good and bad news (e.g., distinguishing behaviorally between
winning and losing a fight); and/or (e) doesn’t have social outlets when
frustrated. You could make a living giving baboons “how to succeed in
business” seminars built around these factors.22
Meanwhile, on the flip side, for the same low rank, an individual
tends to be healthier if (a) he has lots of grooming relationships; and/or
(b) there’s someone even lower ranking than him to serve as a target for
displaced aggression.
Thus, in other species, how does rank affect the body? It depends on
what it’s like to have a certain rank in that species and particular social

440

group, and the personality traits that filter the perception of those
variables. What about humans?

And Us
A smidgen of neurobiology research has examined differences in
how people feel about hierarchy. Back to a concept from the last chapter,
social-dominance orientation (SDO), the measure of how much people
value power and prestige. In one study subjects viewed someone in
emotional pain. As reviewed in chapter 2, this activates the anterior
cingulate cortex and insular cortex—empathy, and disgust at the
circumstance that evoked the pain. The higher someone’s SDO score, the
less activation of those two regions. Those with the most interest in
prestige and power seem least likely to feel for those less fortunate.23
What about the biological correlates of a human having a particular
rank? In some ways we’re more subtle than other primates; in others, far
less so.
Two studies examined high-status individuals in government or the
military (in the latter case, officers up to the level of colonel). As
compared with low-status controls, these folks had lower basal
glucocorticoid levels, less self-reported anxiety, and an enhanced sense
of control (this telling us nothing, however, as to which came first—the
rank or the unstressed profile).24
Baboons redux. But something subtler was happening. The authors
deconstructed high rank with three questions: (a) How many people
ranked lower than the subject in his organization? (b) How much
autonomy did he have (e.g., to hire and fire)? (c) How many people did
he directly supervise? And high rank came with low glucocorticoids and
anxiety only insofar as the position was about the first two variables—
lots of subordinates, lots of authority. In contrast, having to directly
supervise lots of subordinates did not predict those good outcomes.
This gives credence to executives’ bellyaching about how they aren’t
supervising eleventy people; instead they have eleventy bosses. To
accrue the full physiological benefits of high status, don’t supervise
people; instead, glide through the workplace like a master of the universe
while minions whom you never interact with smile obsequiously. It’s not
just rank; it’s what rank means and entails.

441

In what sense is the status/health relationship in humans less subtle
than in other primates?25 In that it reflects the most permeating form of
status any primate has invented, namely socioeconomic status (SES).
Numerous studies examine the “health/SES” gradient, the fact that life
expectancy and the incidence and morbidity of numerous diseases are
worse in poor people.
To summarize this sprawling topic that was reviewed in chapter 9:
Which comes first—poverty or poor health?
Overwhelmingly the former. Recall that developing in a
low-SES womb makes poorer health as an adult more
likely.
It’s not that the poor have poor health and everyone else
is equally healthy. For every step down the SES ladder,
health is worse.
The problem isn’t that poor people have less health-care
access. The gradient occurs in countries with socialized
medicine and universal health care and for diseases
whose incidence is independent of health-care access.
Only about a third of the variability is explained by the
poor being exposed to more health risk factors (e.g.,
pollution) and fewer protective factors (e.g., health club
memberships).
The gradient seems to be about the psychological
baggage of SES. (a) Subjective SES predicts health at
least as accurately as objective SES, meaning that it’s
not about being poor. It’s about feeling poor. (b)
Independent of absolute levels of income, the more
income inequality in a community—meaning the more
frequently the poor have their noses rubbed in their low
status—the steeper the health gradient. (c) Lots of
inequality in a community makes for low social capital
(trust and a sense of efficacy), and that’s the most direct
cause of the poor health. Collectively these studies show
that the psychological stress of low SES is what
decreases health. Consistent with that, it is diseases that
are most sensitive to stress (cardiovascular,

442

gastrointestinal, and psychiatric disorders) that show the
steepest SES/health gradients.
The SES/health gradient is ubiquitous. Regardless of gender, age, or
race. With or without universal health care. In societies that are
ethnically homogeneous and those rife with ethnic tensions. In societies
in which the central mythology is a capitalist credo of “Living well is the
best revenge” and those in which it is a socialist anthem of “From each
according to his ability, to each according to his need.” When humans
invented material inequality, they came up with a way of subjugating the
low ranking like nothing ever before seen in the primate world.

A Really Odd Thing That We Do Now and Then
Amid the unique features of human hierarchies, one of the most
distinctive and recent is this business of having leaders and choosing
who they are.
As discussed, outdated primatology confused high rank with
“leadership” in silly ways. An alpha male baboon is not a leader; he just
gets the best stuff. And while everyone follows a knowledgeable old
female when she chooses her foraging route in the morning, there is
every indication that she is “going” rather than “leading.”
But humans have leaders, anchored in the unique notion of the
common good. What counts as the common good, and the leader’s role
in fostering it, obviously varies, ranging from leading the horde in the
siege of a castle to leading a bird-watching walk.
Even more newfangled is humans choosing their leaders, whether
selecting a clan head by acclamation around the campfire, or a threeyear-long presidential campaign season topped with the bizarreness of
the Electoral College. How do we choose leaders?
A frequent conscious component of decision making is to vote for
experience or competence rather than for stances on specific issues. This
is so common that in one study faces judged to look more competent
won elections 68 percent of the time.26 People also make conscious
voting choices based on single, potentially irrelevant issues (e.g., voting
for assistant county dogcatcher based on the candidates’ stances on drone
warfare in Pakistan). And then there’s the facet of American decision

443

making that baffles citizens of other democracies, namely voting for
“likability.” Just consider Bush v. Kerry in 2004, where Republican
pundits suggested that people’s choice for the most powerful position on
earth should reflect which guy you’d rather have a beer with.
At least as interesting are the automatic and unconscious elements of
decision making. As probably the strongest factor, of candidates with
identical political stances, people are more likely to vote for the betterlooking one. Given the preponderance of male candidates and
officeholders, this mostly translates into voting for masculine traits—tall,
healthy-looking, symmetrical features, high forehead, prominent brow
ridges, jutting jaw.27
As first raised in chapter 3, this fits into the larger phenomenon of
attractive people typically being rated as having better personalities and
higher moral standards and as being kinder, more honest, more friendly,
and more trustworthy. And they are treated better—for the same résumé,
being more likely to be hired; for the same job, getting a higher salary;
for the same crime, being less likely to be convicted. This is the beautyis-good stereotype, summarized in an 1882 quote by Friedrich Schiller:
“Physical beauty is the sign of an interior beauty, a spiritual and moral
beauty.”28 This is the flip side of the view that disfigurement, illness, and
injury are karmic payback for one’s sins. And as we saw in chapter 3, we
use the same circuitry in the orbitofrontal PFC when we evaluate the
moral goodness of an act and the beauty of a face.
Other implicit factors come into play. One study examined the
campaign speeches of candidates in every prime minister election in
Australian history.29 In 80 percent of elections the winner was the one to
use more collective pronouns (i.e., “we” and “us”), suggesting an
attraction to candidates who speak on everyone’s behalf.
There are also contingent automatic preferences. For example, in
scenarios concerning war, both Western and East Asian subjects prefer
candidates with older, more masculine faces; during peacetime, it’s
younger, more feminine faces. Furthermore, in scenarios involving
fostering cooperation between groups, intelligent-looking faces are
preferred; at other times more intelligent faces are viewed as less
masculine or desirable.30
These automatic biases fall into place early in life. One study showed
kids, ages five to thirteen, pairs of faces of candidates from obscure
elections and asked them whom they’d prefer as captain on a
444

hypothetical boat trip. And kids picked the winner 71 percent of the
time.31
Scientists doing these studies often speculate as to why such
preferences have evolved; frankly, much of this feels like just-so stories.
For example, in analyzing the preference for leaders with more
masculine faces during war, the authors noted that high testosterone
levels produce both more masculine facial features (generally true) and
more aggressive behavior (not true, back to chapter 4), and that
aggressiveness is what you want in a leader during times of war
(personally, not so sure about that one). Thus, preferring candidates with
more masculine faces increases the odds of landing the aggressive leader
you need to triumph in war. And everyone then passes on more copies of
their genes. Voilà.
Regardless of causes, the main point is the power of these forces—
five-year-olds with 71 percent accuracy demonstrate that these are some
very generalized, deeply entrenched biases. And then our conscious
cognitions play catch-up to make our decision seems careful and wise.

445

OH, WHY NOT TAKE THIS ONE ON?
POLITICS AND POLITICAL
ORIENTATIONS

S

o humans keep getting weirder—multiple hierarchies and having
leaders and occasionally choosing them and doing so with some
silly, implicit criteria. Now let’s plunge into politics.
Frans de Waal introduced the term “politics” into primatology with
his classic book Chimpanzee Politics, using it in the sense of
“Machiavellian intelligence”—nonhuman primates struggling in socially
complex manners to control access to resources. The book documents
chimpanzee genius for such maneuvering.
This is “politics” in the traditional human sense as well. But I will
use a more restricted, starry-eyed sense, which is politics being the
struggle among the powerful with differing visions of the common good.
Forget liberals accusing conservatives of waging war on the poor. Ditto
conservatives accusing those depraved liberals of destroying family
values. Cutting through this posturing, we’ll assume that everyone
equally desires that people do as well as possible, but differs as to how
best to accomplish this. In this section we’ll focus on three issues:
a. Do political orientations tend to be internally consistent
(e.g., do people’s opinions about their town’s littering
policy and about military actions in Somewhere-istan
come as an ideological package)? Quick answer:
usually.
b. Do such consistent orientations arise from deep, implicit
factors with remarkably little to do with specific
political issues? Yup.
c. Can one begin to detect the bits of biology underlying
these factors? Of course.

The Internal Consistency of Political Orientation
446

The previous chapter examined the remarkable consistency in
Us/Them orientations—people who dislike a particular out-group on
economic grounds are likelier than chance to dislike another group on
historical grounds, another on cultural, and so on.32 Much the same is
true here—social, economic, environmental, and international political
orientations tend to come in a package. This consistency explains the
humor behind a New Yorker cartoon (pointed out by the political
psychologist John Jost) showing a woman modeling a dress for her
husband and asking, “Does this dress make me look Republican?”
Another example concerns the bioethicist Leon Kass, who not only has
had influential conservative stances on human cloning, finding the
possibility “repugnant,” but also finds it repugnant when people display
the “catlike activity” of licking ice cream cones in public. More to come
on his issues, including with licking ice cream cones. What this internal
consistency suggests is that political ideology is merely one
manifestation of broader, underlying ideology—as we’ll see, this helps
explain conservatives being more likely than liberals to have cleaning
supplies in their bedrooms.
Naturally, strict consistency in political ideology isn’t always the
rule. Libertarians are a mixture of social liberalism and economic
conservatism; conversely, black Baptist churches are traditionally
economically liberal but socially conservative (for example, rejecting
both gay rights and the idea that gay rights are a form of civil rights).
Moreover, neither extreme of political ideology is monolithic (and
ignoring that, I’ll be simplifying throughout by using “liberal” and “leftwing” interchangeably, as well as “conservative” and “right-wing”).
Nonetheless, the building blocks of political orientation tend to be
stable and internally consistent. It’s usually possible to dress like a
Republican or lick ice cream like a Democrat.

Implicit Factors Underlying Political Orientation
If political ideology is but one manifestation of larger internal forces
pertinent to everything from cleaning supplies in the bedroom to ice
cream consumption, are there psychological, affective, cognitive, and
visceral ways in which leftists and rightists tend to differ? This question
has produced deeply fascinating findings; I’ll try to corral them into
some categories.
447

INTELLIGENCE

Oh, what the hell? Let’s begin with something inflammatory. Starting
with Theodor Adorno in the 1950s, people have suggested that lower
intelligence predicts adherence to conservative ideology.33 Some but not
all studies since then have supported this conclusion. More consistent
has been a link between lower intelligence and a subtype of
conservatism, namely right-wing authoritarianism (RWA, a fondness for
hierarchy). One particularly thorough demonstration of this involved
more than fifteen thousand subjects in the UK and United States;
importantly, the links among low IQ, RWA, and intergroup prejudice
were there after controlling for education and socioeconomic status. The
standard, convincing explanation for the link is that RWA provides
simple answers, ideal for people with poor abstract reasoning skills.
INTELLECTUAL STYLE

This literature has two broad themes. One is that rightists are
relatively uncomfortable intellectually with ambiguity; this is covered
below. The other is that leftists, well, think harder, have a greater
capacity for what the political scientist Philip Tetlock of the University
of Pennsylvania calls “integrative complexity.”
In one study conservatives and liberals, when asked about the causes
of poverty, both tended toward personal attributions (“They’re poor
because they’re lazy”). But only if they had to make snap judgments.
Give people more time, and liberals shifted toward situational
explanations (“Wait, things are stacked against the poor”). In other
words, conservatives start gut and stay gut; liberals go from gut to
head.34
This differing attributional style extends way beyond politics. Tell
liberals or conservatives about a guy who trips over someone’s feet while
learning a dance, ask for a snap assessment, and everyone does personal
attribution—the guy’s clumsy. It’s only with time that the liberals go
situational—maybe the dance is really difficult.
Obviously this dichotomy isn’t perfect. Rightists did personal
attribution for Lewinsky-gate (Bill Clinton’s rotten) while leftists did
situational (it’s a vast right-wing conspiracy), and things ran the opposite
with Nixon and Watergate. However, they are pretty reliable.
Why the difference? Liberals and conservatives are equally capable
of thinking past gut personal attributions to subtler situational ones—

448

when asked to do so, both are equally adept at dispassionately presenting
the viewpoints of the opposite camp. It’s that liberals are more motivated
to push toward situational explanations.
Why? Some have suggested it’s a greater respect for thinking, which
readily becomes an unhelpful tautology. Linda Skitka of the University
of Illinois emphasizes how the personal attributions of snap judgments
readily feel dissonant to liberals, at odds with their principles; thus they
are motivated to think their way to a more consonant view. In contrast,
even with more time, conservatives don’t become more situational,
because there’s no dissonance.

Proportion of rulings in favor of the prisoner s by ordinal position. Circled points indicate
the first decision in each of the three decision sessions; tick marks on x axis denote every
third case; dotted line denotes food break. Because unequal session lengths resulted in a low
number of cases for some of the later ordinal positions, the graph is based on the first 95%
of the data from each session.

While logical, this just turfs us to asking where the liberal ideology
causing the dissonance comes from in the first place. As we’ll see, it
comes from factors having little to do with cognitive style.
These findings suggest that it’s easier to make a liberal think like a
conservative than the other way around.35 Or, stated in a familiar way,
increasing cognitive load* should make people more conservative. This
is precisely the case. The time pressure of snap judgments is a version of

449

increased cognitive load. Likewise, people become more conservative
when tired, in pain or distracted with a cognitive task, or when blood
alcohol levels rise.
Recall from chapter 3 that willpower takes metabolic power, thanks
to the glucose demands of the frontal cortex. This was the finding that
when people are hungry, they become less generous in economic games.
A real-world example of this is startling (see graph on previous page)—
in a study of more than 1,100 judicial rulings, prisoners were granted
parole at about a 60 percent rate when judges had recently eaten, and at
essentially a 0 percent rate just before judges ate (note also the overall
decline over the course of a tiring day). Justice may be blind, but she’s
sure sensitive to her stomach gurgling.36
MORAL COGNITION

Another minefield. Surprise, people at both ends of the political
spectrum accuse the other side of impoverished moral thought.37 One
direction of this is seemingly bolstered by chapter 7’s Kohlberg stages of
moral development. Liberals, steeped in civil disobedience, tend to be at
a “higher” Kohlberg stage than are conservatives, with their fondness for
law and order. Are rightists less intellectually capable of reasoning at a
more advanced Kohlberg stage, or are they less motivated to do so?
Seemingly the latter—rightists and leftists are equally capable of
presenting the other’s perspective.
Jonathan Haidt of NYU provides a very different view.38 He
identifies six foundations of morality—care versus harm; fairness versus
cheating; liberty versus oppression; loyalty versus betrayal; authority
versus subversion; sanctity versus degradation. Both experimental and
real-world data show that liberals preferentially value the first three
goals, namely care, fairness, and liberty (and, showing an overlap with
Kohlbergian formulations, undervaluing loyalty, authority, and sanctity is
in many ways synonymous with postconventional thinking). In contrast,
conservatives heavily value loyalty, authority, and sanctity. Obviously,
this is a big difference. Is it okay to criticize your group to outsiders?
Rightists: no, that’s disloyal. Leftists: yes, if justified. Should you ever
disobey a law? Rightists: no, that undermines authority. Leftists: of
course, if it’s a bad law. Is it okay to burn the flag? Rightists: never, it’s
sacred. Leftists: come on, it’s a piece of cloth.

450

These differing emphases explain a lot—for example, the classical
liberal view is that everyone has equal rights to happiness; rightists
instead discount fairness in favor of expedient authority, generating the
classical conservative view that some socioeconomic inequality is a
tolerable price for things running smoothly.
What does it mean that, in Haidt’s view, conservatives count up six
(moral foundations) on their toes and liberals only three? Here is where
internecine sniping starts. Conservatives embrace Haidt’s
characterization of liberals as being morally impoverished, with half
their moral foundations atrophied.* The opposite interpretation,
espoused by Jost, and Joshua Greene of Harvard, is that liberals have
more refined moral foundations, having jettisoned the less important,
more historically damaging ones that conservatives perseverate on—in
effect, liberals count from one to three, while conservatives really only
count four to six.
Why are conservatives more concerned with “binding foundations”
like loyalty, authority, and sanctity, often stepping-stones to right-wing
authoritarianism and social-dominance orientation? This segues to the
next section.
AFFECTIVE PSYCHOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES

Research consistently shows that leftists and rightists differ in
overlapping categories of emotional makeup. To summarize: on the
average, rightists are made more anxious by ambiguity and have a
stronger need for closure, dislike novelty, are more comforted by
structure and hierarchy, more readily perceive circumstances as
threatening, and are more parochial in their empathy.
The conservative dislike of ambiguity has been demonstrated in
numerous apolitical contexts (e.g., responses to visual illusions, taste in
entertainment) and is closely related to the differing feelings about
novelty, which by definition evokes ambiguity and uncertainty.39 The
differing views of novelty certainly explain the liberal view that with
correct reforms, our best days are ahead of us in a novel future, whereas
conservatives view our best days as behind us, in familiar circumstances
that should be returned to, to make things great again. Once again, these
differences in psychological makeup play out in apolitical realms as well
—liberals are more likely to own travel books than are conservatives.

451

The conservative need for predictability and structure obviously fuels
the emphases on loyalty, obedience, and law and order.40 It also gives
insights into a puzzling feature of the political landscape: how is it that
over the last fifty years, Republicans have persuaded impoverished white
Americans to so often vote against their own economic self-interest? Do
they actually believe that they’re going to win the lottery and then get to
enjoy the privileged side of American inequality? Nah. The
psychological issues of needing structured familiarity show that for poor
whites, voting Republican constitutes an implicit act of system
justification and risk aversion. Better to resist change and deal with the
devil that you know. Harking back to the last chapter, gay conservatives
show more implicit antigay biases than do gay liberals. Better to hate
who you are, if that bolsters a system whose stability and predictability
are sources of comfort.
Intertwined with these variables is the Left/Right difference in
tendency to see things as threatening, particularly when conservatism is
anchored in authoritarianism. Life is filled with ambiguity, most of all
with the novel future, and if those make you anxious, lots of things will
seem threatening. Now, a “threat” can be abstract, such as to your selfesteem; there are few political differences in the perception of such
threats. The differences concern concrete threats to your keister.
This helps explain political stances—“I have a list here of two
hundred communist spies working in the State Department” is a pretty
good demonstration of imagined threat.* The difference in threat
perception can be apolitical. In one study subjects had to rapidly do a
task when a word flashed up on a screen. Authoritarian conservatives,
but not liberals, responded more rapidly to threatening words like
“cancer,” “snake,” or “mugger” than to nonthreatening words (e.g.,
“telescope,” “tree,” “canteen”). Moreover, as compared with liberals,
such conservatives are more likely to associate “arms” with “weapons”
(rather than with “legs”), more likely to interpret ambiguous faces as
threatening, and more easily conditioned to associate negative (but not
positive) stimuli with neutral stimuli. Republicans report three times as
many nightmares as do Democrats, particularly ones involving loss of
personal power. As the saying goes, a conservative is a liberal who has
been mugged.
Related to this is “terror-management theory,” which suggests that
conservatism is psychologically rooted in a pronounced fear of death;

452

supporting this is the finding that priming people to think about their
mortality makes them more conservative.41
These differences in threat perception help explain the differing
views as to role of government—providing for people (the leftist view;
social services, education, etc.) or protecting people (the rightist view;
law and order, the military, etc.).*
Fear, anxiety, the terror of mortality—it must be a drag being rightwing. But despite that, in a multinational study, rightists were happier
than leftists.42 Why? Perhaps it’s having simpler answers, unburdened by
motivated correction. Or, as favored by the authors, because system
justification allows conservatives to rationalize and be less discomfited
by inequality. And as economic inequality rises, the happiness gap
between the Right and the Left increases.
As emphasized, political ideology is just one manifestation of
intellectual and emotional style. As a great example, a four-year-old’s
openness to a new toy predicts how open she’ll be as an adult to, say, the
United States forging new relations with Iran or Cuba.43

And of Course, Some Underlying Biology
We’ve now seen that political orientation is usually stable and
internally consistent across a range of disparate issues, and that it is
typically merely one manifestation of a package of cognitive and
affective style. Stepping deeper, what are the biological correlates of
differing political orientations?
Back to the insular cortex and its role in mediating gustatory and
olfactory disgust in mammals and in mediating moral disgust in humans.
Recall from the last chapter how you can reliably stoke hatred of Thems
by making them seem viscerally disgusting. When people’s insulae
activate at the thought of Thems, you can check one thing off your
genocide to-do list.
This recalls a remarkable finding—stick subjects in a room with a
smelly garbage can, and they become more socially conservative.44 If
your insula is gagging from the smell of dead fish, you’re more likely to
decide that a social practice of an Other that is merely different is,
instead, just plain wrong.

453

This leads to a thoroughly fascinating finding—social conservatives
tend toward lower thresholds for disgust than liberals. In one study
subjects were exposed to either positively or negatively charged
emotional images,* and galvanic skin resistance (GSR, an indirect
measure of sympathetic nervous system arousal) was measured. The
biggest autonomic responses to negative (but not positive) emotional
images were in conservatives opposed to gay marriage or premarital sex
(while GSR response was unrelated to nonsocial issues like free trade or
gun control). Concerns about hygiene and purity sure predict valuing of
sanctity.45
Related to that, when confronted with something viscerally
disturbing, conservatives are less likely to use reappraisal strategies (e.g.,
when seeing something gory, thinking, “This isn’t real; it’s staged”).
Moreover, when conservatives, but not liberals, are instructed to use
reappraisal techniques (e.g., “Try to view the images in a detached,
unemotional way”), they express less conservative political sentiments.
In contrast, a suppression strategy (“Don’t let your feelings show when
you’re looking at this image”) doesn’t work. As we saw, make a liberal
tired, hungry, rushed, distracted, or disgusted, and they become more
conservative. Make a conservative more detached about something
viscerally disturbing, and they become more liberal.46
Thus political orientation about social issues reflects sensitivity to
visceral disgust and strategies for coping with such disgust. In addition,
conservatives are more likely to think that disgust is a good metric for
deciding whether something is moral. Which recalls Leon Kass, the
bioethicist with the ice cream–licking issues. He headed George W.
Bush’s bioethics panel, one that, thanks to Kass’s antiabortion ideology,
greatly restricted embryonic stem cell research. Kass has argued for what
he calls “the wisdom of repugnance,” where disgust at something like
human cloning can be “the emotional expression of deep wisdom,
beyond wisdom’s power completely to articulate it.” The visceral level,
with or without post-hoc rationalization, is all you need in order to know
what’s right. If it makes you puke, then you must rebuke.47
The monumental flaw is obvious. Different things disgust different
people; whose gag reflex wins? Moreover, things once viewed as
disgusting are viewed differently now (e.g., the idea of slaves having the
same rights as whites would probably have struck most white Americans
circa 1800 as not just economically unworkable but disgusting as well).
454

It’s disgusting, the things people weren’t disgusted by in the past.
Disgust is a moving target.
Thus issues anchored in the insula help explain differences in
political orientation; this point will be returned to in chapter 17.48
Additional neurobiological differences have been demonstrated.
Liberalism has been associated with larger amounts of gray matter in the
cingulate cortex (with its involvement in empathy), whereas
conservatism has been associated with an enlarged amygdala (with, of
course, its starring role in threat perception). Moreover, there’s more
amygdala activation in conservatives than in liberals when viewing a
disgusting image or doing a risky task.
But not all the findings fit easily. For example, when looking at
disgusting images, conservatives also show relatively greater activation
of a hodgepodge of other brain regions—the basal ganglia, thalamus,
periaqueductal gray, (cognitive) dlPFC, middle/superior temporal gyrus,
presupplementary motor, fusiform, and inferior frontal gyrus. How all
those fit together isn’t clear.
Naturally, one must ask: have behavior geneticists reported genetic
influences on political orientation? Twin studies report heritability of
about 50 percent for political orientation. Genomewide survey
approaches have identified genes whose polymorphic variants were
associated with political orientation. Most of the genes had no known
functions, or were previously thought to be unrelated to the brain; those
whose brain-related functions were known (for example, one coded for a
receptor for the neurotransmitter glutamate) don’t teach much about
political orientation. As an interesting gene/environment interaction, the
“risk-taking” version of the D4 dopamine receptor gene is associated
with liberals—but only in people with lots of friends. Moreover, some
studies show a genetic association with people’s likelihood of voting,
independent of political orientation.49
Interesting. However, the approach comes with all of chapter 8’s
caveats—most findings haven’t been replicated, reported effects are
small, and these are published in political science journals rather than
genetics journals. Finally, to the extent that genes are related to political
orientation, links are likely to be via intervening factors, such as the
tendency toward anxiety.

455

OBEDIENCE AND CONFORMITY,
DISOBEDIENCE AND NONCONFORMITY

S

o humans have multiple simultaneous hierarchies and hierarchies
built around abstractions, and occasionally choose leaders who
labor for the common good.50 Add to that obedience to leaders. This is
utterly different from a schlub of a baboon obediently surrendering his
spot in the shade to the looming alpha male. Instead humans show
obedience to authority that transcends any given occupant of a throne
(the king is dead; long live the king), to the very notion of authority. Its
elements range from loyalty, admiration, and emulation to brownnosing,
sycophancy, and instrumental self-interest, and can range from mere
compliance (i.e., the public conformity of going along, without actually
agreeing) to drinking the Kool-Aid (i.e., identifying with the authority
and internalizing and extending its beliefs).
Obedience is closely intertwined with conformity, a concept central
to the previous chapter but considered here. Both consist of going along;
the former with the group, the latter with authority. And for us the
commonalities are what matter. Moreover, the opposites—disobedience
and nonconformity—are also intertwined and range from the
independence of marching to a different drummer to the intentionality
and mirrored determinism of anticonformity.
Importantly, these are value-free terms. Conformity can be great—
it’s helpful if everyone in a culture agrees on whether shaking your head
up and down means yes or no. Conforming is necessary for the benefits
of the wisdom of the crowd. And it can be truly comforting. But
obviously conformity can be horrendous—joining in on bullying,
oppressing, shunning, expelling, killing, just because everyone else is on
board.
Obedience can be swell too, ranging from everyone stopping at stop
signs to (to the embarrassment of my pseudoanarchist adolescence) my
kids listening when my wife and I say it’s bedtime. And malign
obedience obviously underlies “just following orders”—from goose-

456

stepping to Jonestown’s wretched obeying the command to kill their
children.

Roots
Conformity and obedience have deep roots, as evidenced by their
presence in other species and in very young humans.
Animal conformity is a type of social learning—a subordinate
primate does not have to be thrashed by some bruiser in order to express
subordination to him; everyone else’s doing so can be sufficient.*51 The
conformity has a familiar human tinge to it. For example, a chimp is
more likely to copy an action if he sees three other individuals do it once
each than if one other individual does it three times.* Moreover, learning
can include “cultural transmission”—in chimps, for example, this
includes learning types of tool construction. Conformity relates to social
and emotional contagion where, say, a primate aggressively targets an
individual just because someone else is already doing so. Such contagion
even works between groups. For example, among marmosets aggression
in a group becomes more likely if aggressive vocalizations are heard
from the neighboring group. Other primates are even subject to the social
contagion of yawning.*52
My favorite example of nonhuman conformity is so familiar that it
could come right out of high school. A male grouse courts a female who,
alas, doesn’t feel magic in the air and rebuffs him. The researchers then
make him seem like the hottest stud on the prairie—by surrounding him
with some rapt, stuffed female grouse. Soon the reluctant maiden is all
over him, pushing her statuesque rivals aside.53
An even clearer demonstration of animal conformity was shown in a
beautiful study of chimpanzees by Frans de Waal. In each of two groups
the alpha female was separated from the rest and shown how to open a
puzzle box containing food. Crucially, the two were shown different,
equally difficult ways of doing it. Once the females had mastered their
approaches, the chimps in each group got to watch their alpha female
strut her stuff repeatedly with the puzzle box. Finally everyone got
access to the puzzle box and promptly copied their alpha’s technique.54
Thus this is a cool demonstration of the spread of cultural
information. But something even more interesting happened. A chimp in

457

the group would occasionally stumble onto the alternative method—and
would then abandon it, going back to doing it the “normal” way. Just
because everyone else was doing so.* The same phenomenon was
subsequently shown in capuchin monkeys and wild birds.
Thus animals will perform one version of a behavior not because it is
better but simply because everyone else does. Even more striking, animal
conformity can be detrimental. In a 2013 study Andrew Whiten of the
University of St Andrews presented wild vervet monkeys with two bins
of maize, dyed either pink or blue.55 One color tasted fine; the other had
a bitter additive. The monkeys learned to avoid the latter and months
later still ate only the “safe”-colored maize—even after the additive was
omitted.
As infants were born or adults who had grown up elsewhere migrated
into the group, they conformed to this food choice, learning to eat only
the same color food as everyone else. In other words, forgoing half the
potential food just because of the need to fit in—monkeys joining the
herd, acting like sheep, going over the cliff like lemmings. One example
starkly displays the same in humans: in life-threatening emergencies
(e.g., a restaurant fire), people frequently attempt to escape by following
the crowd in what they know to be the wrong direction.
The deeply ingrained nature of human conformity and obedience in
humans is shown by the ages when they are apparent. As detailed in
chapter 7, zillions of pages have been written about conformity and peer
pressure in kids. One study nicely demonstrates the continuity of
conformity between us and other species. This was the report that a
chimp was more likely to conform to the behaviors of three individuals
doing a behavior once each than to one individual doing the behavior
three times. The study showed the same in two-year-old humans.
The depths of human conformity and obedience are shown by the
speed with which they occur—it takes less than 200 milliseconds for
your brain to register that the group has picked a different answer from
yours, and less than 380 milliseconds for a profile of activation that
predicts changing your opinion. Our brains are biased to get along by
going along in less than a second.56

Neural Bases

458

This last study raises the question of what occurs in the brain under
these circumstances. Our usual cast of brain regions pops up in
informative ways.
The influential “social identity theory” posits that our concept of who
we are is heavily shaped by social context—by the groups we do or don’t
identify with.*57 In that view, conformity and obedience, while certainly
about avoiding punishment, are at least as much about the positives of
fitting in. When we imitate someone’s actions, our mesolimbic dopamine
system activates.* When we choose incorrectly in a task, the
dopaminergic decline is less if we made the decision as part of a group
than if we did so as an individual. Belonging is safety.
In numerous studies a subject in a group answers some question,
finds out after that—oh no!—everyone else disagrees, and can then
change their answer.58 No surprise, the discovery that you are out of step
activates the amygdala and insular cortex; the more activation, the
greater your likelihood of changing your mind, and the more persistent
the change (as opposed to the transient change of compliant public
conformity). This is a profoundly social phenomenon—people are more
likely to change their answer if you show them a picture of the person(s)
who disagrees with them.
When you get the news that everyone else disagrees with you, there
is also activation of the (emotional) vmPFC, the anterior cingulate
cortex, and the nucleus accumbens. This is a network mobilized during
reinforcement learning, where you learn to modify your behavior when
there is a mismatch between what you expected to happen and what
actually did. Find out that everyone disagrees with you and this network
activates. What is it basically telling you? Not just that you’re different
from everyone else. That you’re wrong. Being different = being wrong.
The greater the activation of this circuit, the greater the likelihood of
changing answers to conform.59
Like most of the neuroimaging literature, these studies are merely
correlative. Thus, particularly important is a 2011 study that used
transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques to temporarily inactivate
the vmPFC; subjects became less likely to change their answer to
conform.60
Back to the contrast between conforming taking the form of “You
know what, if everyone says they saw B, I guess I did too; whatever” and
its taking the form of “Now that I think about it, I didn’t actually see A; I
459

think I saw B; in fact I’m certain of it.” The latter is associated with
activation of the hippocampus, the brain region central to learning and
memory—the revisionism involves you literally revising your memory.
Remarkably, in another study this process of conforming was also
associated with activation of the occipital cortex, the brain region that
does the primary processing of vision—you can almost hear the frontal
and limbic parts of the brain trying to convince the occipital cortex that it
saw something different from what it actually saw. As has been said,
winners (in this case, in the court of public opinion) get to write the
history books, and everyone else better revise theirs accordingly. War is
peace. Freedom is slavery. That dot you saw was actually blue, not red.61
Thus the neurobiology of conforming consists of a first wave of
anxiety where we equate differentness with wrongness, followed by the
cognitive work needed to change our opinion. These findings obviously
come from an artificial world of psych experiments. Thus they’re only a
faint whisper of what occurs when it’s you against the rest of the jury,
when it’s you being urged to join the lynch mob, when it’s you choosing
between conforming and being deeply lonely.
What is the neurobiology of obedience to authority, when you’re
being ordered to do something wrong? A similar mixture as with
conformity, with the vmPFC and the dlPFC mud-wrestling, with indices
of anxiety and glucocorticoid stress hormones showing up to bias you
toward subordination. Which leads us to consider classic studies of “just
following orders.”

Asch, Milgram, and Zimbardo
The neurobiology of conformity and obedience won’t soon be
revealing much about the core question in this field: if the circumstances
are right, is every human capable of doing something appalling simply
because they’ve been ordered to, because everyone else is doing it?
It is virtually required by law to discuss three of the most influential,
daring, disturbing, and controversial studies in the history of psychology,
namely the conformity experiments of Solomon Asch, the
shock/obedience studies of Stanley Milgram, and the Stanford Prison
Experiment of Philip Zimbardo.

460

The grandparent of the trio was Asch, working in the early 1950s at
Swarthmore College.62 The format of his studies was simple. A
volunteer, thinking that this was a study of perception, would be given a
pair of cards. One card would have a line on it, the other a trio of
different-length lines, one of which matched the length of the singleton
line. Which line of the trio is the same length as the singleton? Easy;
volunteers sitting alone in a room had about a 1 percent error rate over a
series of cases.
Meanwhile, the volunteers in the experimental group take the test in
a room with seven others, each saying his choice out loud. Unbeknownst
to the volunteer, the other seven worked on the project. The volunteer
would “just happen” to go last, and the first seven would unanimously
pick a glaringly wrong answer. Stunningly, volunteers would now agree
with that incorrect answer about a third of the time, something replicated
frequently in the cottage industry of research spawned by Asch. Whether
due to the person’s actually changing their mind or their merely deciding
to go along, this was a startling demonstration of conformity.

—
On to the Milgram obedience experiment, whose first incarnations
appeared in the early 1960s at Yale.63 A pair of volunteers would show
up for a psychology “study of memory”; one would arbitrarily be
designated the “teacher,” the other the “learner.” Learner and teacher
would be in separate rooms, hearing but not seeing each other. In the
room with the teacher would be the lab-coated scientist supervising the
study.
The teacher would recite pairs of words (from a list given by the
scientist); the learner was supposed to remember their pairing. After a
series of these, the teacher would test the learner’s memory of the
pairings. Each time the learner made a mistake, the teacher was supposed
to shock them; with each mistake, shock intensity increased, up to a lifethreatening 450 volts, ending the session.
Teachers thought the shocks were real—at the start they’d been given
a real shock, supposedly of the intensity of the first punitive one. It hurt.
In reality no punitive shocks were given—the “learner” worked on the
project. As the intensity of the supposed shocks increased, the teacher
would hear the learner responding in pain, crying out, begging for the
teacher to stop.* (In one variant the “volunteer” who became the learner

461

mentioned in passing that he had a heart condition. As shock intensity
increased, this learner would scream about chest pains and then go silent,
seemingly having passed out.)
Amid the screams of pain, teachers would typically become hesitant,
at which point they’d be urged on by the scientist with commands of
increasing intensity: “Please continue.” “The experiment requires that
you continue.” “It is absolutely essential that you continue.” “You have
no other choice. You must go on.” And, the scientist assured them, they
weren’t responsible; the learner had been informed of the risks.
And the famed result was that most volunteers complied, shocking
the learner repeatedly. Teachers would typically try to stop, argue with
the scientist, would even weep in distress—but would obey. In the
original study, horrifically, 65 percent of them administered the
maximum shock of 450 volts.

—
And then there’s the Stanford Prison Experiment (SPE), carried out by
Zimbardo in 1971.64 Twenty-four young male volunteers, mostly college
students, were randomly split into a group of twelve “prisoners” and
twelve “guards.” The prisoners were to spend seven to fourteen days
jailed in a pseudoprison in the basement of Stanford’s psychology
department. The guards were to keep order.
Tremendous effort went into making the SPE realistic. The future
prisoners thought they were scheduled to show up at the building at a
particular time to start the study. Instead, Palo Alto police helped
Zimbardo by showing up earlier at each prisoner’s home, arresting him,
and taking him to the police station for booking—fingerprinting, mug
shots, the works. Prisoners were then deposited in the “prison,” stripsearched, given prison garb, along with stocking hats to simulate their
heads being shaved, and dumped as trios in cells.
The guards, in surplus military khakis, batons, and reflective
sunglasses, ruled. They had been informed that while there was no
violence allowed, they could make the prisoners feel bored, afraid,
helpless, humiliated, and without a sense of privacy or individuality.
And the result was just as famously horrific as that of the Milgram
experiment. The guards put prisoners through pointless, humiliating
rituals of obedience, forced painful exercise, deprived them of sleep and
food, forced them to relieve themselves in unemptied buckets in the cells

462

(rather than escorting them to the bathroom), put people in solitary, set
prisoners against each other, addressed them by number, rather than by
name. The prisoners, meanwhile, had a range of responses. One cell
revolted on the second day, refusing to obey the guards and barricading
the entrance to their cell; guards subdued them with fire extinguishers.
Other prisoners resisted more individualistically; most eventually sank
into passivity and despair.
The experiment ended famously. Six days into it, as the brutality and
degradation worsened, Zimbardo was persuaded to halt the study by a
graduate student, Christina Maslach. They later married.

Situational Forces and What Lurks in All of Us
These studies are famed, have inspired movies and novels, have
entered the common culture (with predictably horrendous
misrepresentations).*65 They brought renown and notoriety to Asch,
Milgram, and Zimbardo.* And they were vastly influential in scientific
circles—according to Google Scholar, Asch’s work is cited more than
4,000 times in the literature, Milgram’s more than 27,000 times, the SPE
more than 58,000.*66 The number of times your average science paper is
cited can be counted on one hand, with most of the citations by the
scientist’s mother. The trio is a cornerstone of social psychology. In the
words of Harvard psychologist Mahzarin Banaji, “The primary simple
lesson the SPE [and, by extension, Asch and Milgram] teaches is that
situations matter” (her emphasis).
What did they show? Thanks to Asch, that average people will go
along with absurdly incorrect assertions in the name of conformity. And
thanks to the other two studies, that average people will do stunningly
bad things in the name of obedience and conformity.
The larger implications of this are enormous. Asch and Milgram (the
former a Jewish Eastern European immigrant, the latter the son of Jewish
Eastern European immigrants) worked in the era of the intellectual
challenge of making sense of Germans “just following orders.”
Milgram’s study was prompted by the start, a few months earlier, of the
war-crimes trial of Adolf Eichmann, the man who famously epitomized
the “banality of evil” because of his seeming normalcy. Zimbardo’s work
burst forth during the Vietnam War era with the likes of the My Lai

463

Massacre, and the SPE became bitingly relevant thirty years later with
the abuse and torture of Iraqis at Abu Ghraib Prison by perfectly normal
American soldiers.*67
Zimbardo took a particularly extreme stance as to what these findings
mean, namely his “bad barrel” theory—the issue isn’t how a few bad
apples can ruin the whole barrel; it’s how a bad barrel can turn any apple
bad. In another apt metaphor, rather than concentrating on one evil
person at a time, what Zimbardo calls a “medical” approach, one must
understand how some environments cause epidemics of evil, a “public
health” approach. As he states: “Any deed, for good or evil, that any
human being has ever done, you and I could also do—given the same
situational forces.” Anyone could potentially be an abusive Milgram
teacher, Zimbardo guard, or goose-stepping Nazi. In a similar vein,
Milgram stated, “If a system of death camps were set up in the US of the
sorts we had seen in Nazi Germany one would be able to find sufficient
personnel for those camps in any medium-sized American town.” And as
stated by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn in The Gulag Archipelago, in a quote
perpetually cited in this literature, “The line dividing good and evil cuts
through the heart of every human being. And who is willing to destroy a
piece of his own heart?”68

Some Different Takes
Big surprise—the studies and their conclusions, especially those of
Milgram and Zimbardo, have been controversial. Those two attracted
firestorms of controversy because of the unethical nature of the work;
some teachers and guards were psychological wrecks afterward, seeing
what they had proven capable of;* it changed the course of a number of
their lives.* No human-subjects committee would approve the Milgram
study these days; in contemporary versions subjects are ordered to, for
example, say increasingly insulting things to the learner or administer
virtual shocks, evoking virtual pain, in avatars (stay tuned).69
The controversies about the science itself in the Milgram and
Zimbardo studies are more pertinent. The Milgram edifice has been
questioned in three ways, most piercingly by the psychologist Gina
Perry:

464

Milgram seems to have fudged some of his work. Perry
has analyzed Milgram’s unpublished papers and
recordings of sessions, finding that teachers refused to
shock much more frequently than reported. However,
despite the seemingly inflated results, the finding of
roughly 60 percent compliance rates has been
replicated.70
Few of the replicating studies were traditional academic
ones published in peer-reviewed journals. Instead most
have been re-creations for films and television
programs.
Perhaps most important, as analyzed by Perry, far more
teachers than Milgram indicated realized that the learner
was an actor and that there were no actual shocks. This
problem probably extends to the replications as well.
The SPE has arguably attracted the most controversy.
The biggest lightning rod was the role of Zimbardo
himself. Rather than being a detached observer, he
served as the prison’s “superintendent.” He set the
ground rules (e.g., telling guards that they could make
the prisoners feel afraid and helpless) and met regularly
with the guards throughout. He was clearly excited as
hell to see what was happening in the study. Zimbardo is
a larger-than-life force of nature, someone whom you’d
very much wish to please. Thus guards were subject to
pressure not only to conform with their cohort but also
to obey and please Zimbardo; his role, consciously or
otherwise, almost certainly prompted the guards to more
extreme behavior. Zimbardo, a humane, decent man who
is a friend and colleague, has written at length about this
distortive impact that he had on the study.
At the beginning of the study, volunteers were randomly
assigned to be guards or prisoners, and the resulting two
groups did not differ on various personality measures.
While that’s great, what was not appreciated was the
possibility that the volunteers as a whole were
465

distinctive. This was tested in a 2007 study in which
volunteers were recruited through one of two newspaper
ads. The first described “a psychological study of prison
life”—the words used in the advertisement for the SPE
—while in the other the word “prison” was omitted. The
two groups of volunteers then underwent personality
testing. Importantly, volunteers for the “prison” study
scored higher than the others on measures of
aggressiveness, authoritarianism, and social dominance
and lower for empathy and altruism. Insofar as both
guards and prisoners in the SPE might have had this
makeup, it’s not clear why that would have biased
toward the famously brutal outcome.71
Finally, there’s science’s gold standard, independent
replication. If you redid the SPE, down to matching the
brand of the guards’ socks, would you get the same
result? Any study this big, idiosyncratic, and expensive
would be difficult to match perfectly in the replication
attempt. Moreover, Zimbardo actually published
remarkably little of the data about the SPE in
professional journals; instead he mostly wrote for the lay
public (hard to resist, given the attention the study
garnered). Thus there’s only really been one attempted
replication.
The 2001 “BBC Prison Study” was run by two respected British
psychologists, Stephen Reicher of the University of St Andrews and
Alex Haslam of the University of Exeter.72 As the name implies, it was
carried out (i.e., among other things, paid for) by the BBC, which filmed
it for a documentary. Its design replicated the broad features of the SPE.
As is so often the case, there was a completely different outcome. To
summarize a book’s worth of complex events:
Prisoners organized to resist any abuse by the guards.
Prisoner morale soared while guards became
demoralized and divided.
This led to a collapse of the guard/prisoner power
differential and ushered in a cooperative, power-sharing
466

commune.
Which lasted only briefly before three ex-prisoners and
one ex-guard overthrew the utopians and instituted a
draconian regime; fascinatingly, those four had scored
highest on scales of authoritarianism before the study
began. As the new regime settled into repressive power,
the study was terminated.
Thus, rather than a replication of the SPE, this wound up being more
like a replication of the FRE and the RRE (i.e., the French Revolution
and the Russian Revolution): a hierarchical regime is overthrown by wetnosed idealists who know all the songs from Les Mis, who are then
devoured by Bolsheviks or Reign of Terror–ists. Importantly, the ruling
junta at the end having entered the study with the strongest
predispositions toward authoritarianism certainly suggests bad apples
rather than bad barrels.
Even bigger surprise—stop the presses—Zimbardo criticized the
study, arguing that its structure invalidated it as a chance to replicate the
SPE; that guard/prisoner assignments could not have really been random;
and that filming made this a TV spectacle rather than science; and
asking, how can this be a model for anything when the prisoners take
over the prison?73
Naturally, Reicher and Haslam disagreed with his disagreement,
pointing out that prisoners have de facto taken over some prisons, such
as the Maze in Northern Ireland, which the Brits filled with IRA political
prisoners, and the Robben Island prison, in which Nelson Mandela spent
his endless years.
Zimbardo called Reicher and Haslam “scientifically irresponsible”
and “fraudulent.” They pulled out all the stops by quoting Foucault:
“Where there is [coercive] power there is resistance.”
Let’s calm down. Amid the controversies over Milgram and the SPE,
two deeply vital things are indisputable:
When pressured to conform and obey, a far higher
percentage of perfectly normal people than most would
predict succumb and do awful things. Contemporary
work using a variant on the Milgram paradigm shows
“just following orders” in action, where the pattern of
467

neurobiological activation differs when the same act is
carried out volitionally versus obediently.74
Nonetheless, there are always those who resist.
This second finding is no surprise, given Hutus who died shielding
Tutsi neighbors from Hutu death squads, Germans with every
opportunity to look the other way who risked everything to save people
from the Nazis, the informant who exposed Abu Ghraib. Some apples,
even in the worst of barrels, do not go bad.*
Thus what becomes vital is to understand the circumstances that push
us toward actions we thought we were far better than or that reveal
strength we never suspected we had.

Modulators of the Pressures to Conform and Obey
The end of the previous chapter examined factors that lessen
Us/Them dichotomizing. These included becoming aware of implicit,
automatic biases; becoming aware of our sensitivity to disgust,
resentment, and envy; recognizing the multiplicity of Us/Them
dichotomies that we harbor and emphasizing ones in which a Them
becomes an Us; contact with a Them under the right circumstances;
resisting essentialism; perspective taking; and, most of all, individuating
Thems.
Similar factors decrease the likelihood of people doing appalling
things in the name of conformity or obedience. These include:
THE NATURE OF THE AUTHORITY OR GROUP PRESSING FOR
CONFORMITY

Does the authority(s) evoke veneration, identification, pants-wetting
terror? Is the authority in close proximity? Milgram follow-ups showed
that when the authority (i.e., the scientist) was in a different room,
compliance decreased. Does the authority come cloaked in prestige?
When the experiment was conducted in some nondescript warehouse in
New Haven, instead of on the Yale campus, compliance declined. And,
as emphasized by Tajfel in his writing, is the authority perceived as
legitimate and stable? I’d more likely comply with, say, lifestyle advice
issued by the Dalai Lama than by the head of Boko Haram.

468

Similar issues of prestige, proximity, legitimacy, and stability
influence whether people conform to a group. Obviously, groups of Uses evoke more conformity than do groups of Thems. Consider the
invoking of Us in Konrad Lorenz’s attempt to justify becoming a Nazi:
“Practically all my friends and teachers did so, including my own father
who certainly was a kindly and humane man.”75
With groups, issues of numbers come into play—how many other
voices are urging you to join the cool kids? Recall how among chimps or
two-year-old humans, one individual doing something three times does
not evoke the conformity of three individuals doing the same act once
each. Echoing this, follow-up studies by Asch showed that conformity
first kicks in when there are at least three people unanimously
contradicting what the subject thinks, with maximum conformity first
evoked by around half a dozen contradictors. But this is the artificial
world of lab subjects judging the length of a line—in the real world the
conforming power of a lynch mob of six doesn’t approach that of a mob
of a thousand.76
WHAT IS BEING REQUIRED AND IN WHAT CONTEXT

Two issues stand out. The first is the persuasive power of the
incremental. “You were okay shocking the guy with 225 volts, but not
with 226? That’s illogical.” “Come on, we’re all boycotting their
businesses. Let’s shut them down; it’s not like anyone patronizes them.
Come on, we’ve shut down their businesses, let’s loot them; it’s not like
the stores are doing them any good.” We rarely have a rational
explanation for an intuitive sense that a line has been crossed on a
continuum. What incrementalism does is put the potential resister on the
defensive, making the savagery seem like an issue of rationality rather
than of morality. This represents an ironic inversion of our tendency to
think in categories, to irrationally inflate the importance of an arbitrary
boundary. The descent into savagery can be so incremental as to come
with nothing but arbitrary boundaries, and our descent becomes like the
proverbial frog cooked alive without noticing. When your conscience
finally rebels and draws a line in the sand, we know that it is likely to be
an arbitrary one, fueled by implicit subterranean forces—despite your
best attempts at pseudospeciation, this victim’s face reminds you of a
loved one’s; a smell just wafted by that took you back to childhood and
reminds you of how life once felt innocent; your anterior cingulate

469

neurons just had breakfast. At such times, a line having finally been
drawn must be more important than its arbitrariness.
The second issue concerns responsibility. When debriefed afterward,
compliant teachers typically cited how persuasive they found the
information that the learner had been informed of the risks and had given
consent. “Don’t worry, you won’t be held responsible.” The Milgram
phenomenon also showed the coercive power of misdirecting
responsibility, when researchers would seek compliance by emphasizing
that the teacher’s responsibility was to the project, not the learner—“I
thought you said you were here to help.” “You’re a team member.”
“You’re ruining things.” “You signed a form.” It’s hard enough to
respond with “This isn’t the job I signed up for.” It’s that much harder
when the fine print reveals that this is what you signed up for.
Compliance increases when guilt is diffused—even if I hadn’t done
it, it still would have happened.77 Statistical guilt. This is why,
historically, people were not executed with five shots fired from one gun.
Instead there were five guns fired simultaneously—a firing squad. Firing
squads traditionally took the diffusion of responsibility a step further,
where one member was randomly given a blank instead of a real bullet.
That way, a shooter could shift from the comforting irrationality that “I
only one fifth killed him” to the even better “I may not even have shot
him.” This tradition was translated into modern execution technology.
Lethal injection machines used in prison executions come with a dual
control system—two syringes, each filled with a lethal dose, two
separate delivery systems, two buttons pressed simultaneously by two
different people—at which point a random binary generator would
secretly determine which syringe was emptied into a bucket and which
into a human. And then the record would be erased, allowing each
person to think, “Hey, I may not even have given him any drug.”

470

Finally, responsibility is diffused by anonymity.78 This comes de
facto if the group is large enough, and large groups also facilitate
individual efforts at anonymity—during the Chicago riots of 1968, many
police notoriously covered their name tags before setting on the unarmed
antiwar demonstrators. Groups also facilitate conformity by
institutionalizing anonymity; examples range from the KKK to Star
Wars’ Imperial Storm Troopers to the finding that in traditional human
societies, warriors who transform and standardize their appearance
before battle are more likely to torture and mutilate their enemies than
warriors from cultures that don’t transform themselves. All use means to
deindividuate, where the goal may not be to ensure that a victimized
Them won’t be able to recognize you afterward as much as to facilitate
moral disengagement so that you won’t be able to recognize you
afterward.
THE NATURE OF THE VICTIM

471

No surprise, compliance becomes easier when the victim is an
abstraction—say, the future generations who will inherit this planet. In
Milgram follow-ups, compliance declined if the learner was in the same
room as the teacher and would plummet if the two had shaken hands.
Ditto if psychological distance was shortened by perspective taking—
what would it feel like if you were in their shoes?
Predictably, compliance is also decreased when the victim is
individuated.79 However, don’t let the authority individuate victims for
you. In one classic Milgram-esque study, the scientists would
“accidentally” allow a teacher to overhear their opinion of the learner.
“Seems like a nice guy” versus “This guy seems like an animal.” Guess
who’d get more shocks?
Authorities rarely ask us to administer shocks to those whom they
label as nice guys. It’s always to the animals. Implicit in the latter
categorization’s evoking more compliance is our having ceded power to
the authorities or to the group to create the narrative. One of the greatest
wellsprings of resistance is to seize back the narrative. From “children of
exceptionalities” to the Paralympics, from gay-pride marches to “never
again,” from Hispanic Heritage Month to James Brown singing, “Say It
Out Loud, I’m Black and I’m Proud,” a major step toward victims’
resistance is to gain the power to define themselves.
THINGS BROUGHT TO THE TABLE BY THE PERSON BEING PRESSURED

Some personality traits predict resistance to the pressure to comply:
not valuing being conscientious or agreeable; being low in neuroticism;
scoring low on right-wing authoritarianism (any particular authority is
more likely to be questioned if you already question the very concept of
authority); social intelligence, which may be mediated by an enhanced
ability to understand things like scapegoating or ulterior motives. And
where these individual differences come from is, of course, the end
product of most of the preceding chapters.80
What about gender? Milgram-like studies have shown that women
average higher rates than men of voicing resistance to the demands to
obey . . . but higher rates, nonetheless, of ultimately complying. Other
studies show that women have higher rates than men of public
conformity and lower rates of private conformity. Overall, though,
gender is not much of a predictor. Interestingly, rates of conformity in
Asch-like studies increase in mixed-sex groups. When in the presence of

472

the opposite sex, perhaps there’s less desire to seem like a rugged
individualist than fear of seeming foolish.81
Finally, of course, we are the products of our culture. In broad crosscultural surveys, Milgram and others showed more compliance in
subjects from collectivist than from individualist cultures.82
STRESS

Exactly as with Us/Them-ing, people are more likely to conform and
obey at times of stress, ranging from time pressure to a real or imagined
outside threat to a novel context. In stressful settings rules gain power.
ALTERNATIVES

Finally, there is the key issue of whether you perceive alternatives to
the actions demanded of you. It can be a solitary task to reframe and
reappraise a situation, to make the implicit explicit, to engage in
perspective taking, to question. To imagine that resistance is not futile.
A huge help in doing that is evidence that you are not alone. From
Asch and Milgram on, it’s clear that the presence of anyone else pushing
back against the pressure can be galvanizing. Ten against two in a jury
room is a world of difference from eleven against one. One lone voice
crying out in the wilderness is a crank. Two voices joined together form
a nidus of resistance, offer the start of an oppositional social identity.
It certainly helps to know that you are not alone, that there are others
who are willing to resist, that there are those who have done so in the
past. But often something still holds us back. Eichmann’s seeming
normalcy supplied us, thanks to Hannah Arendt, with the notion of the
banality of evil. Zimbardo, in his recent writing, emphasizes the
“banality of heroism.” As discussed in various chapters, people who
heroically refuse to look the other way, who do the right thing even when
it carries the ultimate cost—tend to be surprisingly normal. The stars
didn’t align at their births; doves of peace did not envelop them where
they strode. They put their pants on one leg at a time. This should be a
huge source of strength for us.

473

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
We’re just like numerous other social species in terms of
having marked status differences among individuals and
hierarchies that emerge from those differences. Like
many of these other species, we’re fantastically attuned
to status differences, are sufficiently fascinated by them
that we monitor status relations in individuals who are
irrelevant to us, and can perceive status differences in a
blink of an eye. And we find it deeply unsettling, with
the amygdala leading front and center, when status
relations are ambiguous and shifting.
As in so many other species, our brains, particularly the
neocortex and most particularly the frontal cortex, have
coevolved with the social complexity of status
differences. It takes a lot of brainpower to make sense of
the subtleties of dominance relations. This is no surprise,
given that “knowing your place” can be so contextual.
Navigating status differences is most challenging when
it comes to attaining and maintaining high rank; this
requires cognitive mastery of Theory of Mind and
perspective taking; of manipulation, intimidation, and
deceit; and of impulse control and emotion regulation.
As with so many other primates, the biographies of our
most hierarchically successful members are built around
what provocations are ignored during occasions where
the frontal cortex kept a level head.
Our bodies and brains, like those of other social species,
bear the imprint of social status, and having the “wrong”
rank can be corrosively pathogenic. Moreover, the
physiology is not so much about rank per se as about its
social meaning in your species and particular group, the
behavioral advantages and disadvantages, and the
psychological baggage of a particular rank.

474

And then we’re unlike any other species on earth in that
we belong to multiple hierarchies, are psychologically
adept at overvaluing those in which we excel, and
maintain internal standards that can trump objective
rank in their impact.
Humans committed themselves to a unique trajectory
when we invented socioeconomic status. In terms of its
caustic, scarring impact on minds and bodies, nothing in
the history of animals being crappy to one another about
status differences comes within light-years of our
invention of poverty.
We’re really out there as a species in that sometimes our
high-status individuals don’t merely plunder and instead
actually lead, actually attempt to facilitate the common
good. We’ve even developed bottom-up mechanisms for
collectively choosing such leaders on occasion. A
magnificent achievement. Which we then soil by having
our choosing of leaders be shaped by implicit, automatic
factors more suitable to five-year-olds deciding who
should captain their boat on a voyage with the
Teletubbies to Candyland.
Stripped to their idealistic core, our political differences
concern differing visions of how best to bring about the
common good. We tend to come as internally consistent
packages of political stances ranging from the small and
local to the mammoth and global. And with remarkable
regularity our stances reflect our implicit, affective
makeup, with cognition playing post-hoc catch up. If
you really want to understand someone’s politics,
understand their cognitive load, how prone they are to
snap judgments, their approaches to reappraisal and
resolving cognitive dissonance. Even more important,
understand how they feel about novelty, ambiguity,
empathy, hygiene, disease and dis-ease, and whether
things used to be better and the future is a scary place.
Like so many other animals, we have an often-frantic
need to conform, belong, and obey. Such conformity can
be markedly maladaptive, as we forgo better solutions in

475

the name of the foolishness of the crowd. When we
discover we are out of step with everyone else, our
amygdalae spasm with anxiety, our memories are
revised, and our sensory-processing regions are even
pressured to experience what is not true. All to fit in.
Finally, the pull of conformity and obedience can lead us
to some of our darkest, most appalling places, and far
more of us can be led there than we’d like to think. But
despite that, even the worst of barrels doesn’t turn all
apples bad, and “Resistance” and “Heroism” are often
more accessible and less rarefied and capitalized than
assumed. We’re rarely alone in thinking this is wrong,
wrong, wrong. And we are usually no less special or
unique than those before us who have fought back.

476

Thirteen

Morality and Doing the
Right Thing, Once You’ve
Figured Out What That Is

T

he two previous chapters examined the thoroughly unique
contexts for some human behaviors that are on a continuum with
behaviors in other species. Like some other species, we make automatic
Us/Them dichotomies and favor the former—though only humans
rationalize that tendency with ideology. Like many other species, we are
implicitly hierarchical—though only humans view the gap between
haves and have-nots as a divine plan.
This chapter considers another domain rife with human uniqueness,
namely morality. For us, morality is not only belief in norms of
appropriate behavior but also the belief that they should be shared and
transmitted culturally.
Work in the field is dominated by a familiar sort of question. When
we make a decision regarding morality, is it mostly the outcome of moral
reasoning or of moral intuition? Do we mostly think or feel our way to
deciding what is right?
This raises a related question. Is human morality as new as the
cultural institutions we’ve hatched in recent millennia, or are its
rudiments a far older primate legacy?
This raises more questions. What’s more impressive, consistencies
and universalities of human moral behavior or variability and its
correlation with cultural and ecological factors?
Finally, there will be unapologetically prescriptive questions. When it
comes to moral decision making, when is it “better” to rely on intuition,
477

when on reasoning? And when we resist temptation, is it mostly an act of
will or of grace?
People have confronted these issues since students attended intro
philosophy in togas. Naturally, these questions are informed by science.

478

THE PRIMACY OF REASONING IN
MORAL DECISION MAKING

O

ne single fact perfectly demonstrates moral decision making being
based on cognition and reasoning. Have you ever picked up a law
textbook? They’re humongous.
Every society has rules about moral and ethical behavior that are
reasoned and call upon logical operations. Applying the rules requires
reconstructing scenarios, understanding proximal and distal causes of
events, and assessing magnitudes and probabilities of consequences of
actions. Assessing individual behavior requires perspective taking,
Theory of Mind, and distinguishing between outcome and intent.
Moreover, in many cultures rule implementation is typically entrusted to
people (e.g., lawyers, clergy) who have undergone long training.
Harking back to chapter 7, the primacy of reasoning in moral
decision making is anchored in child development. The Kohlbergian
emergence of increasingly complex stages of moral development is built
on the Piagetian emergence of increasingly complex logical operations.
They are similar, neurobiologically. Logical and moral reasoning about
the correctness of an economic or ethical decision, respectively, both
activate the (cognitive) dlPFC. People with obsessive-compulsive
disorder get mired in both everyday decision making and moral decision
making, and their dlPFCs go wild with activity for both.1
Similarly, there’s activation of the temporoparietal junction (TPJ)
during Theory of Mind tasks, whether they are perceptual (e.g.,
visualizing a complex scene from another viewer’s perspective), amoral
(e.g., keeping straight who’s in love with whom in A Midsummer Night’s
Dream), or moral/social (e.g., inferring the ethical motivation behind a
person’s act). Moreover, the more the TPJ activation, the more people
take intent into account when making moral judgments, particularly
when there was intent to harm but no actual harm done. Most important,
inhibit the TPJ with transcranial magnetic stimulation, and subjects
become less concerned about intent.2

479

The cognitive processes we bring to moral reasoning aren’t perfect,
in that there are fault lines of vulnerability, imbalances, and
asymmetries.3 For example, doing harm is worse than allowing it—for
equivalent outcomes we typically judge commission more harshly than
omission and must activate the dlPFC more to judge them as equal. This
makes sense—when we do one thing, there are innumerable other things
we didn’t do; no wonder the former is psychologically weightier. As
another cognitive skew, as discussed in chapter 10, we’re better at
detecting violations of social contracts that have malevolent rather than
benevolent consequences (e.g., giving less versus more than promised).
We also search harder for causality (and come up with more false
attributions) for malevolent than for benevolent events.
This was shown in one study. First scenario: A worker proposes a
plan to the boss, saying, “If we do this, there’ll be big profits, and we’ll
harm the environment in the process.” The boss answers: “I don’t care
about the environment. Just do it.” Second scenario: Same setup, but this
time there’ll be big profits and benefits to the environment. Boss: “I
don’t care about the environment. Just do it.” In the first scenario 85
percent of subjects stated that the boss harmed the environment in order
to increase profits; however, in the second scenario only 23 percent said
that the boss helped the environment in order to increase profits.4

—
Okay, we’re not perfect reasoning machines. But that’s our goal, and
numerous moral philosophers emphasize the preeminence of reasoning,
where emotion and intuition, if they happen to show up, just soil the
carpet. Such philosophers range from Kant, with his search for a
mathematics of morality, to Princeton philosopher Peter Singer, who
kvetches that if things like sex and bodily functions are pertinent to
philosophizing, time to hang up his spurs: “It would be best to forget all
about our particular moral judgments.” Morality is anchored in reason.5

480

YEAH, SURE IT IS: SOCIAL
INTUITIONISM

E

xcept there’s a problem with this conclusion—people often haven’t
a clue why they’ve made some judgment, yet they fervently believe
it’s correct.
This is straight out of chapter 11’s rapid implicit assessments of Us
versus Them and our post-hoc rational justifications for visceral
prejudice. Scientists studying moral philosophy increasingly emphasize
moral decision making as implicit, intuitive, and anchored in emotion.
The king of this “social intuitionist” school is Jonathan Haidt, whom
we’ve encountered previously.6 Haidt views moral decisions as primarily
based on intuition and believes reasoning is what we then use to
convince everyone, including ourselves, that we’re making sense. In an
apt phrase of Haidt’s, “moral thinking is for social doing,” and sociality
always has an emotional component.
The evidence for the social intuitionist school is plentiful:
When contemplating moral decisions, we don’t just activate the
eggheady dlPFC.7 There’s also activation of the usual emotional
cast—amygdala, vmPFC and the related orbitofrontal cortex,
insular cortex, anterior cingulate. Different types of moral
transgressions preferentially activate different subsets of these
regions. For example, moral quandaries eliciting pity
preferentially activate the insula; those eliciting indignation
activate the orbitofrontal cortex. Quandaries generating intense
conflict preferentially activate the anterior cingulate. Finally, for
acts assessed as equally morally wrong, those involving
nonsexual transgression (e.g., stealing from a sibling) activate
the amygdala, whereas those involving sexual transgressions
(e.g., sex with a sibling) also activate the insula.*
Moreover, when such activation is strong enough, we also
activate the sympathetic nervous system and feel arousal—and
481

we know how those peripheral effects feedback and influence
behavior. When we confront a moral choice, the dlPFC doesn’t
adjudicate in contemplative silence. The waters roil below.
The pattern of activation in these regions predicts moral
decisions better than does the dlPFC’s profile. And this matches
behavior—people punish to the extent that they feel angered by
someone acting unethically.8
People tend toward instantaneous moral reactions; moreover,
when subjects shift from judging nonmoral elements of acts to
moral ones, they make assessments faster, the antithesis of moral
decision making being about grinding cognition. Most strikingly,
when facing a moral quandary, activation in the amygdala,
vmPFC, and insula typically precedes dlPFC activation.9
Damage to these intuitionist brain regions makes moral
judgments more pragmatic, even coldhearted. Recall from
chapter 10 how people with damage to the (emotional) vmPFC
readily advocate sacrificing one relative to save five strangers,
something control subjects never do.
Most telling is when we have strong moral opinions but can’t tell
why, something Haidt calls “moral dumbfounding”—followed
by clunky post-hoc rationalizing.10 Moreover, such moral
decisions can differ markedly in different affective or visceral
circumstances, generating very different rationalizations. Recall
from the last chapter how people become more conservative in
their social judgments when they’re smelling a foul odor or
sitting at a dirty desk. And then there’s that doozy of a finding—
knowing a judge’s opinions about Plato, Nietzsche, Rawls, and
any other philosopher whose name I just looked up gives you
less predictive power about her judicial decisions than knowing
if she’s hungry.
The social intuitionist roots of morality are bolstered further by
evidence of moral judgment in two classes of individuals with limited
482

capacities for moral reasoning.

483

AGAIN WITH BABIES AND ANIMALS

M

uch as infants demonstrate the rudiments of hierarchical and
Us/Them thinking, they possess building blocks of moral
reasoning as well. For starters, infants have the bias concerning
commission versus omission. In one clever study, six-month-olds
watched a scene containing two of the same objects, one blue and one
red; repeatedly, the scene would show a person picking the blue object.
Then, one time, the red one is picked. The kid becomes interested, looks
more, breathes faster, showing that this seems discrepant. Now, the scene
shows two of the same objects, one blue, one a different color. In each
repetition of the scene, a person picks the one that is not blue (its color
changes with each repetition). Suddenly, the blue one is picked. The kid
isn’t particularly interested. “He always picks the blue one” is easier to
comprehend than “He never picks the blue one.” Commission is
weightier.11
Infants and toddlers also have hints of a sense of justice, as shown by
Kiley Hamlin of the University of British Columbia, and Paul Bloom and
Karen Wynn of Yale. Six- to twelve-month-olds watch a circle moving
up a hill. A nice triangle helps to push it. A mean square blocks it.
Afterward the infants can reach for a triangle or a square. They choose
the triangle.* Do infants prefer nice beings, or shun mean ones? Both.
Nice triangles were preferred over neutral shapes, which were preferred
over mean squares.
Such infants advocate punishing bad acts. A kid watches puppets,
one good, one bad (sharing versus not). The child is then presented with
the puppets, each sitting on a pile of sweets. Who should lose a sweet?
The bad puppet. Who should gain one? The good puppet.
Remarkably, toddlers even assess secondary punishment. The good
and bad puppets then interact with two additional puppets, who can be
nice or bad. And whom did kids prefer of those second-layer puppets?
Those who were nice to nice puppets and those who punished mean
ones.
Other primates also show the beginnings of moral judgments. Things
started with a superb 2003 paper by Frans de Waal and Sarah Brosnan.12
484

Capuchin monkeys were trained in a task: A human gives them a mildly
interesting small object—a pebble. The human then extends her hand
palm up, a capuchin begging gesture. If the monkey puts the pebble in
her hand, there’s a food reward. In other words, the animals learned how
to buy food.
Now there are two capuchins, side by side. Each gets a pebble. Each
gives it to the human. Each gets a grape, very rewarding.
Now change things. Both monkeys pay their pebble. Monkey 1 gets a
grape. But monkey 2 gets some cucumber, which blows compared with
grapes—capuchins prefer grapes to cucumber 90 percent of the time.
Monkey 2 was shortchanged.
And monkey 2 would then typically fling the cucumber at the human
or bash around in frustration. Most consistently, they wouldn’t give the
pebble the next time. As the Nature paper was entitled, “Monkeys reject
unequal pay.”
This response has since been demonstrated in various macaque
monkey species, crows, ravens, and dogs (where the dog’s “work” would
be shaking her paw).*13
Subsequent work by Brosnan, de Waal, and others fleshed out this
phenomenon further:14
One criticism of the original study was that maybe
capuchins refused to work for cucumbers because
grapes were visible, regardless of whether the other guy
was getting paid in grapes. But no—the phenomenon
required unfair payment.
Both animals are getting grapes, then one gets switched
to cucumber. What’s key—that the other guy is still
getting grapes, or that I no longer am? The former—if
doing the study with a single monkey, switching from
grapes to cucumbers would not evoke refusal. Nor
would it if both monkeys got cucumbers.
Across the various species, males were more likely than
females to reject “lower pay”; dominant animals were
more likely than subordinates to reject.
It’s about the work—give one monkey a free grape, the
other free cucumber, and the latter doesn’t get pissed.

485

The closer in proximity the two animals are, the more
likely the one getting cucumber is to go on strike.
Finally, rejection of unfair pay isn’t seen in species that
are solitary (e.g., orangutans) or have minimal social
cooperation (e.g., owl monkeys).
Okay, very impressive—other social species show hints of a sense of
justice, reacting negatively to unequal reward. But this is worlds away
from juries awarding money to plaintiffs harmed by employers. Instead
it’s self-interest—“This isn’t fair; I’m getting screwed.”
How about evidence of a sense of fairness in the treatment of another
individual? Two studies have examined this in a chimp version of the
Ultimatum Game. Recall the human version—in repeated rounds, player
1 in a pair decides how money is divided between the two of them.
Player 2 is powerless in the decision making but, if unhappy with the
split, can refuse, and no one gets any money. In other words, player 2 can
forgo immediate reward to punish selfish player 1. As we saw in chapter
10, Player 2s tend to accept 60:40 splits.
In the chimp version, chimp 1, the proposer, has two tokens. One
indicates that each chimp gets two grapes. The other indicates that the
proposer gets three grapes, the partner only one. The proposer chooses a
token and passes it to chimp 2, who then decides whether to pass the
token to the human grape dispenser. In other words, if chimp 2 thinks
chimp 1 is being unfair, no one gets grapes.
In one such study, Michael Tomasello (a frequent critic of de Waal—
stay tuned) at the Max Planck Institutes in Germany, found no evidence
of chimp fairness—the proposer always chose, and the partner always
accepted unfair splits.15 De Waal and Brosnan did the study in more
ethologically valid conditions and reported something different: proposer
chimps tended toward equitable splits, but if they could give the token
directly to the human (robbing chimp 2 of veto power), they’d favor
unfair splits. So chimps will opt for fairer splits—but only when there is
a downside to being unfair.
Sometimes other primates are fair when it’s at no cost to themselves.
Back to capuchin monkeys. Monkey 1 chooses whether both he and the
other guy get marshmallows or it’s a marshmallow for him and yucky
celery for the other guy. Monkeys tended to choose marshmallows for
the other guy.* Similar “other-regarding preference” was shown with
486

marmoset monkeys, where the first individual got nothing and merely
chose whether the other guy got a cricket to eat (of note, a number of
studies have failed to find other-regarding preference in chimps).16
Really interesting evidence for a nonhuman sense of justice comes in
a small side study in a Brosnan/de Waal paper. Back to the two monkeys
getting cucumbers for work. Suddenly one guy gets shifted to grapes. As
we saw, the one still getting the cucumber refuses to work. Fascinatingly,
the grape mogul often refuses as well.
What is this? Solidarity? “I’m no strike-breaking scab”? Self-interest,
but with an atypically long view about the possible consequences of the
cucumber victim’s resentment? Scratch an altruistic capuchin and a
hypocritical one bleeds? In other words, all the questions raised by
human altruism.
Given the relatively limited reasoning capacities of monkeys, these
findings support the importance of social intuitionism. De Waal
perceives even deeper implications—the roots of human morality are
older than our cultural institutions, than our laws and sermons. Rather
than human morality being spiritually transcendent (enter deities, stage
right), it transcends our species boundaries.17

487

MR. SPOCK AND JOSEPH STALIN

M

any moral philosophers believe not only that moral judgment is
built on reasoning but also that it should be. This is obvious to
fans of Mr. Spock, since the emotional component of moral intuitionism
just introduces sentimentality, self-interest, and parochial biases. But one
remarkable finding counters this.
Relatives are special. Chapter 10 attests to that. Any social organism
would tell you so. Joseph Stalin thought so concerning Pavlik Morozov
ratting out his father. As do most American courts, where there is either
de facto or de jure resistance to making someone testify against their
own parent or child. Relatives are special. But not to people lacking
social intuitionism. As noted, people with vmPFC damage make
extraordinarily practical, unemotional moral decisions. And in the
process they do something that everyone, from clonal yeast to Uncle Joe
to the Texas Rules of Criminal Evidence considers morally suspect: they
advocate harming kin as readily as strangers in an “Is it okay to sacrifice
one person to save five?” scenario.18
Emotion and social intuition are not some primordial ooze that gums
up that human specialty of moral reasoning. Instead, they anchor some of
the few moral judgments that most humans agree upon.

488

CONTEXT

S

o social intuitions can have large, useful roles in moral decision
making. Should we now debate whether reasoning or intuition is
more important? This is silly, not least of all because there is
considerable overlap between the two. Consider, for example, protesters
shutting down a capital to highlight income inequity. This could be
framed as the Kohlbergian reasoning of people in a postconventional
stage. But it could also be framed à la Haidt in a social intuitionist way—
these are people who resonate more with moral intuitions about fairness
than with respect for authority.
More interesting than squabbling about the relative importance of
reasoning and intuition are two related questions: What circumstances
bias toward emphasizing one over the other? Can the differing emphases
produce different decisions?
As we’ve seen, then–graduate student Josh Greene and colleagues
helped jump-start “neuroethics” by exploring these questions using the
poster child of “Do the ends justify the means?” philosophizing, namely
the runaway trolley problem. A trolley’s brake has failed, and it is
hurtling down the tracks and will hit and kill five people. Is it okay to do
something that saves the five but kills someone else in the process?
People have pondered this since Aristotle took his first trolley ride;*
Greene et al. added neuroscience. Subjects were neuroimaged while
pondering trolley ethics. Crucially, they considered two scenarios.
Scenario 1: Here comes the trolley; five people are goners. Would you
pull a lever that diverts the trolley onto a different track, where it will hit
and kill someone (the original scenario)? Scenario 2: Same circumstance.
Would you push the person onto the tracks to stop the trolley?19
By now I bet readers can predict which brain region(s) activates in
each circumstance. Contemplate pulling the lever, and dlPFC activity
predominates, the detached, cerebral profile of moral reasoning.
Contemplate consigning the person to death by pushing them, and it’s
vmPFC (and amygdala), the visceral profile of moral intuition.
Would you pull the lever? Consistently, 60 to 70 percent of people,
with their dlPFCs churning away, say yes to this utilitarian solution—kill
489

one to save five. Would you push the person with your own hands? Only
30 percent are willing; the more the vmPFC and/or amygdaloid
activation, the more likely they are to refuse.* This is hugely important
—a relatively minor variable determines whether people emphasize
moral reasoning or intuition, and they engage different brain circuits in
the process, producing radically different decisions. Greene has explored
this further.
Are people resistant to the utilitarian trade-off of killing one to save
five in the pushing scenario because of the visceral reality of actually
touching the person whom they have consigned to death? Greene’s work
suggests not—if instead of pushing with your hands, you push with a
pole, people are still resistant. There’s something about the personal
force involved that fuels the resistance.
Are people willing in the lever scenario because the victim is at a
distance, rather than right in front of them? Probably not—people are
just as willing if the lever is right next to the person who will die.
Greene suggests that intuitions about intentionality are key. In the
lever scenario, the five people are saved because the trolley has been
diverted to another track; the killing of the individual is a side effect and
the five would still have been saved if that person hadn’t been standing
on the tracks. In contrast, in the pushing scenario the five are saved
because the person is killed, and the intentionality feels intuitively
wrong. As evidence, Greene would give subjects another scenario: Here
comes the trolley, and you are rushing to throw a switch that will halt it.
Is it okay to do this if you know that in the process of lunging for the
switch, you must push a person out of the way, who falls to the ground
and dies? About 80 percent of people say yes. Same pushing the person,
same proximity, but done unintentionally, as a side effect. The person
wasn’t killed as a means to save the five. Which seems much more okay.
Now a complication. In the “loop” scenario, you pull a lever that
diverts the trolley to another track. But—oh no!—it’s just a loop; it
merges back on to the original track. The trolley will still kill the five
people—except that there’s a person on the side loop who will be killed,
stopping the trolley. This is as intentional a scenario as is pushing with
your hands—diverting to another track isn’t enough; the person has to be
killed. By all logic only about 30 percent of people should sign on, but
instead it’s in the 60 to 70 percent range.

490

Greene concludes (from this and additional scenarios resembling the
loop) that the intuitionist universe is very local. Killing someone
intentionally as a means to save five feels intuitively wrong, but the
intuition is strongest when the killing would occur right here, right now;
doing it in more complicated sequences of intentionality doesn’t feel as
bad. This is not because of a cognitive limit—it’s not that subjects don’t
realize the necessity of killing the person in the loop scenario. It just
doesn’t feel the same. In other words, intuitions discount heavily over
space and time. Exactly the myopia about cause and effect you’d expect
from a brain system that operates rapidly and automatically. This is the
same sort of myopia that makes sins of commission feel worse than those
of omission.
Thus these studies suggest that when a sacrifice of one requires
active, intentional, and local actions, more intuitive brain circuitry is
engaged, and ends don’t justify means. And in circumstances where
either the harm is unintentional or the intentionality plays out at a
psychological distance, different neural circuitry predominates,
producing an opposite conclusion about the morality of ends and means.
These trolleyology studies raise a larger point, which is that moral
decision making can be wildly context dependent.20 Often the key thing
that a change in context does is alter the locality of one’s intuitionist
morals, as summarized by Dan Ariely of Duke University in his
wonderful book Predictably Irrational. Leave money around a common
work area and no one takes it; it’s not okay to steal money. Leave some
cans of Coke and they’re all taken; the one-step distance from the money
involved blunts the intuitions about the wrongness of stealing, making it
easier to start rationalizing (e.g., someone must have left them out for the
taking).
The effects of proximity on moral intuitionism are shown in a
thought experiment by Peter Singer.21 You’re walking by a river in your
hometown. You see that a child has fallen in. Most people feel morally
obliged to jump in and save the child, even if the water destroys their
$500 suit. Alternatively, a friend in Somalia calls and tells you about a
poor child there who will die without $500 worth of medical care. Can
you send money? Typically not. The locality and moral discounting over
distance is obvious—the child in danger in your hometown is far more of
an Us than is this dying child far away. And this is an intuitive rather
than cognitive core—if you were walking along in Somalia and saw a

491

child fall into a river, you’d be more likely to jump in and sacrifice the
suit than to send $500 to that friend making the phone call. Someone
being right there, in the flesh, in front of our eyes is a strong implicit
prime that they are an Us.
Moral context dependency can also revolve around language, as
noted in chapter 3.22 Recall, for example, people using different rules
about the morality of cooperation if you call the same economic game
the “Wall Street game” or the “community game.” Framing an
experimental drug as having a “5 percent mortality rate” versus a “95
percent survival rate” produces different decisions about the ethics of
using it.
Framing also taps into the themes of people having multiple
identities, belonging to multiple Us groups and hierarchies. This was
shown in a hugely interesting 2014 Nature paper by Alain Cohn and
colleagues at the University of Zurich.23 Subjects, who worked for an
(unnamed) international bank, played a coin-toss game with financial
rewards for guessing outcomes correctly. Crucially, the game’s design
made it possible for subjects to cheat at various points (and for the
investigators to detect the cheating).
In one version subjects first completed a questionnaire filled with
mundane questions about their everyday lives (e.g., “How many hours of
television do you watch each week?”). This produced a low, baseline
level of cheating.
Then, in the experimental version, the questionnaire was about their
bank job. Questions like these primed the subjects to implicitly think
more about banking (e.g., they became more likely in a word task to
complete “__oker” with “broker” than with “smoker”).
So subjects were thinking about their banking identity. And when
they did, rates of cheating rose 20 percent. Priming people in other
professions (e.g., manufacturing) to think about their jobs, or about the
banking world, didn’t increase cheating. These bankers carried in their
heads two different sets of ethical rules concerning cheating (banking
and nonbanking), and unconscious cuing brought one or the other to the
forefront.* Know thyself. Especially in differing contexts.

“But This Circumstance Is Different”

492

The context dependency of morality is crucial in an additional realm.
It is a nightmare of a person who, with remorseless sociopathy,
believes it is okay to steal, kill, rape, and plunder. But far more of
humanity’s worst behaviors are due to a different kind of person, namely
most of the rest of us, who will say that of course it is wrong to do X . . .
but here is why these special circumstances make me an exception right
now.
We use different brain circuits when contemplating our own moral
failings (heavy activation of the vmPFC) versus those of others (more of
the insula and dlPFC).24 And we consistently make different judgments,
being more likely to exempt ourselves than others from moral
condemnation. Why? Part of it is simply self-serving; sometimes a
hypocrite bleeds because you’ve scratched a hypocrite. The difference
may also reflect different emotions being involved when we analyze our
own actions versus those of others. Considering the moral failings of the
latter may evoke anger and indignation, while their moral triumphs
prompt emulation and inspiration. In contrast, considering our own
moral failings calls forth shame and guilt, while our triumphs elicit pride.
The affective aspects of going easy on ourselves are shown when
stress makes us more this way.25 When experimentally stressed, subjects
make more egoistic, rationalizing judgments regarding emotional moral
dilemmas and are less likely to make utilitarian judgments—but only
when the latter involve a personal moral issue. Moreover, the bigger the
glucocorticoid response to the stressor, the more this is the case.
Going easy on ourselves also reflects a key cognitive fact: we judge
ourselves by our internal motives and everyone else by their external
actions.26 And thus, in considering our own misdeeds, we have more
access to mitigating, situational information. This is straight out of
Us/Them—when Thems do something wrong, it’s because they’re
simply rotten; when Us-es do it, it’s because of an extenuating
circumstance, and “Me” is the most focal Us there is, coming with the
most insight into internal state. Thus, on this cognitive level there is no
inconsistency or hypocrisy, and we might readily perceive a wrong to be
mitigated by internal motives in the case of anyone’s misdeeds. It’s just
easier to know those motives when we are the perpetrator.
The adverse consequences of this are wide and deep. Moreover, the
pull toward judging yourself less harshly than others easily resists the
rationality of deterrence. As Ariely writes in his book, “Overall cheating
493

is not limited by risk; it is limited by our ability to rationalize the
cheating to ourselves.”

Cultural Context
So people make different moral judgments about the same
circumstance depending on whether it’s about them or someone else,
which of their identities has been primed, the language used, how many
steps the intentionality is removed, and even the levels of their stress
hormones, the fullness of their stomach, or the smelliness of their
environment. After chapter 9 it is no surprise that moral decision making
can also vary dramatically by culture. One culture’s sacred cow is
another’s meal, and the discrepancy can be agonizing.
When thinking about cross-cultural differences in morality, key
issues are what universals of moral judgment exist and whether the
universals or the differences are more interesting and important.
Chapter 9 noted some moral stances that are virtually universal,
whether de facto or de jure. These include condemnation of at least some
forms of murder and of theft. Oh, and of some form of sexual practice.
More broadly, there is the near universal of the Golden Rule (with
cultures differing as to whether it is framed as “Do only things you’d
want done to you” or “Don’t do things you wouldn’t want done to you”).
Amid the power of its simplicity, the Golden Rule does not incorporate
people differing as to what they would/wouldn’t want done to them; we
have entered complicated terrain when we can make sense of an
interchange where a masochist says, “Beat me,” and the sadist
sadistically answers, “No.”
This criticism is overcome with the use of a more generalized,
common currency of reciprocity, where we are enjoined to give concern
and legitimacy to the needs and desires of people in circumstances where
we would want the same done for us.
Cross-cultural universals of morality arise from shared categories of
rules of moral behavior. The anthropologist Richard Shweder has
proposed that all cultures recognize rules of morality pertinent to
autonomy, community, and divinity. As we saw in the last chapter,
Jonathan Haidt breaks this continuum into his foundations of morality
that humans have strong intuitions about. These are issues related to
harm, fairness and reciprocity (both of which Shweder would call
494

autonomy), in-group loyalty and respect for authority (both of which
Shweder would call community), and issues of purity and sanctity (i.e.,
Shweder’s realm of divinity).*27
The existence of universals of morality raises the issue of whether
that means that they should trump more local, provincial moral rules.
Between the moral absolutists on one side and the relativists on the other,
people like the historian of science Michael Shermer argue reasonably
for provisional morality—if a moral stance is widespread across cultures,
start off by giving the benefit of the doubt to its importance, but watch
your wallet.28
It’s certainly interesting that, for example, all cultures designate
certain things as sacred; but it is far more so to look at the variability in
what is considered sacred, how worked up people get when such sanctity
is violated,* and what is done to keep such violations from reoccurring.
I’ll touch on this huge topic with three subjects—cross-cultural
differences concerning the morality of cooperation and competition,
affronts to honor, and the reliance on shame versus guilt.
COOPERATION AND COMPETITION

Some of the most dramatic cross-cultural variability in moral
judgment concerns cooperation and competition. This was shown to an
extraordinary extent in a 2008 Science paper by a team of British and
Swiss economists.
Subjects played a “public good” economic game where players begin
with a certain number of tokens and then decide, in each of a series of
rounds, how many to contribute to a shared pool; the pool is then
multiplied and shared evenly among all the players. The alternative to
contributing is for subjects to keep the tokens for themselves. Thus, the
worst payoff for an individual player would be if they contributed all
their tokens to the pool, while no other player contributed any; the best
would be if the individual contributed no tokens and everyone else
contributed everything. As a feature of the design, subjects could “pay”
to punish other players for the size of their contribution. Subjects were
from around the world.
First finding: Across all cultures, people were more prosocial than
sheer economic rationality would predict. If everyone played in the most
brutally asocial, realpolitik manner, no one would contribute to the pool.
Instead subjects from all cultures consistently contributed. Perhaps as an

495

explanation, subject from all cultures punished people who made lowball
contributions, and to roughly equal extents.
Where the startling difference came was with a behavior that I’d
never even seen before in the behavioral economics literature, something
called “antisocial punishment.” Free-riding punishment is when you
punish another player for contributing less than you (i.e., being selfish).
Antisocial punishment is when you punish another player for
contributing more than you (i.e., being generous).
What is that about? Interpretation: This hostility toward someone
being overly generous is because they’re going to up the ante, and soon
everyone (i.e., me) will be expected to be generous. Kill ’em, spoiling
things for everyone. It’s a phenomenon where you punish someone for
being nice, because what if that sort of crazy deviance becomes the norm
and you feel pressure to be nice back?
At one extreme were subjects from countries (the United States and
Australia) where this weird antisocial punishment was nearly
nonexistent. And at the mind-boggling other extreme were subjects from
Oman and Greece, who were willing to spend more to punish generosity
than to punish selfishness. And this was not a comparison of, say,
theologians in Boston with Omani pirates. Subjects were all urban
university students.
So what’s different among these cities? The authors found a key
correlation—the lower the social capital in a country, the higher the rates
of antisocial punishment. In other words, when do people’s moral
systems include the idea that being generous deserves punishment?
When they live in a society where people don’t trust one another and feel
as if they have no efficacy.
Fascinating work has also been done specifically on people in nonWestern cultures, as reported in a pair of studies by Joseph Henrich, of
the University of British Columbia, and colleagues.29 Subjects were in
the thousands and came from twenty-five different “small-scale” cultures
from around the world—they were nomadic pastoralists, huntergatherers, sedentary forager/horticulturalists, and subsistence
farmers/wage earners. There were two control groups, namely urbanites
from Missouri and Accra, Ghana. As a particularly thorough feature of
the study, subjects played three economic games: (a) The Dictator Game,
where the subject simply decides how money is split between them and
another player. This measures a pure sense of fairness, independent of

496

consequence. (b) The Ultimatum Game, where you can pay to punish
someone treating you unfairly (i.e., self-interested second-party
punishment). (c) A third-party punishment scenario, where you can pay
to punish someone treating a third party unfairly (i.e., altruistic
punishment).

B. Herrmann et al., “Antisocial Punishment Across Societies,” Sci 319 (2008):
1362.
Visit bit.ly/2neVZaA for a larger version of this graph.

The authors identified three fascinating variables that predicted
patterns of play:
Market integration: How much do people in a culture interact
economically, with trade items? The authors operationalized this as the
percentage of people’s calories that came from purchases in market
interactions, and it ranged from 0 percent for the hunter-gathering Hadza
497

of Tanzania to nearly 90 percent for sedentary fishing cultures. And
across the cultures a greater degree of market integration strongly
predicted people making fairer offers in all three games and being
willing to pay for both self-interested second-party and altruistic thirdparty punishment of creeps. For example, the Hadza, at one extreme,
kept an average of 73 percent of the spoils for themselves in the Dictator
Game, while the sedentary fishing Sanquianga of Colombia, along with
people in the United States and Accra, approached dictating a 50:50
split. Market integration predicts more willingness to punish selfishness
and, no surprise, less selfishness.
Community size: The bigger the community, the more the incidence of
second- and third-party punishment of cheapskates. Hadza, for example,
in their tiny bands of fifty or fewer, would pretty much accept any offer
above zero in the Ultimatum Game—there was no punishment. At the
other extreme, in communities of five thousand or more (sedentary
agriculturalists and aquaculturalists, plus the Ghanaian and American
urbanites), offers that weren’t in the ballpark of 50:50 were typically
rejected and/or punished.
Religion: What percentage of the population belonged to a worldwide
religion (i.e., Christianity or Islam)? This ranged from none of the Hadza
to 60 to 100 percent for all the other groups. The greater the incidence of
belonging to a Western religion, the more third-party punishment (i.e.,
willingness to pay to punish person A for being unfair to person B).
What to make of these findings?
First the religion angle. This was a finding not about religiosity
generally but about religiosity within a worldwide religion, and not about
generosity or fairness but about altruistic third-party punishment. What is
it about worldwide religions? As we saw in chapter 9, it is only when
groups get large enough that people regularly interact with strangers that
cultures invent moralizing gods. These are not gods who sit around the
banquet table laughing with detachment at the foibles of humans down
below, or gods who punish humans for lousy sacrificial offerings. These
are gods who punish humans for being rotten to other humans—in other
words, the large religions invent gods who do third-party punishment.
No wonder this predicts these religions’ adherents being third-party
punishers themselves.
Next the twin findings that more market integration and bigger
community size were associated with fairer offers (for the former) and

498

more willingness to punish unfair players (for both). I find this to be a
particularly challenging pair of findings, especially when framed as the
authors thoughtfully did.
The authors ask where the uniquely extreme sense of fairness comes
from in humans, particularly in the context of large-scale societies with
strangers frequently interacting. And they offer two traditional types of
explanations that are closely related to our dichotomies of intuition
versus reasoning and animal roots versus cultural inventions:
Our moral anchoring in fairness in large-scale societies
is a residue and extension of our hunter-gatherer and
nonhuman primate past. This was life in small bands,
where fairness was mostly driven by kin selection and
easy scenarios of reciprocal altruism. As our community
size has expanded and we now mostly have one-shot
interactions with unrelated strangers, our prosociality
just represents an expansion of our small-band mind-set,
as we use various green-beard marker shibboleths as
proxies for relatedness. I’d gladly lay down my life for
two brothers, eight cousins, or a guy who is a fellow
Packers fan.
The moral underpinnings of a sense of fairness lie in
cultural institutions and mind-sets that we invented as
our groups became larger and more sophisticated (as
reflected in the emergence of markets, cash economies,
and the like).
This many pages in, it’s obvious that I think the former scenario is
pretty powerful—look, we see the roots of a sense of fairness and justice
in the egalitarian nature of nomadic hunter-gatherers, in other primates,
in infants, in the preeminent limbic rather than cortical involvement. But,
inconveniently for that viewpoint, that’s totally counter to what emerges
from these studies—across the twenty-five cultures it’s the huntergatherers, the ones most like our ancestors, living in the smallest groups,
with the highest degrees of relatedness and with the least reliance on
market interactions, who show the least tendency toward making fair
offers and are least likely to punish unfairness, whether to themselves or

499

to the other guy. None of that prosociality is there, a picture counter to
what we saw in chapter 9.
I think an explanation is that these economic games tap into a very
specific and artificial type of prosociality. We tend to think of market
interactions as being the epitome of complexity—finding a literal
common currency for the array of human needs and desires in the form
of this abstraction called money. But at their core, market interactions
represent an impoverishment of human reciprocity. In its natural form,
human reciprocity is a triumph of comfortably and intuitively doing
long-term math with apples and oranges—this guy over here is a
superstar hunter; that other guy isn’t in his league but has your back if
there’s a lion around; meanwhile, she’s amazing at finding the best
mongongo nuts, that older woman knows all about medicinal herbs, and
that geeky guy remembers the best stories. We know where one another
live, the debit columns even out over time, and if someone is really
abusing the system, we’ll get around to collectively dealing with them.
In contrast, at its core, a cash-economy market interaction strips it all
down to “I give you this now, so you give me that now”—myopic
present-tense interactions whose obligations of reciprocity must be
balanced immediately. People in small-scale societies are relatively new
to functioning this way. It’s not the case that small-scale cultures that are
growing big and market reliant are newly schooled in how to be fair.
Instead they’re newly schooled in how to be fair in the artificial
circumstances modeled by something like the Ultimatum Game.
HONOR AND REVENGE

Another realm of cross-cultural differences in moral systems
concerns what constitutes appropriate response to personal affronts. This
harks back to chapter 9’s cultures of honor, from Maasai tribesmen to
traditional American Southerners. As we saw, such cultures have
historical links to monotheism, warrior age groups, and pastoralism.
To recap, such cultures typically see an unanswered challenge to
honor as the start of a disastrous slippery slope, rooted in the intrinsic
vulnerability of pastoralism—while no one can raid farmers and steal all
their crops, someone can rustle a herd overnight—and if this sum’a bitch
gets away with insulting my family, he’ll be coming for my cattle next.
These are cultures that place a high moral emphasis on revenge, and
revenge at least in kind—after all, an eye for an eye was probably the

500

invention of Judaic pastoralists. The result is a world of Hatfields and
McCoys, with their escalating vendettas. This helps explain why the
elevated murder rates in the American South are not due to urban
violence or things like robberies but are instead about affronts to honor
between people who know each other. And it helps explain why
Southern prosecutors and juries are typically more forgiving of such
crimes of affronted honor. And it also helps explain the command
apparently given by many Southern matriarchs to their sons marching off
to join the Confederate fight: come back a winner or come back in a
coffin. The shame of surrender is not an option.
SHAMED COLLECTIVISTS AND GUILTY INDIVIDUALISTS

We return to our contrast between collectivist and individualistic
cultures (in the studies, as a reminder, “collectivist” has mostly meant
East Asian societies, while “individualistic” equals Western Europeans
and North Americans). Implicit in the very nature of the contrast are
markedly different approaches to the morality of ends and means. By
definition, collectivist cultures are more comfortable than individualistic
ones with people being used as a means to a utilitarian end. Moreover,
moral imperatives in collectivist cultures tend to be about social roles
and duties to the group, whereas those in individualistic cultures are
typically about individual rights.
Collectivist and individualistic cultures also differ in how moral
behavior is enforced. As first emphasized by the anthropologist Ruth
Benedict in 1946, collectivist cultures enforce with shame, while
individualistic cultures use guilt. This is a doozy of a contrast, as
explored in two excellent books, Stanford psychiatrist Herant
Katchadourian’s Guilt: The Bite of Conscience and NYU environmental
scientist Jennifer Jacquet’s Is Shame Necessary?30
In the sense used by most in the field, including these authors, shame
is external judgment by the group, while guilt is internal judgment of
yourself. Shame requires an audience, is about honor. Guilt is for
cultures that treasure privacy and is about conscience. Shame is a
negative assessment of the entire individual, guilt that of an act, making
it possible to hate the sin but love the sinner. Effective shaming requires
a conformist, homogeneous population; effective guilt requires respect
for law. Feeling shame is about wanting to hide; feeling guilt is about
wanting to make amends. Shame is when everyone says, “You can no

501

longer live with us”; guilt is when you say, “How am I going to live with
myself?”*
From the time that Benedict first articulated this contrast, there has
been a self-congratulatory view in the West that shame is somehow more
primitive than guilt, as the West has left behind dunce caps, public
flogging, and scarlet letters. Shame is the mob; guilt is internalizing
rules, laws, edicts, decrees, and statutes. Yet, Jacquet convincingly
argues for the continued usefulness of shaming in the West, calling for its
rebirth in a postmodernist form. For her, shaming is particularly useful
when the powerful show no evidence of feeling guilt and evade
punishment. We have no shortage of examples of such evasion in the
American legal system, where one can benefit from the best defense that
money or power can buy; shaming can often step into that vacuum.
Consider a 1999 scandal at UCLA, when more than a dozen healthy,
strapping football players were discovered to have used connections,
made-up disabilities, and forged doctors’ signatures to get handicapped
parking permits. Their privileged positions resulted in what was
generally seen as slaps on the wrist by both the courts and UCLA.
However, the element of shaming may well have made up for it—as they
left the courthouse in front of the press, they walked past a phalanx of
disabled, wheelchair-bound individuals jeering them.31
Anthropologists, studying everyone from hunter-gatherers to
urbanites, have found that about two thirds of everyday conversation is
gossip, with the vast majority of it being negative. As has been said,
gossip (with the goal of shaming) is a weapon of the weak against the
powerful. It has always been fast and cheap and is infinitely more so now
in the era of the Scarlet Internet.
Shaming is also effective when dealing with outrages by
corporations.32 Bizarrely, the American legal system considers a
corporation to be an individual in many ways, one that is psychopathic in
the sense of having no conscience and being solely interested in profits.
The people running a corporation are occasionally criminally responsible
when the corporation has done something illegal; however, they are not
when the corporation does something legal yet immoral—it is outside the
realm of guilt. Jacquet emphasizes the potential power of shaming
campaigns, such as those that forced Nike to change its policies about
the horrific working conditions in its overseas sweatshops, or paper giant
Kimberly-Clark to address the cutting of old-growth forests.

502

Amid the potential good that can come from such shaming, Jacquet
also emphasizes the dangers of contemporary shaming, which is the
savagery with which people can be attacked online and the distance such
venom can travel—in a world where getting to anonymously hate the
sinner seems more important than anything about the sin itself.

503

FOOLS RUSH IN: APPLYING THE
FINDINGS OF THE SCIENCE OF
MORALITY

H

ow can the insights we already have in hand be used to foster the
best of our behaviors and lessen the worst?

Which Dead White Male Was Right?
Let’s start with a question that has kept folks busy for millennia,
namely, what is the optimal moral philosophy?
People pondering this question have grouped the different
approaches into three broad categories. Say there’s money sitting there,
and it’s not yours but no one is looking; why not grab it?
Virtue ethics, with its emphasis on the actor, would answer: because
you are a better person than that, because you’ll have to live with
yourself afterward, etc.
Deontology, with its emphasis on the act: because it’s not okay to
steal.
Consequentialism, with its emphasis on the outcome: what if
everyone started acting that way, think about the impact on the person
whose money you’ve stolen, etc.

—
Virtue ethics has generally taken a backseat to the other two in recent
years, having acquired a quaint veneer of antiquarian fretting over how
an improper act tarnishes one’s soul. As we’ll see, I think that virtue
ethics returns through the back door with considerable relevance.
By focusing on deontology versus consequentialism, we are back on
the familiar ground of whether ends justify means. For deontologists the
answer is “No, people can never be pawns.” For the consequentialist the
answer is “Yes, for the right outcome.” Consequentialism comes in a
number of stripes, taken seriously to varying degrees, depending on its

504

features—for example, yes, the end justifies the means if the end is to
maximize my pleasure (hedonism), to maximize overall levels of
wealth,* to strengthen the powers that be (state consequentialism). For
most, though, consequentialism is about classical utilitarianism—it is
okay to use people as a means to the end of maximizing overall levels of
happiness.
When deontologism and consequentialism contemplate trolleys, the
former is about moral intuitions rooted in the vmPFC, amygdala, and
insula, while the latter is the domain of the dlPFC and moral reasoning.
Why is it that our automatic, intuitive moral judgments tend to be
nonutilitarian? Because, as Greene states in his book, “Our moral brains
evolved to help us spread our genes, not to maximize our collective
happiness.”
The trolley studies show people’s moral heterogeneity. In them
approximately 30 percent of subjects were consistently deontologists,
unwilling to either pull a lever or push a person, even at the cost of those
five lives. Another 30 percent were always utilitarian, willing to pull or
push. And for everyone else, moral philosophies were context dependent.
The fact that a plurality of people fall into this category prompts
Greene’s “dual process” model, stating that we are usually a mixture of
valuing means and ends. What’s your moral philosophy? If harm to the
person who is the means is unintentional or if the intentionality is really
convoluted and indirect, I’m a utilitarian consequentialist, and if the
intentionality is right in front of my nose, I’m a deontologist.
The different trolley scenarios reveal what circumstances push us
toward intuitive deontology, which toward utilitarian reasoning. Which
outcome is better?
For the sort of person reading this book (i.e., who reads and thinks,
things to be justifiably self-congratulatory about), when considering this
issue at a calm distance, utilitarianism seems like the place to start—
maximizing collective happiness. There is the emphasis on equity—not
equal treatment but taking everyone’s well-being into equal
consideration. And there is the paramount emphasis on impartiality: if
someone thinks the situation being proposed is morally equitable, they
should be willing to flip a coin to determine which role they play.
Utilitarianism can be critiqued on practical grounds—it’s hard to find
a common currency of people’s differing versions of happiness, the
emphasis on ends over means requires that you be good at predicting

505

what the actual ends will be, and true impartiality is damn hard with our
Us/Them minds. But in theory, at least, there is a solid, logical appeal to
utilitarianism.
Except that there’s a problem—unless someone is missing their
vmPFC, the appeal of utilitarianism inevitably comes to a screeching halt
at some point. For most people it’s pushing the person in front of the
trolley. Or smothering a crying baby to save a group of people hiding
from Nazis. Or killing a healthy person to harvest his organs and save
five lives. As Greene emphasizes, virtually everyone immediately grasps
the logic and appeal of utilitarianism yet eventually hits a point where it
is clear that it’s not a good guide for everyday moral decision making.
Greene and, independently, the neuroscientist John Allman of
Caltech and historian of science James Woodward of the University of
Pittsburgh have explored the neurobiological underpinnings of a key
point—the utilitarianism being considered here is unidimensional and
artificial; it hobbles the sophistication of both our moral intuitions and
our moral reasoning. A pretty convincing case can be made for utilitarian
consequentialism. As long as you consider the immediate consequences.
And the longer-term consequences. And the long-long-term
consequences. And then go and consider them all over again a few times.
When people hit a wall with utilitarianism, it’s because what is on
paper a palatable trade-off in the short run (“Intentionally kill one to save
five—that obviously increases collective happiness”) turns out not to be
so in the long run. “Sure, that healthy person’s involuntary organ
donation just saved five lives, but who else is going to get dissected that
way? What if they come for me? I kinda like my liver. What else might
they start doing?” Slippery slopes, desensitization, unintended
consequences, intended consequences. When shortsighted utilitarianism
(what Woodward and Allman call “parametric” consequentialism) is
replaced with a longer-viewed version (what they call “strategic”
consequentialism and what Greene calls “pragmatic utilitarianism”), you
get better outcomes.
Our overview of moral intuition versus moral reasoning has
generated a dichotomy, something akin to how guys can’t have lots of
blood flow to their crotch and their brain at the same time; they have to
choose. Similarly, you have to choose whether your moral decision
making will be about the amygdala or the dlPFC. But this is a false
dichotomy, because we reach our best long-term, strategic,

506

consequentialist decisions when we engage both our reasoning and our
intuition. “Sure, being willing to do X in order to accomplish Y seems
like a good trade-off in the short run. But in the long run, if we do that
often enough, doing Z is going to start to seem okay also, and I’d feel
awful if Z were done to me, and there’s also a good chance that W would
happen, and that’s going to generate really bad feelings in people, which
will result in . . .” And the “feel” part of that process is not the way Mr.
Spock would do it, logically and dispassionately remembering that those
humans are irrational, flighty creatures and incorporating that into his
rational thinking about them. Instead, this is feeling what the feelings
would feel like. This is straight out of chapter 2’s overview of Damasio’s
somatic marker hypothesis: when we are making decisions, we are
running not only thought experiments but somatic feeling experiments as
well—how is it going to feel if this happens?—and this combination is
the goal in moral decision making.
Thus, “No way I’d push someone onto the trolley tracks; it’s just
wrong” is about the amygdala, insula, and vmPFC. “Sacrifice one life to
save five, sure” is the dlPFC. But do long-term strategic
consequentialism, and all those regions are engaged. And this yields
something more powerful than the cocksureness of knee-jerk
intuitionism, the “I can’t tell you why, but this is simply wrong.” When
you’ve engaged all those brain systems, when you’ve done the thought
experiments and feeling experiments of how things might play out in the
long run, and when you’ve prioritized the inputs—gut reactions are taken
seriously, but they’re sure not given veto power—you’ll know exactly
why something seems right or wrong.
The synergistic advantages of combining reasoning with intuition
raise an important point. If you’re a fan of moral intuitions, you’d frame
them as being foundational and primordial. If you don’t like them, you’d
present them as simplistic, reflexive, and primitive. But as emphasized
by Woodward and Allman, our moral intuitions are neither primordial
nor reflexively primitive. They are the end products of learning; they are
cognitive conclusions to which we have been exposed so often that they
have become automatic, as implicit as riding a bicycle or reciting the
days of the week forward rather than backward. In the West we nearly all
have strong moral intuitions about the wrongness of slavery, child labor,
or animal cruelty. But that sure didn’t used to be the case. Their
wrongness has become an implicit moral intuition, a gut instinct

507

concerning moral truth, only because of the fierce moral reasoning (and
activism) of those who came before us, when the average person’s moral
intuitions were unrecognizably different. Our guts learn their intuitions.

Slow and Fast: The Separate Problems of “Me
Versus Us” and “Us Versus Them”
The contrast between rapid, automatic moral intuitionism and
conscious, deliberative moral reasoning plays out in another crucial
realm and is the subject of Greene’s superb 2014 book Moral Tribes:
Emotion, Reason, and the Gap Between Us and Them.33
Greene starts with the classic tragedy of the commons. Shepherds
bring their flocks to a common grazing field. There are so many sheep
that there is the danger of destroying the commons, unless people
decrease the size of their herds. And the tragedy is that if it is truly a
commons, there is no incentive to ever cooperate—you’d range from
being a fool if no one else was cooperating to being a successful free
rider if everyone else was.
This issue, namely how to jump-start and then maintain cooperation
in a sea of noncooperators, ran through all of chapter 10 and, as shown in
the widespread existence of social species that cooperate, this is solvable
(stay tuned for more in the final chapter). When framed in the context of
morality, averting the tragedy of the commons requires getting people in
groups to not be selfish; it is an issue of Me versus Us.
But Greene outlines a second type of tragedy. Now there are two
different groups of shepherds, and the challenge is that each group has a
different approach to grazing. One, for example, treats the pasture as a
classic commons, while the other believes that the pasture should be
divided up into parcels of land belonging to individual shepherds, with
high, strong fences in between. In other words, mutually contradictory
views about using the pasture.
The thing that fuels the danger and tragedy of this situation is that
each group has such a tightly reasoned structure in their heads as to why
their way is correct that it can acquire moral weight, be seen as a “right.”
Greene dissects that word brilliantly. For each side, perceiving
themselves as having a “right” to do things their way mostly means that
they have slathered enough post-hoc, Haidtian rationalizations on a

508

shapeless, self-serving, parochial moral intuition; have lined up enough
of their gray-bearded philosopher-king shepherds to proclaim the moral
force of their stance; feel in the most sincere, pained way that the very
essence of what they value and who they are is at stake, that the very
moral rightness of the universe is wobbling; all of that so strongly that
they can’t recognize the “right” for what it is, namely “I can’t tell you
why, but this is how things should be done.” To cite a quote attributed to
Oscar Wilde, “Morality is simply the attitude we adopt towards people
whom we personally dislike.”
It’s Us versus Them framed morally, and the importance of what
Greene calls “the Tragedy of Commonsense Morality” is shown by the
fact that most intergroup conflicts on our planet ultimately are cultural
disagreements about whose “right” is righter.
This is an intellectualized, bloodless way of framing the issue. Here’s
a different way.
Say I decide that it would be a good thing to have pictures here
demonstrating cultural relativism, displaying an act that is
commonsensical in one culture but deeply distressing in another. “I
know,” I think, “I’ll get some pictures of a Southeast Asian dog-meat
market; like me, most readers will likely resonate with dogs.” Good plan.
On to Google Images, and the result is that I spend hours transfixed,
unable to stop, torturing myself with picture after picture of dogs being
carted off to market, dogs being butchered, cooked, and sold, pictures of
humans going about their day’s work in a market, indifferent to a crate
stuffed to the top with suffering dogs.
I imagine the fear those dogs feel, how they are hot, thirsty, in pain. I
think, “What if these dogs had come to trust humans?” I think of their
fear and confusion. I think, “What if one of the dogs whom I’ve loved
had to experience that? What if this happened to a dog my children
loved?” And with my heart racing, I realize that I hate these people, hate
every last one of them and despise their culture.
And it takes a locomotive’s worth of effort for me to admit that I
can’t justify that hatred and contempt, that mine is a mere moral
intuition, that there are things that I do that would evoke the same
response in some distant person whose humanity and morality are
certainly no less than mine, and that but for the randomness of where I
happen to have been born, I could have readily had their views instead.

509

The thing that makes the
tragedy of commonsense morality
so tragic is the intensity with which
you just know that They are deeply
wrong.
In general, our morally tinged
cultural institutions—religion,
nationalism, ethnic pride, team
spirit—bias us toward our best
behaviors when we are single
shepherds facing a potential tragedy
of the commons. They make us less
selfish in Me versus Us situations.
But they send us hurtling toward
our worst behaviors when
confronting Thems and their
different moralities.
The dual process nature of moral decision making gives some
insights into how to avert these two very different types of tragedies.
In the context of Me versus Us, our moral intuitions are shared, and
emphasizing them hums with the prosociality of our Us-ness. This was
shown in a study by Greene, David Rand of Yale, and colleagues, where
subjects played a one-shot public-goods game that modeled the tragedy
of the commons.34 Subjects were given differing lengths of time to
decide how much money they would contribute to a common pot (versus
keeping it for themselves, to everyone else’s detriment). And the faster
the decision required, the more cooperative people were. Ditto if you had
primed subjects to value intuition (by having them relate a time when
intuition led them to a good decision or where careful reasoning did the
opposite)—more cooperation. Conversely, instruct subjects to “carefully
consider” their decision, or prime them to value reflection over intuition,
and they’d be more selfish. The more time to think, the more time to do a
version of “Yes, we all agree that cooperation is a good thing . . . but
here is why I should be exempt this time”—what the authors called
“calculated greed.”
What would happen if subjects played the game with someone
screamingly different, as different a human as you could find, by
whatever the subject’s standards of comfort and familiarity? While the

510

study hasn’t been done (and would obviously be hard to do), you’d
predict that fast, intuitive decisions would overwhelmingly be in the
direction of easy, unconflicted selfishness, with “Them! Them!”
xenophobia alarms ringing and automatic beliefs of “Don’t trust Them!”
instantly triggered.
When facing Me-versus-Us moral dilemmas of resisting selfishness,
our rapid intuitions are good, honed by evolutionary selection for
cooperation in a sea of green-beard markers.35 And in such settings,
regulating and formalizing the prosociality (i.e., moving it from the
realm of intuition to that of cogitation) can even be counterproductive, a
point emphasized by Samuel Bowles.*
In contrast, when doing moral decision making during Us-versusThem scenarios, keep intuitions as far away as possible. Instead, think,
reason, and question; be deeply pragmatic and strategically utilitarian;
take their perspective, try to think what they think, try to feel what they
feel. Take a deep breath, and then do it all again.*

Veracity and Mendacity
The question rang out, clear and insistent, a question that could
not be ignored or evaded. Chris swallowed once, tried for a voice
that was calm and steady, and answered, “No, absolutely not.” It
was a bald-faced lie.
Is this a good thing or bad thing? Well, it depends on what the
question was: (a) “When the CEO gave you the summary, were you
aware that the numbers had been manipulated to hide the third-quarter
losses?” asked the prosecutor. (b) “Is this a toy you already have?” asked
Grandma tentatively. (c) “What did the doctor say? Is it fatal?” (d) “Does
this outfit make me look ____ ?” (e) “Did you eat the brownies that were
for tonight?” (f) “Harrison, are you harboring the runaway slave named
Jack?” (g) “Something’s not adding up. Are you lying about being at
work late last night?” (h) “OMG, did you just cut one?”
Nothing better typifies the extent to which the meanings of our
behaviors are context dependent. Same untruth, same concentration on
controlling your facial expression, same attempt to make just the right
amount of eye contact. And depending on the circumstance, this could be

511

us at our best or worst. On the converse side of context dependency,
sometimes being honest is the harder thing—telling an unpleasant truth
about another person activates the medial PFC (along with the insula).*36
Given these complexities, it is no surprise that the biology of honesty
and duplicity is very muddy.
As we saw in chapter 10, the very nature of competitive evolutionary
games selects for both deception and vigilance against it. We even saw
protoversions of both in social yeast. Dogs attempt to deceive one
another, with marginal success—when a dog is terrified, fear
pheromones emanate from his anal scent glands, and it’s not great if the
guy you’re facing off against knows you’re scared. A dog can’t
consciously choose to be deceptive by not synthesizing and secreting
those pheromones. But he can try to squelch their dissemination by
putting a lid on those glands, by putting his tail between his legs—“I’m
not scared, no siree,” squeaked Sparky.
No surprise, nonhuman primate duplicity takes things to a whole
other level.37 If there is a good piece of food and a higher-ranking animal
nearby, capuchins will give predator alarm calls to distract the other
individual; if it is a lower-ranking animal, no need; just take the food.
Similarly, if a low-ranking capuchin knows where food has been hidden
and there is a dominant animal around, he will move away from the
hiding place; if it’s a subordinate animal, no problem. The same is seen
in spider monkeys and macaques. And other primates don’t just carry out
“tactical concealment” about food. When a male gelada baboon mates
with a female, he typically gives a “copulation call.” Unless he is with a
female who has snuck away from her nearby consortship male. In which
case he doesn’t make a sound. And, of course, all of these examples pale
in comparison with what politico chimps can be up to. Reflecting
deception as a task requiring lots of social expertise, across primate
species, a larger neocortex predicts higher rates of deception,
independent of group size.*
That’s impressive. But it is highly unlikely that there is conscious
strategizing on the part of these primates. Or that they feel bad or even
morally soiled about being deceptive. Or that they actually believe their
lies. For those things we need humans.
The human capacity for deception is enormous. We have the most
complex innervation of facial muscles and use massive numbers of
motor neurons to control them—no other species can be poker-faced.

512

And we have language, that extraordinary means of manipulating the
distance between a message and its meaning.
Humans also excel at lying because our cognitive skills allow us to
do something beyond the means of any perfidious gelada baboon—we
can finesse the truth.
A cool study shows our propensity for this. To simplify: A subject
would roll a die, with different results yielding different monetary
rewards. The rolls were made in private, with the subject reporting the
outcome—an opportunity to cheat.
Given chance and enough rolls, if everyone was honest, each number
would be reported about one sixth of the time. If everyone always lied
for maximal gain, all rolls would supposedly have produced the highestpaying number.
There was lots of lying. Subjects were over 2,500 college students
from twenty-three countries, and higher rates of corruption, tax evasion,
and political fraud in a subject’s country predicted higher rates of lying.
This is no surprise, after chapter 9’s demonstration that high rates of rule
violations in a community decrease social capital, which then fuels
individual antisocial behavior.
What was most interesting was that across all the cultures, lying was
of a particular type. Subjects actually rolled a die twice, and only the first
roll counted (the second, they were told, tested whether the die was
“working properly”). The lying showed a pattern that, based on prior
work, could be explained by only one thing—people rarely made up a
high-paying number. Instead they simply reported the higher roll of the
two.
You can practically hear the rationalizing. “Darn, my first roll was a
1 [a bad outcome], my second a 4 [better]. Hey, rolls are random; it
could just as readily have been 4 as a 1, so . . . let’s just say I rolled a 4.
That’s not really cheating.”
In other words, lying most often included rationalizing that made it
feel less dishonest—not going whole hog for that filthy lucre, so that
your actions feel like only slightly malodorous untruthiness.
When we are lying, naturally, regions involved in Theory of Mind
are involved, particularly with circumstances of strategic social
deception. Moreover, the dlPFC and related frontal regions are central to
a neural circuit of deception. And then insight grinds to a halt.38

513

Back to the theme introduced in chapter 2 of the frontal cortex, and
the dlPFC in particular, getting you to do the harder thing when it’s the
right thing to do. And in our value-free sense of “right,” you’d expect the
dlPFC to activate when you’re struggling to do (a) the morally right
thing, which is to avoid the temptation to lie, as well as (b) the
strategically right thing, namely, once having decided to lie, doing it
effectively. It can be hard to deceive effectively, having to think
strategically, carefully remember what lie you’re actually saying, and
create a false affect (“Your Majesty, I bring terrible, sad news about your
son, the heir to the throne [yeah, we ambushed him—high fives!]”).*
Thus activation of the dlPFC will reflect both the struggle to resist
temptation and the executive effort to wallow effectively in the
temptation, once you’ve lost that struggle. “Don’t do it” + “if you’re
going to do it, do it right.”
This confusion arises in neuroimaging studies of compulsive liars.*39
What might one expect? These are people who habitually fail to resist
the temptation of lying; I bet they have atrophy of something
frontocortical. These are people who habitually lie and are good at it
(and typically have high verbal IQs); I bet they have expansion of
something frontocortical. And the studies bear out both predictions—
compulsive liars have increased amounts of white matter (i.e., the axonal
cables connecting neurons) in the frontal cortex, but lesser amounts of
gray matter (i.e., the cell bodies of the neurons). It’s not possible to know
if there’s causality in these neuroimaging/behavior correlates. All one
can conclude is that frontocortical regions like the dlPFC show multiple
and varied versions of “doing the harder thing.”
You can dissociate the frontal task of resisting temptation from the
frontal task of lying effectively by taking morality out of the equation.40
This is done in studies where people are told to lie. (For example,
subjects are given a series of pictures; later they are shown an array of
pictures, some of which are identical to ones in their possession, and
asked, “Is this a picture you have?” A signal from the computer indicates
whether the subject should answer honestly or lie.) In this sort of
scenario, lying is most consistently associated with activation of the
dlPFC (along with the nearby and related ventrolateral PFC). This is a
picture of the dlPFC going about the difficult task of lying effectively,
minus worrying about the fate of its neuronal soul.

514

The studies tend to show activation of the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) as well. As introduced in chapter 2, the ACC responds to
circumstances of conflicting choices. This occurs for conflict in an
emotional sense, as well as in a cognitive sense (e.g., having to choose
between two answers when both seem to work). In the lying studies the
ACC isn’t activating because of moral conflict about lying, since
subjects were instructed to lie. Instead, it’s monitoring the conflict
between reality and what you’ve been instructed to report, and this gums
up the works slightly; people show minutely longer response times
during lying trials than during honest ones.
This delay is useful in polygraph tests (i.e., lie detectors). In the
classic form, the test detected arousal of the sympathetic nervous system,
indicating that someone was lying and anxious about not getting caught.
The trouble is that you’d get the same anxious arousal if you’re telling
the truth but your life’s over if that fallible machine says otherwise.
Moreover, sociopaths are undetectable, since they don’t get anxiously
aroused when lying. Plus subjects can take countermeasures to
manipulate their sympathetic nervous system. As a result, this use of
polygraphs is no longer admissible in courts. Contemporary polygraph
techniques instead home in on that slight delay, on the physiological
indices of that ACC conflict—not the moral one, since some miscreant
may have no moral misgivings, but the cognitive conflict—“Yeah, I
robbed the store, but no, wait, I have to say that I didn’t.” Unless you
thoroughly believe your lie, there’s likely to be that slight delay,
reflecting the ACC-ish cognitive conflict between reality and your claim.
Thus, activation of the ACC, dlPFC, and nearby frontal regions is
associated with lying on command.41 At this point we have our usual
issue of causality—is activation of, say, the dlPFC a cause, a
consequence, or a mere correlate of lying? To answer this, transcranial
direct-current stimulation has been used to inactivate the dlPFC in people
during instructed-lying tasks. Result? Subjects were slower and less
successful in lying—implying a causal role for the dlPFC. And to remind
us of how complicated this issue is, people with damage to the dlPFC are
less likely to take honesty into account when honesty and self-interest
are pitted against each other in an economic game. So this most
eggheady, cognitive part of the PFC is central to both resisting lying and,
once having decided to lie, doing it well.

515

This book’s focus is not really how good a liar someone is. It’s
whether we lie, whether we do the harder thing and resist the temptation
to deceive. For more understanding of that, we turn to a pair of
thoroughly cool neuroimaging studies where subjects who lied did so not
because they were instructed to but because they were dirty rotten
cheaters.
The first was carried out by the Swiss scientists Thomas
Baumgartner, Ernst Fehr (whose work has been noted previously), and
colleagues.42 Subjects played an economic trust game where, in each
round, you could be cooperative or selfish. Beforehand a subject would
tell the other player what their strategy would be
(always/sometimes/never cooperate). In other words, they made a
promise.
Some subjects who promised to always cooperate broke their
promise at least once. At such times there was activation of the dlPFC,
the ACC, and, of course, the amygdala.*43
A pattern of brain activation before each round’s decision predicted
breaking of a promise. Fascinatingly, along with predictable activation of
the ACC, there’d be activation of the insula. Does the scoundrel think,
“I’m disgusted with myself, but I’m going to break my promise”? Or is it
“I don’t like this guy because of X; in fact, he’s kind of disgusting; I owe
him nothing; I’m breaking my promise”? While it’s impossible to tell,
given our tendency to rationalize our own transgressions, I’d bet it’s the
latter.
The second study comes from Greene and colleague Joseph
Paxton.44 Subjects in a scanner would predict the outcome of coin tosses,
earning money for correct guesses. The study’s design contained an extra
layer of distracting nonsense. Subjects were told the study was about
paranormal mental abilities, and for some of the coin tosses, for this
concocted reason, rather than state their prediction beforehand, subjects
would just think about their choice and then tell afterward if they were
right. In other words, amid a financial incentive to guess correctly, there
were intermittent opportunities to cheat. Crucially, this was detectable—
during the periods of forced honesty, subjects averaged a 50 percent
success rate. And if accuracy jumped a lot higher during opportunities to
cheat, subjects were probably cheating.
The results were pretty depressing. Using this form of statistical
detection, about a third of the subjects appeared to be big-time cheaters,
516

with another sixth on the statistical border. When cheaters cheated, there
was activation of the dlPFC, as we’d expect. Were they struggling with
the combination of moral and cognitive conflict? Not particularly—there
wasn’t activation of the ACC, nor was there the slight lag time in
response. Cheaters typically didn’t cheat at every opportunity; what did
things look like when they resisted? Here’s where you saw the struggling
—even greater activation of the dlPFC (along with the vlPFC), the ACC
roaring into action, and a significant delay in response time. In other
words, for people capable of cheating, the occasional resistance seems to
be the outcome of major neurobiological Sturm und Drang.

—
And now for probably the most important finding in this chapter. What
about subjects who never cheated? There are two very different
scenarios, as framed by Greene and Paxton: Is resisting temptation at
every turn an outcome of “will,” of having a stoked dlPFC putting Satan
into a hammerlock of submission? Or is it an act of “grace,” where
there’s no struggle, because it’s simple; you don’t cheat?
It was grace. In those who were always honest, the dlPFC, vlPFC,
and ACC were in veritable comas when the chance to cheat arose.
There’s no conflict. There’s no working hard to do the right thing. You
simply don’t cheat.
Resisting temptation is as implicit as walking up stairs, or thinking
“Wednesday” after hearing “Monday, Tuesday,” or as that first piece of
regulation we mastered way back when, being potty trained. As we saw
in chapter 7, it’s not a function of what Kohlbergian stage you’re at; it’s
what moral imperatives have been hammered into you with such urgency
and consistency that doing the right thing has virtually become a spinal
reflex.
This is not to suggest that honesty, even impeccable honesty that
resists all temptation, can only be the outcome of implicit automaticity.45
We can think and struggle and employ cognitive control to produce
similar stainless records, as shown in some subsequent work. But in
circumstances like the Greene and Paxton study, with repeated
opportunities to cheat in rapid succession, it’s not going to be a case of
successfully arm wrestling the devil over and over. Instead, automaticity
is required.

517

We’ve seen something equivalent with the brave act, the person who,
amid the paralyzed crowd, runs into the burning building to save the
child. “What were you thinking when you decided to go into the house”?
(Were you thinking about the evolution of cooperation, of reciprocal
altruism, of game theory and reputation?) And the answer is always “I
wasn’t thinking anything. Before I knew it, I had run in.” Interviews of
Carnegie Medal recipients about that moment shows precisely that—a
first, intuitive thought of needing to help, resulting in the risking of life
without a second thought. “Heroism feels and never reasons,” to quote
Emerson.46
It’s the same thing here: “Why did you never cheat? Is it because of
your ability to see the long-term consequences of cheating becoming
normalized, or your respect for the Golden Rule, or . . . ?” The answer is
“I don’t know [shrug]. I just don’t cheat.” This isn’t a deontological or a
consequentialist moment. It’s virtue ethics sneaking in the back door in
that moment—“I don’t cheat; that’s not who I am.” Doing the right thing
is the easier thing.

518

Fourteen

Feeling Someone’s Pain,
Understanding Someone’s
Pain, Alleviating
Someone’s Pain
person is in pain, frightened, or crushed with a malignant sadness.
A
And another human, knowing that, is likely to experience something
absolutely remarkable—an aversive state that is approximated by the
word “empathy.” As we’ll see in this chapter, it is a state on a continuum
with what occurs in a baby or in another species. The state takes varied
forms, with varied underlying biology, reflecting its sensorimotor,
emotional, and cognitive building blocks. Various logical influences
sharpen or dull the state. All leading to this chapter’s two key questions:
When does empathy lead us to actually do something helpful? When we
do act, whose benefit is it for?

519

“FOR” VERSUS “AS IF” AND OTHER
DISTINCTIONS

E

mpathy, sympathy, compassion, mimicry, emotional contagion,
sensorimotor contagion, perspective taking, concern, pity. Let the
terminology and squabbles begin over definitions of ways in which we
resonate with someone else’s adversity (along with the question of
whether the opposite of such resonance is gloating pleasure or
indifference).
We start with, for want of a better word, primitive versions of
resonating with someone’s pain. There’s sensorimotor contagion—you
see a hand poked with a needle, and the part of your sensory cortex that
maps onto your hand activates, sensitizing you to the imagined sensation.
Perhaps your motor cortex will also activate, causing you to compress
your own hand. Or you watch a tightrope walker and involuntarily put
your arms out for balance. Or someone has a coughing fit, and your
throat constricts.
Even more explicitly motoric is the act of matching movements with
simple mimicry. Or there’s emotional contagion, the automatic transfer
of strong emotive states—such as one baby crying because another is, or
someone catching the fever of a mob plunging into a riot.
Your resonance with someone’s plight can carry an implicit power
differential. You can pity someone in pain—recalling Fiske’s categories
of Thems in chapter 11, this belittling pity means you view the person as
high in warmth and low in competence and agency. And we all know the
everyday meaning of “sympathy” (“Look, I sympathize with your
situation, but . . .”); you have the power to alleviate their distress but
choose not to.
Then there are terms reflecting how much your resonance is about
emotion versus cognition. In that sense “sympathy” means you feel sorry
for someone else’s pain without understanding it. In contrast, “empathy”
contains the cognitive component of understanding the cause of
someone’s pain, taking his perspective, walking in his shoes.

520

And then there are distinctions introduced in chapter 6, describing
how much you and your own feelings play into resonating with someone
else’s distress. There’s the emotionally distanced sense of sympathy, of
feeling for someone. There’s the rawer, vicarious state of feeling their
pain as if it were happening to you. And then there is the more
cognitively distanced state of perspective taking, of imagining what this
must be like for her, not you. As we’ll see, an as-if state carries the
danger that you experience her pain so intensely that your primary
concern becomes alleviating your own distress.
Which raises a different word—“compassion,” where your resonance
with someone’s distress leads you to actually help.1
Perhaps most important, these words are generally about inwardly
motivated states—you can’t force someone to truly feel empathy, can’t
induce it in them with guilt or a sense of obligation. You can generate
ersatz versions of it those ways, but not the real thing. Consistent with
that, some recent work shows that when you help someone out of
empathy, there is a very different profile of brain activation from when
you do so out of an obliged sense of reciprocity.2
As usual, we gain insights into the nature and biology of these states
by looking at their rudiments in other species, their development in
children, and their pathological manifestations.

521

EMOTIONALLY CONTAGIOUS,
COMPASSIONATE ANIMALS

L

ots of animals display building blocks of empathic states (I use
“empathic state” throughout the chapter when referring to the
collectivity of sympathy, empathy, compassion, etc.). There’s mimicry, a
cornerstone of social learning in many species—think young chimps
watching Mom to learn to use tools. Ironically, humans’ strong proclivity
for imitation can have a downside. In one study chimps and children
observed an adult human repeatedly accessing a treat inside a puzzle
box; crucially, the person added various extraneous movements. When
exploring the box themselves afterward, chimps imitated only the steps
needed to open it, whereas kids “overimitated,” copying the superfluous
gestures as well.*3
Social animals are also constantly buffeted with emotional contagion
—shared states of arousal in a pack of dogs or male chimps going on a
border patrol. These are not terribly precise states, often spilling over
into other behaviors. For example, say some baboons flush out
something good to eat—say, a young gazelle. The gazelle is running like
hell, with these baboons in pursuit. And then the male in front seems to
think something along the lines of “Well, here I am running fast and—
WHAT? There’s my hated rival running right behind me! Why’s that jerk
chasing me?” He spins around for a head-on collision and fight with the
baboon behind him, gazelle forgotten.
Mimicry and emotional contagion are baby steps. Do other animals
feel one another’s pain? Sort of. Mice can learn a specific fear
association vicariously by observing another mouse experiencing the fear
conditioning. Moreover, this is a social process—learning is enhanced if
the mice are related or have mated.4
In another study a mouse would be exposed to an aggressive intruder
placed in its cage.5 As shown previously, this produces persistent adverse
consequences—a month later, such mice still had elevated glucocorticoid
levels and were more anxious and more vulnerable to a mouse model of
depression.* Importantly, the same persistent effects would be induced in

522

a mouse merely observing another mouse experiencing that stressful
intruder paradigm.
An even more striking demonstration of “your pain is my pain” in
another species came in a 2006 Science paper from Jeff Mogil of McGill
University.6 A mouse would observe another mouse (separated from it
by Plexiglas) in pain, and, as a result, its own pain sensitivity increased.*
In another part of the study, an irritant would be injected in a mouse’s
paw; mice typically lick their paw at that point, with the amount of
licking indicating the amount of discomfort. Thus, X amount of the
irritant would produce Z amount of licking. However, if the mouse was
simultaneously observing a mouse who had been exposed to more than
X amount of irritant and who thus was licking more than Z amount, the
subject mouse would lick more than usual. Conversely, if the subject
observed a mouse licking less (having been exposed to less than X
amount of irritant), it would also lick less. Thus the amount of pain a
mouse was feeling was modulated by the amount of pain a nearby mouse
was. Importantly, this was a social phenomenon—this shared pain only
occurred between mice that were cagemates.*
Obviously we can’t know the internal state of these animals. Were
they feeling bad for the other mouse in pain, feeling “for” or “as if,”
taking the other mouse’s perspective? Pretty unlikely, making the use of
the word “empathy” in this literature controversial.7
However, we can observe overt behavior. Do other species
proactively lessen the distress of another individual? Yes.
As we will see in the final chapter, numerous species show
“reconciliative” behavior, where two individuals, soon after a negative
interaction, show higher-than-chance levels of affiliative behaviors
(grooming, sitting in contact) between them, and this decreases the odds
of subsequent tensions between them. As shown by de Waal and
colleagues, chimps also show third-party “consolation” behavior. This is
not when, after two individuals fight, some bleeding-heart chimp
indiscriminately nices both of them. Instead the consoler is preferentially
affiliative to the victim over the initiator of the fight. This reflects both a
cognitive component of tracking who started a tension and an affective
desire to comfort. Similar consolation, focused on fight victims, also
occurs in wolves, dogs, elephants, and corvids (who preen the feathers of
victims). Ditto for bonobos—with some bonoboesque sex thrown in for

523

victims along with all that platonic grooming. In contrast, such
consolation doesn’t occur in monkeys.8
Consolation is also shown among those heartwarming pair-bonding
prairie voles, as shown in a 2016 Nature paper from Larry Young of
Emory University, a pioneer of the vole/monogamy/vasopressin story,
along with de Waal.9 Members of a vole pair would be placed in separate
rooms. One of the pair would be either stressed (with a mild shock) or
left undisturbed; pairs were then reunited. As compared with unstressed
individuals, stressed ones would be licked and groomed more by their
partner. Partners would also match the anxiety behaviors and
glucocorticoid levels of their stressed pairmate. This didn’t occur for a
stressed stranger, nor among polygamous meadow voles. As we’ll see,
the neurobiology of this effect is all about oxytocin and the anterior
cingulate cortex.
Animals will intervene even more proactively. In one study rats
worked more (pressing a lever) to lower a distressed rat, dangling in the
air in a harness, than a suspended block. In another study rats proactively
worked to release a cagemate from a stressful restrainer. Subjects were as
motivated to do this as to get chocolate (nirvana for rats). Moreover,
when a rat could both release the cagemate and get chocolate, they’d
share it more than half the time.10
This prosociality had an Us/Them component. The authors
subsequently showed that rats would work to release even a strange rat—
so long as it was of the same strain and thus nearly genetically
identical.11 Is this automatic Us/Them-ing built on the genetics of shared
pheromone signatures (back to chapter 10)? No—if a rat is housed with a
cagemate of another strain, it will help individuals of that other strain.
And if a rat is switched at birth and raised by a female of another strain,
it helps members of its adopted but not its biological strain. “Us” is
malleable by experience, even among rodents.
Why do all these animals labor away consoling another individual in
distress, or even helping them? It’s probably not conscious application of
the Golden Rule, and it’s not necessarily for the social benefits—rats
were just as likely to release cagemates from restrainers even if they
didn’t get to interact afterward. Maybe it’s something resembling
compassion. On the other hand, maybe it’s just self-interest—“That
dangling rat’s incessant alarm calls are getting on my nerves. I’m going

524

to work to lower him so he’ll shut up.” Scratch an altruistic rat and a
hypocrite bleeds.

525

EMOTIONALLY CONTAGIOUS,
COMPASSIONATE CHILDREN

A

recap of material covered in chapters 6 and 7:
As we saw, a developmental landmark is attaining Theory of
Mind, something necessary but not sufficient for empathy, which paves
the way for increasing abstraction. The capacity for simple sensorimotor
contagion matures into empathic states for someone’s physical pain and,
later, for someone’s emotional pain. There’s the progression from feeling
sorry for an individual (e.g., someone homeless) to feeling sorry for a
category (e.g., “homeless people”). There is increasing cognitive
sophistication, as kids first distinguish between harming an object and
harming a person. Likewise for distinguishing between intentional and
unintentional harm, along with a capacity for moral indignation that is
more readily evoked by the former. Along with this comes a capacity to
express empathy and a sense of responsibility to act upon it, to be
proactively compassionate. Perspective taking matures as well, as the
child transitions from solely being capable of feeling “for” to also feeling
“as if.”
As we saw, the neurobiology of this developmental arc makes sense.
At the age where an empathic state is evoked only by someone’s physical
pain, brain activation centers on the periaqueductal gray (PAG), a fairly
low-level way station in the brain’s pain circuitry. Once emotional pain
can evoke an empathic state, the profile is mostly about coupled
activation between the (emotional) vmPFC and limbic structures. As the
capacity for moral indignation matures, coupling among the vmPFC, the
insula, and amygdala emerges. And as perspective taking comes into
play, the vmPFC is increasingly coupled to regions associated with
Theory of Mind (like the temporoparietal junction).
This was our picture of empathic states in kids being built upon the
cognitive foundation of Theory of Mind and perspective taking. But as
we also saw, there are empathic states earlier on—infants showing
emotional contagion, a toddler trying to comfort a crying adult by
offering her stuffie, long before textbook Theory of Mind occurs. And

526

just as with empathic states in other animals, one must ask whether
compassion in kids is mostly about ending the sufferer’s distress or
ending their own.

527

AFFECT AND/OR COGNITION?

T

his again. We can predict the major punch lines, thanks to the
previous three chapters: both cognitive and affective components
contribute to healthy empathic states; it’s silly to debate which is more
important; what’s interesting is seeing when one predominates over the
other. Even more interesting is to look at the neurobiology of how those
components interact.

The Affective Side of Things
When it comes to empathy, all neurobiological roads pass through
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). As introduced in chapter 2, this
frontal cortical structure has starred in empathy neuroscience ever since
people felt someone else’s pain while inside a brain scanner.12
Given its more traditional roles in mammals, the ACC’s empathy
connection is unexpected. Broadly, those roles are:
Processing interoceptive information. As introduced in
chapter 3, our brains monitor sensory information not
only from outside us but from our internal world as well
—interoceptive information about achy muscles, dry
mouths, bowels in an uproar. If you unconsciously sense
that your heart is racing and that makes you experience
some emotion more intensely, thank the ACC. The ACC
funnels literal gut feelings into intuitions and
metaphorical gut feelings influencing frontal function.
Pain is a key type of interoceptive information that
catches the ACC’s attention.13
Conflict monitoring. The ACC responds to “conflict” in
the sense of a discrepancy from what is expected. If you
associate doing some behavior with a particular
outcome, when that outcome doesn’t occur, the ACC
takes notice. This monitoring of discrepancy from
528

expectation is asymmetrical—do some task that pays
two brownie points and today, unexpectedly, you get
three instead, and the ACC perks up and takes notice; do
the task and instead of two brownie points you only get
one, and the ACC activates like mad. In the words of
Kevin Ochsner of Columbia University and colleagues,
the ACC is an “all-purpose alarm that signals when
ongoing behavior has hit a snag.”14
Unexpected pain is at the intersection of those two roles of the ACC,
a sure sign that things are amiss with your schema about the world. Even
with anticipated pain, you monitor whether it turns out to be of the
quality and quantity expected. As noted, the ACC doesn’t concern itself
with pedestrian concerns about pain (is it my finger or my toe that
hurts?); that’s the purview of less refined, more ancient brain circuitry.
What the ACC cares about is the meaning of the pain. Good news or bad,
and of what nature? Thus the ACC’s perception of pain can be
manipulated. Poke your finger with a pin and the ACC activates, along
with those brain regions telling you which finger and what parameters of
pain. Make someone believe that the inert cream you just smeared on his
finger is a powerful painkiller, and when you poke his finger, the “it’s my
finger, not my toe” circuitry still activates. But the ACC falls for the
placebo effect and stays silent.
Obviously the ACC receives inputs from interoceptive and
exteroceptive outposts. Equally logically, it sends lots of projections into
the sensorimotor cortex, making you very aware of and focused on the
body part that hurts.
But the sophistication of the ACC, the reason it sits up there in the
frontal cortex, is apparent when considering another type of pain. Back
to chapter 6 and the Cyberball game where subjects in brain scanners
play catch with a virtual ball on a computer screen, tossing it back and
forth, and the other two players stop throwing the ball to you. You’re
being left out, and the ACC activates. Insofar as the ACC cares about the
meaning of pain, it’s just as concerned with the abstractions of social and
emotional pain—social exclusion, anxiety, disgust, embarrassment—as
with physical pain. Intriguingly, major depression is associated with
various abnormalities in the ACC.* And the ACC is also involved during
positive resonance—when their pleasure is your pleasure.15
529

All this makes the ACC sound pretty self-oriented, mighty concerned
with your well-being. Which makes its empathy role initially surprising.
Nonetheless, numerous studies consistently show that if someone else’s
pain—a poked finger, a sad face, a tale of misfortune—is evoking an
empathic state in you, the ACC is involved.16 Moreover, the more
painful the other person’s situation seems to be, the more ACC
activation. The ACC is also central to doing something to alleviate
someone else’s distress.
The neuropeptide/hormone oxytocin gets into the mix. Recall from
chapter 4 how it promotes bonding and affiliative behaviors, trust, and
generosity.* Recall the study in which prairie voles are observed
consoling their stressed partner. And we’d expect, the effect depends on
the actions of oxytocin. Remarkably, the oxytocin works in the ACC—
selectively block oxytocin effects in the ACC, and voles don’t console.
So how do we go from the ACC as this outpost of self-interest,
monitoring your pain and whether you are getting what you think you
deserve, to the ACC allowing you to feel the pain of the wretched of the
earth? I think the link is a key issue of this chapter—how much is an
empathic state actually about yourself?17 “Ouch, that hurt” is a good way
to learn not to repeat whatever you just did. But often, even better is to
monitor someone else’s misfortune—“That sure seems to have hurt her;
I’m staying away from doing that.” Crucially, the ACC is essential for
learning fear and conditioned avoidance by observation alone. Going
from “She seems to be having a miserable time” to “Thus I should avoid
that” requires an intervening step of shared representation of self: “Like
her, I wouldn’t enjoy feeling that way.” Feeling someone else’s pain can
be more effective for learning than just knowing that they’re in pain. At
its core the ACC is about self-interest, with caring about that other
person in pain as an add-on.
Other brain regions are pertinent as well. As we saw, maturation of
the circuitry of empathy involves bringing into the mix not only the ACC
but the insula as well.18 By adulthood the insula (and to a lesser degree
the amygdala) is nearly as intertwined with experiencing empathy as is
the ACC. The three regions are highly interconnected, and a big chunk of
the amygdala texting the frontal cortex is funneled through the ACC.
Numerous circumstances that evoke a sense of empathy, particularly
physical pain, activate the insula along with the ACC, with the
magnitude of the response correlating with the subject’s basic proclivity
530

toward empathy, or the subjective sense of empathy they are feeling in
the situation.
This makes sense, given the workings of the insula and amygdala. As
we saw, their involvement in empathic states emerges developmentally
as kids first embed empathy in context and causality—why is this person
in pain, and whose fault is it? This is obvious when pain is rooted in
injustice, when disgust, indignation, and anger sweep in because we
know that this pain could have been prevented, that someone profited
from it. Even when it is unclear that a cause of pain lies in injustice, we
seek attribution—the intertwining of the ACC with the insula and
amygdala is our world of scapegoating. And that pattern is so often there
even when pain is random, without human agency or villainy—literal or
metaphorical tectonic plates shift, the earth opens up and swallows
someone innocent, and we rail against the people who deprived that
victim of a happier life before the tragedy struck, against the God behind
this act of God, against the mechanistic indifference of the universe. And
as we will see, the more the purity of empathy is clouded with the anger,
disgust, and indignation of blame, the harder it is to actually help.

The Cognitive Side of Things
When do the more cognitive components of an empathic state—the
PFC, the dlPFC in particular, along with Theory of Mind networks such
as the temporoparietal juncture (TPJ) and superior central sulcus—come
more to the forefront? Obviously, and uninterestingly, when it’s
challenging to even figure out what’s going on—“Wait, who won the
game?” “Do I want my pieces to surround or be surrounded by the other
person’s?”
More interesting is when more cognitive brain circuitry is recruited
by issues of causation and intentionality: “Wait, does he have a horrible
headache because he’s a migrant farm worker who was sprayed with
pesticide, or because he’s been binge drinking with his frat bros?” “Did
this AIDS patient get his HIV from a blood transfusion or drug use?
(People show more activation of the ACC for the former.) This is
precisely what chimps have thought through when comforting an
innocent victim of aggression but not an instigator. As we saw in chapter
7, the more cognitive profile of activation emerges when kids start
distinguishing between self- and other-inflicted pain. In the words of
531

Jean Decety, who did such research, this demonstrates that “empathic
arousal [was] moderated early in information processing by a priori
attitudes toward other people.”19 In other words, cognitive processes
serve as a gatekeeper, deciding whether a particular misfortune is worthy
of empathy.
It is also a cognitive task to resonate with pain that is less overt—for
example, there is more engagement of the dmPFC when observing
someone in emotional pain than physical pain. Likewise when the pain is
presented more abstractly—a signal on a screen indicating that
someone’s hand has been stuck with a needle versus the act itself being
shown. Resonating with someone else’s pain is also a cognitive task
when it is a type of pain that you haven’t experienced. “Well, I suppose I
can understand the disappointment of this militia leader when he was
passed over for the chance to carry out the ethnic cleansing—kinda like
when I lost the election in kindergarten to be president of the randomact-of-kindness club.” Now, that takes cognitive work. In one study
subjects considered people suffering from a neurological disorder
involving a novel type of pain sensitivity; empathizing for that novel
pain involved more frontal cortical activation than for more conventional
pain.20
As we saw, the rudimentary “empathy” of rodents is contingent,
depending on whether the other individual is a cagemate or a stranger.21
It is an enormous cognitive task for humans to overcome that, to reach an
empathic state for someone who is different, unappealing. A hospital
chaplain once described to me how he has to actively make sure that he
is not preferentially visiting patients who were “YAVIS”—young,
attractive, verbal, intelligent, or social. This is straight out of Us versus
Them—recall Susan Fiske’s work showing how extreme out-group
members, such as the homeless or addicts, are processed differently in
the frontal cortex than other people. And it is also straight out of Josh
Greene’s tragedy of the commons versus tragedy of the commonsense
morality, where acting morally toward an Us is automatic, while doing
so for a Them takes work.
The ease of empathizing with people like us starts at the level of
autonomic building blocks of empathy—in one study of ritual fire
walkers in Spain, heart rate changes in the walkers synchronized with
spectators—but only those who were relatives. In line with that
distinction, taking the perspective of a loved one in pain activates the
532

ACC; doing the same for a stranger activates the TPJ, that region central
to Theory of Mind.22
This extends to broader versions of Us versus Them. As introduced
in chapter 3, we have a stronger sensorimotor response in our hands
when the hand we see being poked with a needle is of our race; the
stronger one’s implicit in-group bias, the stronger this effect. Meanwhile,
other studies show that the stronger the discrepancy in patterns of neural
activation when observing an in-group versus an out-group person in
pain, the lower the chances of helping the latter.23 Thus it’s no surprise
that feeling the same degree of empathy or achieving the same level of
perspective taking for a Them as for an Us requires greater frontocortical
activation. This is the domain where you must suppress the automatic
and implicit urges to be indifferent, if not repulsed, and do the creative,
motivated work of finding the affective commonalities.*24
Categorical boundaries to the extension of empathy also run along
socioeconomic lines, but in an asymmetrical manner. What does that
mean? That when it comes to empathy and compassion, rich people tend
to suck. This has been explored at length in a series of studies by Dacher
Keltner of UC Berkeley. Across the socioeconomic spectrum, on the
average, the wealthier people are, the less empathy they report for people
in distress and the less compassionately they act. Moreover, wealthier
people are less adept at recognizing other people’s emotions and in
experimental settings are greedier and more likely to cheat or steal. Two
of the findings were picked up by the media as irresistible: (a) wealthier
people (as assessed by the cost of the car they were driving) are less
likely than poor people to stop for pedestrians at crosswalks; (b) suppose
there’s a bowl of candy in the lab; invite test subjects, after they finish
doing some task, to grab some candy on the way out, telling them that
whatever’s left over will be given to some kids—the wealthier take more
candy.25
So do miserable, greedy, unempathic people become wealthy, or does
being wealthy increase the odds of a person’s becoming that way? As a
cool manipulation, Keltner primed subjects to focus either on their
socioeconomic success (by asking them to compare themselves with
people less well off than them) or on the opposite. Make people feel
wealthy, and they take more candy from children.
What explains this pattern? A number of interrelated factors, built
around the system justification described in chapter 12—wealthier
533

people are more likely to endorse greed as being good, to view the class
system as fair and meritocratic, and to view their success as an act of
independence—all great ways to decide that someone else’s distress is
beneath your notice or concern.
It is a particularly uphill battle when we are asked to empathize with
the pain of people we dislike, whom we morally disapprove of—
remember how their misfortune doesn’t simply fail to activate the ACC
but instead it activates mesolimbic dopamine reward pathways. Thus the
process of taking their perspective and feeling their pain (as other than
grounds for gloating) is a dramatic cognitive challenge rather than
something remotely automatic.26
The cognitive “costs” of empathizing with someone distant are
shown by increasing people’s cognitive load (i.e., making their frontal
cortex work harder by forcing it to override a habitual behavior)—they
become less helpful to strangers but not to family members. “Empathy
fatigue” can thus be viewed as the state when the cognitive load of
repeated exposure to the pain of Thems whose perspective is challenging
to take has exhausted the frontal cortex. The notions of cognitive work
and load also help explain why people are more charitable when
contemplating one person in need than a group. To quote Mother Teresa,
“If I look at the mass, I will never act. If I look at the one, I will.” Or to
cite a quote attributed to someone who never seems to have achieved
enough empathy to be vulnerable to empathy fatigue, Joseph Stalin:
“The death of one man is a tragedy; the death of millions is a statistic.”27
And probably most reliably, those mentalizing pathways are
activated when we switch from focusing on what it would feel like if this
were happening to us to focusing on what it must feel like for them. Thus
when subjects are instructed to switch from first- to third-person
perspective, there’s not just activation of the TPJ but also frontal
activation with the top-down regulatory task “Stop thinking about
yourself.”28
Thus we have themes that closely resemble those from the last few
chapters. When it comes to empathic states, “emotion” and “cognition”
are totally false dichotomies; you need both, but with the balance
between the two shifting on a continuum, and the cognition end of it has
to do the heavy lifting when the differences between you and the person
in pain initially swap the similarities.
Time now for one of the great sideshows in empathy science.
534

A MYTHIC LEAP FORWARD

I

n the early 1990s scientists at the University of Parma in Italy, led by
Giacomo Rizzolatti and Vittorio Gallese, reported something that,
depending on your tastes, ranged from really interesting to revolutionary.
They had been studying an area of the brain called the premotor cortex
(PMC) in rhesus monkeys, examining what sorts of stimuli would cause
individual neurons there to activate. Back to the PMC from chapter 2.
“Executive” neurons in the PFC decide something, passing the news to
the rest of the frontal cortex just behind it. Which sends projections to
the PMC just behind it. Which sends projections one step further back, to
the motor cortex, which then sends commands to muscles. Thus the
PMC straddles the divide between thinking about and carrying out a
movement.29
The group had discovered some mighty quirky PMC neurons.
Suppose a monkey carried out a behavior—grasping some food and
bringing it to her mouth. Naturally, some neurons in the PMC would
have activated. If she did a different movement—grasping an object and
placing it in a container—a different (partially overlapping) array of
PMC neurons were involved. What the group reported was that some of
the bring-food-to-mouth neurons would also activate if the monkey
observed someone else (monkey or human) making that movement.
Same for some of the place-object-in-container neurons. Same for subtler
movements like facial expressions. Consistently, about 10 percent of the
PMC neurons devoted to doing movement X also activated when
observing someone else doing movement X—very odd for neurons a few
steps away from commanding muscles to move. The neurons were
concerned with the mirroring of movements. And thus were “mirror
neurons” announced to the world.
Naturally, everyone looked for mirror neurons in humans, and their
existence in roughly the same part of the brain*30 was soon inferred with
brain imaging studies (“inferred” because that approach tells you about
the activity of large numbers of neurons at a time, rather than single
ones). Then individual neurons were shown to be mirroresque in humans
(in patients undergoing neurosurgery to control a rare type of epilepsy).31
535

The mirroring can be quite abstract. It can be cross-modal—see
someone doing movement A, and some mirror neuron activates; hear the
sound of someone doing movement A, and the same occurs. And the
neurons can gestalt a scene, firing even if only part of the observed
movement is obscured.32
Most interesting, mirror neurons didn’t simply track movement. Find
a mirror neuron that responds to the sight of someone picking up a cup of
tea to drink. The sight of someone picking up the tea to clear the table
doesn’t activate it. In other words, mirror neurons can incorporate
intentionality into their response.
Thus mirror neuron activity correlates with circumstances of
imitation, either conscious or otherwise, including imitating the idea of
an action, as well as the intent behind it. Nevertheless, no one has
actually shown a causal relationship, that automatic or conscious
mimicry requires mirror neuron activation. Moreover, the mirror
neuron/imitation link is complicated by the cells having been first
identified in rhesus monkeys—a species that does not show imitation of
behavior.
But assuming that mirror neurons are indeed involved, the question
becomes what purpose mimicry serves. Various possibilities have been
raised and debated.

—
Probably the least controversial and most plausible is that mirror neurons
mediate motor learning by observation.33 Downsides of this theory,
though, are that (a) mirror neurons do their thing in species with minimal
learning by mimicry; (b) the amount of mirror neuron activity is
unrelated to the efficacy with which observational learning of
movements occurs; (c) to the extent that mirror neurons are needed for
types of observational learning, it’s a pretty low-level contribution in
humans—after all, while we do learn how to carry out certain motoric
acts by observation, far more interesting is our learning of context by
observation—when to carry out that behavior (for example,
observational learning may teach a subordinate primate the motoric
features of kowtowing, but far more demanding and important is
learning whom to kowtow to).
Related to that is the idea of mirror neurons aiding learning from
another person’s experience.34 If you observe someone biting into food
536

and they grimace at its taste, having mirror neurons at the intersection of
observing that expression and experiencing it yourself will certainly
make more vivid your understanding that you should probably avoid that
food. This is an idea advocated by Gregory Hickok of the University of
California at Irvine, who, as we’ll see, is a hard-nosed critic of mirror
neuron flights of fancy.
This harks back to chapter 2 and Antonio Damasio’s influential
somatic marker hypothesis, the idea that when we are choosing among
difficult options, the frontal cortex runs as-if experiments, canvassing
your mind’s and body’s responses to doing X or Y—a thought
experiment combined with a (gut) feeling experiment. Mirror neurons,
with their putative attunement to how things worked out for observed
individuals, would certainly weigh into this process.
Thus mirror neurons might be useful for learning the meaning of a
movement, how to carry it out more effectively, and the consequences
for someone else who did it. Nonetheless, such neuronal activity is
neither necessary nor sufficient for observational learning, especially of
the most interesting, abstract human kinds.
Then there’s the next, more controversial realm, namely the idea that
mirror neurons help you understand what someone else is thinking. This
can range from understanding what behavior they are doing to
understanding why they are doing it to grasping their larger motivations,
all the way to peering into their souls with your mirror neurons. You can
see why this has spawned debates.
In this view mirror neurons aid Theory of Mind, mind reading, and
perspective taking, suggesting that part of how we understand someone
else’s world is by simulating (in our minds, in our PMC, in our mirror
neurons) their actions.35 This orients a mirror neuron’s world in a very
different way from the previous section, where mirroring is to improve
your own motor performance and the most pertinent neuroanatomy about
mirror neurons in the PMC is their talking to motor neurons that
command muscles. In contrast, mirror neurons being concerned with
understanding someone else’s actions should be talking to Theory of
Mind–related brain regions, for which there is evidence.
There was also the suggestion that mirror neuron–mediated
perspective taking is particularly concerned with social interactions.
Rizzolatti, for example, showed that mirror neuron activity was greater
when the observed individual was closer.36 But importantly, this isn’t

537

just literal distance but something resembling “social” distance; as
evidence, mirror neuron activity would decrease if there was a
transparent barrier between the observer and observed. In Gallese’s
words, “this shows the relevance of mirror neurons when mapping the
potentialities for competition or cooperation between agent and
observer.”
The notion that mirror neurons aid us in understanding someone
else’s actions, leading to our understanding someone else, period, has
been heavily criticized on two grounds, most notably by Hickok. First is
the issue of causality—while some studies show that mirror neuron
activity correlates with attempts at understanding someone else’s
perspective, there is minimal evidence that such activity causes the
understanding. The second criticism concerns something obvious: we
can understand the intent behind someone else’s actions even if we can’t
remotely perform them ourselves. This would apply to actions of the
observed individual ranging from pole-vaulting eighteen feet to
explaining special relativity.
Supporters of this role for mirror neurons admit this but argue that
they provide an extra level of understanding. Gallese writes, “I submit
that it is only through the activation of Mirror Neurons that we can grasp
the meaning of other’s behavior from within”37 (my emphasis). This is
not my area of research, and I’m not trying to be snarky, but it seems like
he’s saying that there’s understanding and then there’s super-duper
understanding, and the latter requires mirror neurons.

—
These mirror neuron speculations have been extended to focus on
autism, a disorder in which there are profound impairments in
understanding other people’s actions and intentions.38 According to the
“broken mirror” hypothesis of mirror neuron pioneer Marco Iacoboni of
UCLA, mirror neuron dysfunction underlies those aspects of autism.
This has been examined by scads of researchers, with findings varying
depending on the paradigm; most meta-analyses conclude that there is
nothing flagrantly wrong with the formal features of mirror neuron
function in autistic individuals.
Thus, while mirror neurons’ activity correlates with attempts to
understand other people’s actions, their involvement seems neither
necessary nor sufficient and is most pertinent to low-level, concrete

538

aspects of such understanding. As for mirror neurons being the portal for
peering into someone’s soul and attaining super-duper understanding
from within, I think things are best summarized by the title of Hickok’s
well-received 2014 book The Myth of Mirror Neurons.39
Which leads to the Wild West of mirror neuron–ology, with
speculations that mirror neurons are essential to language, aesthetics,
consciousness.40 Most of all, within two seconds of people first hearing
about mirror neurons, they started writing reviews where the last
paragraph would say something like “Wow, mirror neurons! How cool is
that? This opens up all sorts of interesting avenues. Maybe they even
explain . . . EMPATHY!”
Sure, why not? Feeling someone’s pain is like mirroring their
experience, feeling as if you are them. Tailor made, an irresistible idea.
And in the decades since mirror neurons’ discovery, the “maybe they
even explain empathy” reviews have continued. Gallese, for example,
nearly twenty years into the mirror neuron era, speculates: “I proposed
the mirroring could be a basic functional principle of our brain and that
our capacity to empathize with others might be mediated by embodied
stimulation mechanisms [i.e., mirroring].” Iacoboni, at the same time,
writes, “Mirror neurons are likely cellular candidates for the core layer of
empathy.” There have been some supportive hints—for example, people
who self-report being particularly empathic show stronger mirror
neuron–esque responses to matching movements. But for skeptics
everything else is mere speculation.41
That’s disappointing. But worse is people skipping over the “maybe”
and concluding that mirror neurons have been proven to mediate
empathy. Iacoboni, for example, mistakes correlation for causality:
“Other studies, however, show that [PMC] activity correlates with
empathy even when subjects watch grasping actions without overt
emotional content. Thus, the mirror neuron activity is a prerequisite for
experiencing empathy (my emphasis).”42
A flagrant example of this is the neuroscientist Vilayanur
Ramachandran of UC San Diego, one of the most flamboyantly creative
people in the business, doing fascinating research on phantom limbs,
synesthesia, and out-of-body experiences. He’s brilliant but has gotten a
bit giddy with mirror neurons. A sampling: “We know that my mirror
neurons can literally feel your pain.” He’s called them “the driving force
behind the great leap forward” into human behavioral modernity sixty
539

thousand years ago and famously said, “Mirror neurons will do for
psychology what DNA did for biology.” I’m not trying to harp on
Ramachandran, but how can you resist someone brilliant handing out
sound bites like calling mirror neurons “Gandhi neurons”? And this
wasn’t just in the first heady days of mirror neurons in the early 1990s.
Two decades later he stated, “I don’t think [the importance of mirror
neurons for empathy is] being exaggerated. I think they’re being played
down, actually.”43
Ramachandran is certainly not alone. British philosopher Anthony
Grayling has gone for the empathy link big time, writing, “We have a
great gift for empathy. This is a biologically evolved capacity, as shown
by the function of ‘mirror neurons.’” In a 2007 New York Times article
about one man’s heroic actions to save another, those cells featured
again: “People have ‘mirror neurons,’ which make them feel what
someone else is experiencing” (emphasis added). And of course there
was my daughter’s six-year-old classmate who, upon the class being
complimented by their teacher for caring about the planet and cleaning
up after their Earth Day cupcake celebration, shouted out, “It’s because
our neurons have mirrors.”44
I’d like to think that I’m being a maverick here, ahead of the crowd
in terms of crucial thinking, but in recent years most in the field have
charged overhype. Psychologist Gary Marcus of NYU calls mirror
neurons “the most oversold idea in psychology,” philosopher and
neuroscientist Patricia Churchland of UCSD calls them the “darling of
the don’t-look-too-closely crew,” and Harvard’s Stephen Pinker
concludes, “Mirror neurons do not, in fact, explain language, empathy,
society, and world peace.”45 They simply haven’t been shown to have
much to do with this chapter’s concerns.

540

THE CORE ISSUE: ACTUALLY DOING
SOMETHING

T

he previous chapter considered the world of difference between
highfalutin moral reasoning and whether, at a crucial juncture,
someone actually does the right thing. As we saw, there is something
consistent about that latter type of person: “What were you thinking
when you leaped into that river to save the child?” “I wasn’t; before I
knew it, I’d jumped in.” An act of implicit automaticity, the product of a
childhood in which doing the right thing was ingrained as an automatic,
moral imperative, light-years away from the frontal cortex calculating
costs and benefits.
We face a similar situation here, one that is the core of this chapter.
Sympathy versus empathy, “for” versus “as if,” affect versus cognition,
what we do versus what other species do—does any of this actually
predict who does something compassionate to lessen someone’s pains?
Similarly, does any of this predict whether the person acting
compassionately acts effectively, and how much it’s an act of selfinterest? As we’ll see, there is a yawning gap between being in an
empathic state and acting effectively in a way that is truly selfless.

Doing Something
It is far from guaranteed that an empathic state leads to a
compassionate act. One reason for this is captured superbly by the
essayist Leslie Jamison:
[Empathy] can also offer a dangerous sense of completion: that
something has been done because something has been felt. It is
tempting to think that feeling someone’s pain is necessarily
virtuous in its own right. The peril of empathy isn’t simply that it
can make us feel bad, but that it can make us feel good, which can

541

in turn encourage us to think of empathy as an end in itself rather
than part of a process, a catalyst.46
In such a situation, saying “I feel your pain,” becomes a New Age
equivalent of the unhelpful bureaucrat saying, “Look, I sympathize with
your situation, but . . .” The former is so detached from action that it
doesn’t even require the “but” as a bridge to the “there’s nothing I
can/will do.” Having your pain validated is swell; having it alleviated is
better.
And there’s a broader reason why an empathic state may not produce
action, first raised in chapter 6 when considering those strange creatures,
adolescents. In that discussion I emphasized a wonderful feature of so
many adolescents, namely the frenzied feeling of the world’s pains, but
noted how that intensity often leads to little more than frenzied selfabsorption. If instead of imagining how someone else is feeling (an
other-oriented perspective), you are imagining how it would feel if this
were happening to you (a self-oriented perspective), “you” has just come
to the forefront and the main point is that feeling someone’s pain feels
painful.
The biological substrates of this are clear. Look at someone in pain
with the instruction to take a self-oriented perspective, and the amygdala,
ACC, and insular cortex activate, along with reports of distress and
anxiety. Do the same with an other-oriented perspective, and all are less
likely. And the more extreme the former state, the more likely that
someone’s focus will be to lessen their own distress, to metaphorically
look the other way.47
This can be predicted with remarkable ease. Expose subjects to
evidence of someone else in pain. If their heart rate increases a lot (a
peripheral indicator of anxious, amygdaloid arousal), they are unlikely to
act prosocially in the situation. The prosocial ones are those whose heart
rates decrease; they can hear the sound of someone else’s need instead of
the distressed pounding in their own chests.*48
Thus, if feeling your pain makes me feel awful, I’m likely to just
look out for number one, rather than helping you. Likewise if you’ve got
your own issues. We saw this earlier, with the demonstration that if you
increase people’s cognitive load, they become less prosocial toward
strangers. Similarly, when people are hungry, they are less charitable—
hey, quit bellyaching about your problems; my belly is aching. Make
542

people feel socially excluded and they become less generous and
empathic. Stress has the same effect, working via glucocorticoids;
Mogil’s group (with my involvement) recently showed that if you use a
drug to block glucocorticoid secretion, both mice and humans become
more empathic toward strangers. Thus, if you feel highly distressed,
whether due to resonating with someone else’s problems or because of
your own, tending to your own needs readily becomes the priority.49
In other words, empathic states are most likely to produce
compassionate acts when we manage a detached distance. This brings to
mind the anecdote from many chapters ago about the Buddhist monk I
encountered who said that, yes, sometimes he cuts short his cross-legged
meditation because of his knees, but not because he feels them hurting
—“I do it as an act of kindness to my knees.” And this is certainly in line
with the Buddhist approach to compassion, which views it as a simple,
detached, self-evident imperative rather than as requiring vicarious froth.
You act compassionately toward one individual because of a globalized
sense of wishing good things for the world.*
A handful of fascinating studies of Buddhist monks have been
carried out, both by Richard Davidson of the University of Wisconsin
and Tania Singer of the Max Planck Institutes in Germany. Remarkably,
given the science-versus-religion culture wars, such work was given its,
er, blessing and facilitated by the Dalai Lama, who is famously intrigued
by neuroscience and who has said that if his Dalai Lama gig hadn’t come
up, he would have wanted to be a scientist or engineer. The most
publicized work revolves around the neuroimaging of Matthieu Ricard, a
French-born Buddhist monk (who is the Dalai Lama’s French translator
and who just happens to have a PhD in molecular biology from the
Pasteur Institute—this is one interesting guy).50
When confronted with examples of human suffering and instructed to
empathically feel the pain of those people, Ricard showed activation of
the same circuitry as you’d see in most everyone else. And it was
extremely aversive—“The empathic sharing very quickly became
intolerable to me and I felt emotionally exhausted,” he explained. When
instead he did his Buddhist thing, focusing on thoughts of compassion, a
totally different picture of activation emerged—the amygdala was silent,
and instead there was heavy activation of the mesolimbic dopamine
system. He described it as “a warm positive state associated with a
strong prosocial motivation.”

543

In other studies volunteers underwent either empathy training
(focusing on feeling the pain of someone in distress) or compassion
training (focusing on a feeling of warmth and care toward that distressed
person).51 The former would generate the typical neuroimaging profiles,
including heavy amygdala activation, and a negative, anxious state.
Those with compassion training did not, showing heavy activation
instead in the (cognitive) dlPFC, coupling of activation between the
dlPFC and dopaminergic regions, more positive emotions, and a greater
tendency toward prosociality.
Okay, caveats. This is a tiny literature (i.e., not much larger than the
study of Ricard). And all-star Buddhist monks apparently meditate eight
hours a day, not a trivial path to take. The point is merely to emphasize
this scenario of detachment. Which brings us to the next issue, which is
whether compassionate acts fostered by empathy are necessarily useful.

Doing Something Effectively
In a provocatively titled 2014 article, “Against Empathy,” Paul
Bloom explored the ways in which empathy can lead to compassionate
acts that are far from ideal.
There is the realm of what has been termed “pathological altruism,”
the type associated with codependency.52 This is the scenario of someone
so consumed with the vicarious pain of a loved one that they endure and
facilitate his dysfunction rather than administering tough love. Then
there’s the danger that the empathic pain is so intense that you can only
come up with solutions that would work for you, rather than ones that
might help the sufferer. And there is the problem of empathy impeding
your doing what’s necessary—it’s not great if a parent is so vicariously
distressed by their child being distressed that they forgo vaccinations. A
large piece of the training of health-care professionals is teaching them
to keep empathy at bay.* For example, the various behavioral and
neurobiological responses to seeing someone poked with a needle do not
occur in acupuncturists. As Jamison describes, when anxiously seeing a
doctor about something worrisome, “I needed to look at him and see the
opposite of my fear, not its echo.”
Bloom also emphasizes how highly aroused empathy pushes us
toward psychologically easy acts that generate the least cognitive load.

544

In those times suffering that is local, that concerns an identified
appealing individual, and that is of a type with which you’re familiar
readily counts for more than suffering that is distant, involves a group,
and is an alien form of pain.* Aroused empathy produces tunnelvisioned compassion that can wind up misplaced. As the philosopher
Jesse Prinz emphasizes, the point is not whose pain pains us the most but
who most needs our help.

Are There Ever Any Bloody Altruists?
Stop the presses; science has proven that it can feel good to do good,
complete with activation of the mesolimbic dopamine system. This
doesn’t even require a brain scanner. In a 2008 study in Science, subjects
were given either five dollars or twenty dollars; half were instructed to
spend it that day on themselves, half on someone else (ranging from a
friend to a charity). And comparisons of self-assessments of happiness at
the beginning and end of the day showed that neither the larger amount
of money nor the opportunity to spend it on oneself increased happiness;
only spending it on someone else did. And particularly interesting is that
other subjects, told about the design, predicted the opposite—that
happiness would be raised most by spending on oneself, and that twenty
dollars would buy more happiness than five.53
The question, of course, is why doing good can feel good, which
raises the classic question: is there ever a selfless act that contains no
element of self-interest? Does doing good feel good because there’s
something in it for you? I’m sure not going to tackle this from a
philosophical perspective. For biologists the most frequent stance is
anchored in chapter 10’s evolutionary view of cooperation and altruism,
one that always contains some element of self-interest.
Is this surprising? Pure selflessness is clearly going to be an uphill
battle if the very part of the brain most central to an empathic state—the
ACC—evolved to observe and learn from others’ pain for your own
benefit.54 The self-oriented rewards of acting compassionately are
endless. There’s the interpersonal—leaving the beneficiary in your debt,
thus turfing this from altruism to reciprocal altruism. There are the public
benefits of reputation and acclaim—the celebrity swooping into a
refugee camp for a photo op with starving kids made joyful by her

545

incandescent presence. There’s that strange version of reputation that
comes in the rare cultures that have invented a moralizing god, one who
monitors human behavior and rewards or punishes accordingly; as we
saw in chapter 9, it is only when cultures get large enough that there are
anonymous interactions among strangers that they tend to invent
moralizing gods. A recent study shows that across a worldwide range of
religions, the more people perceive their god(s) to monitor and punish,
the more prosocial they are in an anonymous interaction. Thus there is
the self-interested benefit of tipping the cosmic scale in your favor. And
probably most inaccessibly, there is the purely internal reward of
altruism—the warm glow of having done good, the lessened sting of
guilt, the increased sense of connection to others, the solidifying sense of
being able to include goodness in your self-definition.
Science has been able to catch the self-interest component of
empathy in the act.55 As noted, some of the self-interest reflects concerns
about self-definition—personality profiles show that the more charitable
people are, the more they tend to define themselves by their charitability.
Which comes first? It’s impossible to tell, but highly charitable people
tend to have been brought up by parents who were charitable and who
emphasized charitable acts as a moral imperative (particularly in a
religious context).

—
How about the self-interested reputational rewards of being altruistic, the
cachet of conspicuous largesse rather than conspicuous consumption? As
emphasized in chapter 10, people become more prosocial when
reputation rides on it, and personality profiles also show that highly
charitable people tend to be particularly dependent on external approval.
Two of the studies just cited that showed dopaminergic activation when
people were being charitable came with a catch. Subjects were given
money and, while in a brain scanner, decided whether to keep the money
or donate. Being charitable activated dopamine “reward” systems—when
there was an observer present. When no one was present, dopamine
tended to flow most when subjects kept the money for themselves.
As emphasized by the twelfth-century philosopher Moses
Maimonides, the purest form of charity, the most stripped of self-interest,
is when both the giver and the recipient are anonymous.* And, as shown
in those brain scanners, this is perhaps the rarest form as well.

546

Intuitively, if good acts must be motivated by self-interest, the
reputational motive, the desire to be the biggest spender at the charity
auction, seems most worthy of irony. In contrast, the motivation to think
of yourself as a good person seems a pretty benign one. After all, we’re
all searching for a sense of self, and better that particular sense than to
assure yourself that you’re tough, scary, and not to be messed with.
Is the element of self-interest ever truly absent? One 2007 study in
Science examined this.56 Subjects (in brain scanners, of course) were
unexpectedly given varying amounts of money. Then, some of the time
they were “taxed” (i.e., told that a certain percentage of that money
would be forcibly given to a food bank), some of the time given the
opportunity to donate that amount voluntarily. In other words, the exact
same amount of public “good” was accomplished in each case, but the
former constituted enforced civic duty while the latter was a purely
charitable act. Thus, if someone’s altruism is purely other-oriented,
without a smidgen of self-interest, the two circumstances are
psychologically identical—those in need are being helped, and that’s all
that matters. And the more different the scenarios feel, the more selfinterest is coming into play.
The results were complex and interesting:
a. The more people’s dopaminergic reward systems activated
when they unexpectedly received money, the less activation there
was when they were either taxed or asked to donate. In other
words, the greater the love of money, the more painfully it is
parted with. No surprise there.
b. The more dopaminergic activation there was when someone
was taxed, the more voluntarily charitable they were. Being
taxed could not have been welcome to the most self-interested—
money was being taken from them. For subjects who instead
showed heavy activation of dopaminergic systems in that
circumstance, any self-interest of losing money was more than
compensated for by the knowledge that people in need were
being helped. This taps into the last chapter’s exploration of
inequity aversion and is consistent with findings that in some
circumstances, when a pair of strangers are openly given unequal
amounts of reward, there is typically dopaminergic activation in
547

the one with the good luck when some of the reward is
transferred afterward to make things more even. Thus it’s little
surprise in the present study that subjects made happy by
reducing inequity, even at a cost to themselves, were also the
most charitable. The authors appropriately interpret this as
reflecting a compassionate act with elements independent of selfinterest.57
c. There was more dopaminergic activation (and more selfreports of satisfaction) when people gave voluntarily than when
they were taxed. In other words, a component of the charitability
was about self-interest—it was more pleasing when those in
need were helped by voluntary efforts than when giving was
forced.
What does this show? That we’re reinforced by varying things and to
varying extents—getting money, knowing that the needy are being cared
for, feeling the warm glow of doing a good thing. And that it is rare to be
able to get the second type of pleasure with no dependence on the third
—it appears to truly be rare to scratch an altruist and see an altruist
bleed.

548

CONCLUSIONS

A

ll things considered, it is a pretty remarkable thing that when an
individual is in pain, we (i.e., we humans, primates, mammals)
often are induced to be in a state of pain also. There have been some
mighty interesting twists and turns for that one to have evolved.
But at the end of the day, the crucial issue is whether an empathic
state actually produces a compassionate act, to avoid the trap of empathy
being an end unto itself. The gap between the state and the act can be
enormous, especially when the goal is for the act to be not only effective
but also pristine in its motives.
For someone reading this book, a first challenge in bridging that gap
is that much of the world’s suffering is felt by distant masses
experiencing things that we haven’t an inkling of—diseases that don’t
touch us; poverty that precludes clean water, a place to live, the certainty
of a next meal; oppression at the hands of political systems that we’ve
been spared; strictures due to repressive cultural norms that might as
well be from another planet. And everything about us makes those the
hardest scenarios for us to actually act—everything about our hominin
past has honed us to be responsive to one face at a time, to a face that is
local and familiar, to a source of pain that we ourselves have suffered.
Yes, best that our compassion be driven by the most need rather than by
the most readily shared pain. Nevertheless, there’s no reason why we
should expect ourselves to have particularly good intuitions when aiming
to heal this far-flung, heterogeneous world. We probably need to be a bit
easier on ourselves in this regard.
Likewise, we should perhaps ease up a bit on the scratching-analtruist problem. It has always struck me as a bit mean-spirited to
conclude that it is a hypocrite who bleeds. Scratch an altruist and, most
of the time, the individual with unpure motives who bleeds is merely the
product of “altruism” and “reciprocity” being evolutionarily inseparable.
Better that our good acts be self-serving and self-aggrandizing than that
they don’t occur at all; better that the myths we construct and propagate
about ourselves are that we are gentle and giving, rather than that we

549

prefer to be feared than loved, and that we aim to live well as the best
revenge.
Finally, there is the challenge of a compassionate act being left by the
wayside when the empathic state is sufficiently real and vivid and awful.
I’m not advocating that people become Buddhists in order to make the
world a better place. (Nor am I advocating that people don’t become
Buddhists; what is the sound of one atheist waffling?) Most of us
typically require moments of piercing, frothing shared pain to even
notice those around us in need. Our intuitions run counter to doing it any
other way—after all, just as one of the most frightening versions of
humans at their worst is “cold-blooded” killing, one of the most puzzling
and even off-putting of us at our best is “cold-blooded” kindness. Yet, as
we’ve seen, a fair degree of detachment is just what is needed to actually
act. Better that than our hearts racing in pained synchrony with the heart
of someone suffering, if that cardiovascular activation mostly primes us
to flee when it all becomes just too much to bear.
Which brings us to a final point. Yes, you don’t act because someone
else’s pain is so painful—that’s a scenario that begs you to flee instead.
But the detachment that should be aimed for doesn’t represent choosing
a “cognitive” approach to doing good over an “affective” one. The
detachment isn’t slowly, laboriously thinking your way to acting
compassionately as an ideal utilitarian solution—the danger here is the
ease with which you can instead think your way to conveniently
concluding this isn’t your problem to worry about. The key is neither a
good (limbic) heart nor a frontal cortex that can reason you to the point
of action. Instead it’s the case of things that have long since become
implicit and automatic—being potty trained; riding a bike; telling the
truth; helping someone in need.

550

Fifteen

Metaphors We Kill By
EXAMPLE 1

S

tretching back at least to that faux pas about the golden calf at Mt.
Sinai, various branches of Abrahamic religions have had a thing
about graven images. Which has given us aniconism, the banning of
icons, and iconoclasts, who destroy offensive images on religious
grounds. Orthodox Judaism has been into that at times; ditto for
Calvinists, especially when it came to those idolatrous Catholics.
Currently it’s branches of Sunni Islam that deploy literal graven-image
police and consider the height of offense to be images of Allah and
Muhammad.
In September 2005 the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten published
cartoon images of Muhammad on its editorial page. It was a protest
against Danish censorship and self-censorship about the subject, against
Islam being a sacred cow in a Western democracy where other religions
are readily criticized satirically. None of the cartoons suggested
reverence or respect. Many explicitly linked Muhammad with terrorism
(e.g., him wearing a bomb as a turban). Many were ironic about the ban
—Muhammad as a stick figure with a turban, Muhammad (armed with a
sword) with a blackened rectangle over his eyes, Muhammad in a police
lineup alongside other bearded men with turbans.
And as a direct result of the cartoons, Western embassies and
consulates were attacked, even burned, in Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, and
Libya. Churches were burned in northern Nigeria. Protesters were killed
in Afghanistan, Egypt, Gaza, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Libya, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Somalia, and Turkey (typically either by mob stampedes or by

551

police containing rioters). And non-Muslims were killed in Nigeria, Italy,
Turkey, and Egypt as revenge for the cartoons.
In July 2007 drawings by a Swedish artist of Muhammad’s head with
a dog’s body provoked much the same. In addition to deadly protests, the
Islamic State of Iraq offered $100,000 for the artist’s killing, Al-Qaeda
targeted the artist for death (along with staffers from Jyllands-Posten),
assassination plots were stopped by Western authorities, and one attempt
killed two bystanders.
In May 2015 two gunmen attacked an antianiconist event in Texas
where a $10,000 prize was offered for the “best” depiction of
Muhammad. One person was injured before the gunmen were killed by
police.
And, of course, on January 7, 2015, two brothers, French-born sons
of Algerian immigrants, massacred the staff of Charlie Hebdo, killing
twelve.

552

EXAMPLE 2

I

n the Battle of Gettysburg fierce fighting occurred between the Union
First Minnesota Volunteer Infantry and Confederate Twenty-eighth
Virginia Volunteer Infantry Regiment.1 At one point Confederate soldier
John Eakin, carrying the regimental flag of the Twenty-eighth Virginia,
was shot three times (a typical fate of soldiers carrying the colors, who
were preferential targets). Mortally wounded, Eakin handed the flag to a
comrade, who was promptly killed. The flag was then taken up and
displayed by Colonel Robert Allen, who was soon killed, then by
Lieutenant John Lee, who was soon injured. A Union soldier, attempting
to seize the colors, was killed by Confederates. Finally Private Marshall
Sherman of the First Minnesota captured the flag, along with Lee.

553

EXAMPLES 3, 4, AND 5

I

n mid-2015 Tavin Price, a mentally challenged nineteen-year-old, was
killed by gangbangers in Los Angeles for wearing red shoes, a rival
gang’s color. His dying words, in front of his mother, were “Mommy,
please. I don’t want to die. Mommy, please.”2
In October 1980 Irish Republican prisoners at the Maze Prison in
Northern Ireland began a hunger strike protesting, among other things,
their being denied political-prisoner status by having to wear prison garb.
The British government acceded to their demands as a first prisoner
slipped into a coma fifty-three days later. In a similar strike a year later
in the Maze, ten Irish political prisoners starved themselves to death over
forty-six to seventy-three days.
By 2010 karaoke clubs throughout the Philippines had removed the
Frank Sinatra song “My Way” from their playlists because of violent
responses to the singing of it, including a dozen killings. Some of the
“‘My Way’ killings” were due to poor renditions (which apparently often
results in killings), but most were thought linked to the macho lyrics. “‘I
did it my way’—it’s so arrogant. The lyrics evoke feelings of pride and
arrogance in the singer, as if you’re somebody when you’re really
nobody. It covers up your failures. That’s why it leads to fights,”
explained the owner of a singing school in Manila to the New York
Times.

—
In other words, people are willing to kill or be killed over a cartoon, a
flag, a piece of clothing, a song. We have some explaining to do.

—
Throughout this book we’ve repeatedly gained insights into humans by
examining other species. Some of the time the similarities have been
most pertinent—dopamine is dopamine in a human or a mouse.
Sometimes the interesting thing is our unique use of the identical
substrate—dopamine facilitates a mouse’s pressing of a lever in the

554

hopes of getting some food and a human’s praying in the hopes of
entering heaven.
But some human behaviors stand alone, without precedent in another
species. One of the most important realms of human uniqueness comes
down to one simple fact, namely that this is not a horse:

Anatomically modern humans emerged around 200,000 years ago.
But behavioral modernity had to wait more than another 150,000 years,
as evidenced by the appearance in the archaeological record of
composite tools, ornamentation, ritualistic burial, and that stunning act of
putting pigment on the wall of a cave.*3 This is not a horse. It’s a great
picture of a horse.
When René Magritte placed the words “Ceci n’est pas une pipe”
(“This is not a pipe”) beneath a picture of a pipe, in his 1928 painting
The Treachery of Images, he was highlighting the shaky nature of
imagery. The art historian Robert Hughes writes that this painting is a

555

“visual booby-trap” set off by thought, and that “this sense of slippage
between image and object is one of the sources of modernist disquiet.”4

Magritte’s goal was to magnify and play with the distance between
an object and its representation; these are coping mechanisms against
that modernist disquiet. But for that human putting pigment to wall in
Lascaux Cave more than seventeen thousand years ago, the point was the
opposite: to minimize the distance between the two, to be as close as
possible to possessing the real horse. As we say, to capture its likeness.
To gain its power, as imbued in a symbol.
The clearest human mastery of symbolism comes with our use of
language. Suppose you are being menaced by something and thus scream
your head off. Someone listening can’t tell if the blood-curdling “Aiiiii!”
is in response to an approaching comet, suicide bomber, or Komodo
dragon. It just means that things are majorly not right; the message is the
meaning. Most animal communication is about such present-tense
emotionality.
Symbolic language brought huge evolutionary advantages. This can
be seen even in the starts of symbolism of other species. When vervet
monkeys, for instance, spot a predator, they don’t generically scream.
They use distinct vocalizations, different “protowords,” where one
means “Predator on the ground, run up the tree!” and another means
“Predator in the air, run down the tree!” Evolving the cognitive capacity
556

to make that distinction is mighty useful, as it prompts you to run away
from, rather than toward, something intent on eating you.
Language pries apart a message from its meaning, and as our
ancestors improved at this separation, advantages accrued.5 We became
capable of representing past and future emotions, as well as messages
unrelated to emotion. We evolved great expertise at separating message
from reality, which, as we’ve seen, requires the frontal cortex to regulate
the nuances of face, body, and voice: lying. This capacity creates
complexities that no one else—from slime mold to chimp—deals with in
life’s Prisoner’s Dilemmas.
The height of the symbolic features of language is our use of
metaphor. And this is not just flourish metaphors, when we declare that
life is a bowl of cherries. Metaphors are everywhere in language—we
may literally and physically be “in” a room, but we are only
metaphorically inside something when we are “in” a good mood, “in”
cahoots with someone, “in” luck, a funk, a groove,* or love. We are only
metaphorically standing under something when we “understand” it.*6
The renowned cognitive linguist George Lakoff of UC Berkeley has
explored the ubiquity of metaphor in language in books such as
Metaphors We Live By (with philosopher Mark Johnson), and Moral
Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think (where he demonstrates
how political power involves controlling metaphors—do you favor
“choice” or “life”? are you “tough on” crime, or does your “heart
bleed”? are you loyal to a “fatherland” or a “motherland”? and have you
captured the flag of “family values” from your opponent?). For Lakoff
language is always a metaphor, transferring information from one
individual to another by putting thought into words, as if words were
shopping bags.7
Symbols, metaphors, analogies, parables, synecdoche, figures of
speech. We understand that a captain wants more than just hands when
ordering all of them on deck, that Kafka’s Metamorphosis isn’t really
about a cockroach, and that June doesn’t really bust out all over. If we
are of a certain theological ilk, we see bread and wine intertwined with
body and blood. We learn that the orchestral sounds constituting the
1812 Overture represent Napoleon getting his ass kicked when retreating
from Moscow. And that “Napoleon getting his ass kicked” represents
thousands of soldiers dying cold and hungry, far from home.

557

This chapter explores the neurobiology of some of the most
interesting outposts of symbolic and metaphorical thinking. It makes a
key point: these capacities evolved so recently that our brains are, if you
will, winging it and improvising on the fly when dealing with metaphor.
As a result, we are actually pretty lousy at distinguishing between the
metaphorical and literal, at remembering that “it’s only a figure of
speech”—with enormous consequences for our best and worst behaviors.
We start with examples of odd ways our brains handle metaphor, and
the behavioral manifestations of those oddities; some have been
introduced previously.

558

FEELING SOMEONE ELSE’S PAIN

C

onsider the following: You stub your toe. Pain receptors there send
messages to the spine and on up to the brain, where various regions
kick into action. Some of these areas tell you about the location,
intensity, and quality of the pain. Is it your left toe or right ear that hurts?
Was your toe stubbed or crushed by a tractor-trailer? These various painometers, the meat and potatoes of pain processing, are found in every
mammal.
As we first learned in chapter 2, the frontal cortical anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) also plays a role, assessing the meaning of the pain.8
Maybe it’s bad news: your painful toe signals the start of some unlikely
disease. Or maybe it’s good news: you’re going to get your fire-walker
diploma because the hot coals only made your toes throb. As we saw in
the last chapter, the ACC is heavily involved in “error detection,” noting
discrepancies between what is anticipated and what occurs. And pain
from out of nowhere surely represents a discrepancy between the painfree setting that you anticipate versus a painful reality.
But the ACC does more than just tell you the meaning of a painful
toe. As we saw in chapter 6, put a subject in a brain scanner, make them
think they’re tossing a Cyberball back and forth with two other players,
and then make them feel excluded—the other two stop throwing the ball
to them. “Hey, how come they don’t want to play with me?” And the
ACC activates.
In other words, rejection hurts. “Well, yeah,” you might say. “But
that’s not like stubbing your toe.” But as far as those neurons in the ACC
are concerned, social and literal pain are the same. And as proof of the
rooting of the former in sociality, there isn’t ACC activation if the
subject believes the ball isn’t being thrown to them because of a glitch
connecting them to the other two subjects’ computers.
And the ACC can take things a step further, as we saw in chapter 14.
Receive a mild shock, and there’s activation of your ACC (along with
activation of the more mundane pain-ometer regions). Now instead
watch your beloved get shocked in the same way. Pain-ometer brain

559

regions are silent, but the ACC activates. For those neurons, feeling
someone else’s pain isn’t just a figure of speech.
Moreover, the brain intermixes literal and psychic pain.9 The
neurotransmitter substance P plays a central role in communicating
painful signals from pain receptors in skin, muscles, and joints up into
the brain. It’s got pain-ometer written all over it. And remarkably, its
levels are elevated in clinical depression, and drugs that block the actions
of substance P can have marked antidepressant properties. Stubbed toe,
stubbed psyche. Moreover, there is activation of the cortical parts of pain
networks when we feel dread—anticipating an impending shock.
Furthermore, the brain becomes literal when we do the flip side of
empathy.10 It’s painful watching a hated competitor succeed, and we
activate the ACC at that time. Conversely, if he fails, we gloat, feel
schadenfreude, get pleasure from his pain, and activate dopaminergic
reward pathways. Forget “Your pain is my pain.” Your pain is my gain.

560

DISGUST AND PURITY

T

his is our familiar domain of the insular cortex. If you bite into
rancid food, the insula activates, just as in every other mammal.
You wrinkle your nose, raise your upper lip, narrow your eyes, all to
protect mouth, eyes, and nasal cavities. Your heart slows. You reflexively
spit out the food, gag, perhaps even vomit. All to protect yourself from
toxins and infectious pathogens.11
As humans we do some fancier things: Think about rancid food, and
the insula activates. Look at faces showing disgust, or subjectively
unattractive faces, and the same occurs. And most important, if you think
about a truly reprehensible act, the same occurs. The insula mediates
visceral responses to norm violations, and the more activation, the more
condemnation. And this is visceral, not just metaphorically visceral—for
example, when I heard about the Sandy Hook Elementary School
massacre, “feeling sick to my stomach” wasn’t a mere figure of speech.
When I imagined the reality of the murder of twenty first-graders and the
six adults protecting them, I felt nauseous. The insula not only prompts
the stomach to purge itself of toxic food; it prompts the stomach to purge
the reality of a nightmarish event. The distance between the symbolic
message and the meaning disappears.12
The linking of visceral and moral disgust is bidirectional. As shown
in a number of studies, contemplating a morally disgusting act leaves
more than a metaphorical bad taste in your mouth—people eat less
immediately afterward, and a neutral-tasting beverage drunk afterward is
rated as having a more negative taste (and, conversely, hearing about
virtuous moral acts made the drink taste better).13
In chapters 12 and 13 we saw the political implications of our brains
intermixing visceral and moral disgust—social conservatives have a
lower threshold for visceral disgust than do social progressives; the
“wisdom of repugnance” school posits that being viscerally disgusted by
something is a pretty good indicator that it is morally wrong; implicitly
evoking a sense of visceral disgust (e.g., by sitting in close proximity to a
foul odor) makes us more socially conservative.14 This is not merely

561

because visceral disgust is an aversive state—inducing a sense of
sadness, rather than disgust, doesn’t have the same effect; moreover,
moralizing about purity, while predicted by people’s propensity toward
feeling disgust, is not predicted by propensities toward fear or anger.*
The physiological core of gustatory disgust is to protect yourself
against pathogens. The core of the intermixing of visceral and moral
disgust is a sense of threat as well. A socially conservative stance about,
say, gay marriage is not just that it is simply wrong in an abstract sense,
or even “disgusting,” but that it constitutes a threat—to the sanctity of
marriage and family values. This element of threat is shown in a great
study in which subjects either did or didn’t read an article about the
health risks of airborne bacteria.15 All then read a history article that
used imagery of America as a living organism, with statements like
“Following the Civil War, the United States underwent a growth spurt.”
Those who read about scary bacteria before thinking about the United
States as an organism were then more likely to express negative views
about immigration (without changing attitudes about an economic issue).
My guess is that people with a stereotypically conservative exclusionary
stance about immigration rarely have the sense that they feel disgusted
that people elsewhere in the world would want to come to the United
States for better lives. Instead there is threat by the rabble, the unwashed
masses, to the nebulous entity that is the American way of life.
How cerebral is this intertwining of moral and visceral disgust? Does
the insula get involved in moral disgust only if it’s of a particularly
visceral nature—blood and guts, coprophagia, body parts? Paul Bloom
suggests this is the case. In contrast, Jonathan Haidt feels that even the
most cognitive forms of moral disgust (“He’s a chess grand master and
he shows off by beating that eight-year-old in three moves and reducing
her to tears—that’s disgusting”) are heavily intertwined.16 In support of
that, something as unvisceral as getting a lousy offer in an economic
game activates the insula (a lousy offer from another human, rather than
a computer, that is); the more insula activation, the greater the likelihood
of the offer being rejected. Amid this debate, it is clear that the
intertwining of visceral and moral disgust is, at the least, greatest when
the latter taps into core disgust. To repeat a neat quote from Paul Rozin,
introduced in chapter 11, “Disgust serves as an ethnic or out-group
marker.” First you’re disgusted by how Others smell, a gateway to then
being disgusted by how Others think.

562

Of course, insofar as metaphorically being dirty and disorderly =
bad, metaphorically being clean and orderly = good.*17 Just consider the
use of the word “neat” in the previous paragraph. Similarly, in Swahili
the word safi, meaning “clean” (from kusafisha, “to clean”), is used in
the same slangy metaphorical sense of “neat” in English. Once while in
Kenya, I was hitching a ride to Nairobi from somewhere out in the
boondocks and got to chatting with a local teenager who was curious
about me. “Where are you going?” he asked. Nairobi. “Nairobi ni [is]
safi,” he said wistfully about the far-off metropolis. How are you going
to keep them down on the farm once they’ve seen the neatness of
Nairobi?
Literal cleanliness and orderliness can release us from abstract
cognitive and affective distress—just consider how, during moments
where life seems to be spiraling out of control, it can be calming to
organize your clothes, clean the living room, get the car washed.18 And
consider how the displaced need to impose cleanliness and order runs
and ruins the lives of people suffering from the archetypal anxiety
disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder. The ability of literal cleanliness
to alter cognition was shown in one study. Subjects examined an array of
music CDs, picked ten that they liked, and ranked them in order of
liking; they were then offered a free copy of one of their midrange
choices (number five or six). Subjects were then distracted with some
other task and then asked to rerank the ten CDs. And they showed a
common psychological phenomenon, which was to now overvalue the
CD they’d been given, ranking it higher on the list than before. Unless
they had just washed their hands (ostensibly to try a new brand of soap),
in which case no reranking occurred. Clean hands, clean slate.
But beginning much further back than the “social hygiene”
movement of the turn of the twentieth century, being metaphorically
neat, pure, and hygienic could be a moral state as well—cleanliness was
not just a good way to avoid uncontrolled diarrhea, dehydration, and
serious electrolyte imbalance, but was also ideal for cozying up to a god.
One study was built around the phenomenon of visceral disgust
making people harsher in their moral judgments. The authors first
replicated this effect, showing that watching a short film clip of
something physically disgusting made subjects more morally judgmental
—unless they had washed their hands after watching the film. Another

563

study suggests that the washing decreases emotional arousal, as it
decreased the diameter of subjects’ pupils.19
We intertwine physical and moral purity when it comes to our own
actions. In one of my all-time favorite psychology studies, Chen-Bo
Zhong of the University of Toronto and Katie Liljenquist of
Northwestern University demonstrated that the brain has trouble
distinguishing between being a dirty scoundrel and being in need of a
bath. Subjects were asked to recount either a moral or an immoral act in
their past. Afterward, as a token of appreciation, the researchers offered
the volunteers a choice between the gift of a pencil and a package of
antiseptic wipes. And the folks who had just wallowed in their ethical
failures were more likely to go for the wipes. Another study, showing the
same effect when people were instructed to lie, demonstrated that the
more adversely consequential the lie was presented as being, the more
washing subjects did. Lady Macbeth and Pontius Pilate weren’t the only
ones to at least try to absolve their sins by washing their hands, and this
phenomenon of embodied cognition is referred to as the “Macbeth
effect.”20
This effect is remarkably concrete. In another study subjects were
instructed to lie about something—with either their mouths (i.e., to tell a
lie) or their hands (i.e., to write down a lie).21 Afterward, remarkably,
liars were more likely to pick complementary cleansing products than
control subjects who communicated something truthful: the immoral
mouth-ers were more likely to pick a mouthwash sample; the immoral
scribes, hand soap. Furthermore, as shown with neuroimaging, when
contemplating mouthwash versus soap, those who had just spoken a lie
activated parts of the sensorimotor cortex related to the mouth (i.e., the
subjects were more aware of their mouths at the time); those who had
written the lie activated the cortical regions mapping onto their hand.
Embodied cognition can be specific to parts of the body.
Another fascinating study showed the influence of culture in the
Macbeth effect. The studies just cited were carried out with European or
American subjects. When the same is done with East Asian subjects, the
urge afterward is to wash the face, rather than the hands. If you are going
to save face, it should be a clean one.22
Finally, most important, this intermixing of moral and physical
hygiene affects the way we actually behave. That original study on
contemplating one’s moral failings and the subsequent desire to wash
564

hands included a second experiment. As before, subjects were told to
recall an immoral act of theirs. Afterward subjects either did or didn’t
have the opportunity to clean their hands. Those who were able to wash
were less likely to respond to a subsequent (experimentally staged)
request for help. In another study merely watching someone else wash
their hands in this situation (versus watching them type) also decreased
helpfulness afterward (although to a lesser extent than the subject
washing).23
Many of our moments of prosociality, of altruism and Good
Samaritanism, are acts of restitution, attempts to counter our antisocial
moments. What these studies show is that if those metaphorically dirtied
hands have been unmetaphorically washed in the interim, they’re less
likely to reach out to try to balance the scales.

565

REAL VERSUS METAPHORICAL
SENSATION

T

hen there are ways in which we confuse literal with metaphorical
sensation.
A brilliant study by John Bargh of Yale concerned haptic sensations
(I had to look the word up—haptic: related to the sense of touch).
Volunteers evaluated the résumés of supposed job applicants; crucially,
the résumé was attached to a clipboard of one of two weights. When
subjects held the heavier clipboard, they tended to judge candidates as
more “serious” (while clipboard weight had no effect on other perceived
traits). When you next apply for a job, hope that your résumé will be
attached to a heavy clipboard. How else would the evaluator figure out
that you can appreciate the gravity of a situation and deal with weighty
matters, rather than being a lightweight?24
In the next study subjects assembled a puzzle with pieces that were
either smooth or rough as sandpaper, then observed a socially ambiguous
interaction. Handle the rough puzzle pieces and the interactions were
rated as less coordinated, smooth, or successful (it’s not clear, however,
if those subjects were more likely, at home that evening, to use coarse
language in describing their rough day).
Next, subjects sat in either a hard or a soft chair (to quote the authors,
“We primed subjects by the seat of their pants”). Sit in the former and
they were more likely to perceive individuals as stable and unemotional,
to be less flexible in economic game play. This is remarkable—haptic
sensations in your butt influencing whether you think someone is a hardass. Or hard-hearted instead of a softie.
Similar intermixing of the real and the metaphorical occurs with
temperature sensation. In another study from Bargh’s group, the
researcher, hands full with something, would ask a subject to briefly hold
a cup of coffee for them. Half the subjects held warm coffee, half iced
coffee. Subjects then read about some individual and answered questions
about them. Subjects who held the warm cup rated the individual as
having a warmer personality (without altering ratings about other

566

characteristics). In the next part of the study, the temperature of a held
object altered subjects’ generosity and levels of trust—cold hands, cold
heart. And a more activated insula, as shown in a follow-up study.25
Our brains also confuse metaphorical and literal interoceptive
information. Recall that remarkable study showing that in a real-world
situation, a major predictor of whether a prisoner would be granted
parole was how recently the judge had eaten. Empty stomach, harsher
judgment. Other work has shown that when people are hungry, they
become less generous with money and show more future discounting
(i.e., are more likely to want reward X now, rather than wait for reward
2X). Hungering for fame and fortune are just metaphors—yet our brain
pulls circuits related to real hunger into the mix. Moreover, we use more
abstract levels of cognition when thinking about distant events. Ask
people to make a list of the items they’d bring on a camping trip taking
place either tomorrow or in a month; if the former, the list contains more
specific subcategories. In another study subjects were shown a graph of
the average amount of paper used by an office over time. There is a
steady increase until the most recent time period:26

Subjects were then asked to predict what would happen in the next
time period. Half the subjects were told that the office was nearby.
Result: those subjects did a microanalysis, preferentially paying attention
to that final X trending downward, perceiving it to be meaningful, the
start of a pattern:
567

Down the hall

But subjects told that the office was on the other side of the planet
tended to view the data points at a macro level of analysis, paying
attention to the overall pattern and seeing that downturn as a mere
aberration:

Far away

What’s going on in these studies? Metaphors about weight, density,
texture, temperature, interoceptive sensations, time, and distance are just
figures of speech. Yet the brain confusedly processes them with some of
the same circuits that deal with the physical properties of objects.

568

DUCT TAPE

T

he essence of a symbol is its ability to serve as a stand-in for the
real thing and, remarkably, we’re not the only species where a
signifier, independent of what it signifies, can gain a power of its own.
As discussed in chapter 2, if you condition a rat to associate a bell with a
reward, about half of rats eventually come to find the bell itself
rewarding.
So we’ve now examined cold drinks and cold personalities; lying
through your teeth and then yearning for mouthwash; our hearts aching
for someone else’s pain. Our metaphorical symbols can gain a power all
their own. But insofar as metaphors are the apogee of our capacity for
symbolic thought, it’s thoroughly weird that our top-of-the-line brains
can’t quite keep things straight and remember that those metaphors
aren’t literal. Why?
The answer harks back to a concept first introduced in chapter 10—
evolution is a tinkerer, an improviser. So humans are evolving capacities
for abstractions like morality and deep violations of it, for experiencing
empathy of unprecedented intensity, and for conscious assessment of the
affiliative nature of someone’s temperament—moral disgust, feeling
someone’s pain, warm and cold personalities. Given how short a time
behaviorally modern humans have existed, this has occurred in a blink of
an eye. There hasn’t been enough time to evolve completely new brain
regions and circuits for handling these novelties. Instead, tinkering
occurred—“Hmm, extreme negative affect elicited by violations of
shared behavioral norms. Let’s see . . . Who has any pertinent
experience? I know, the insula! It does extreme negative sensory stimuli
—that’s, like, all that it does—so let’s expand its portfolio to include this
moral disgust business. That’ll work. Hand me a shoehorn and some duct
tape.”
The key to evolution as an improviser rather than inventor is chapter
10’s concept of exaptation—some trait evolves for some purpose and is
co-opted when it turns out to be useful for something else. And soon
feathers are aiding flight, in addition to regulating body temperature, and

569

the insula helps get us into heaven, in addition to purging our guts of
toxins. The latter is a case of what has been called “neural reuse.”27
This isn’t to say it’s been an easy process, that magically one day
neurons that help make you puke are suddenly involved in running the
president’s bioethics panel. It is insanely interesting to me that the most
unique neurons in our brains, the recently evolved and slow-developing
von Economo neurons, are predominantly housed in the anterior
cingulate and insula. And that the neurodegenerative disease
frontotemporal dementia, destined to eventually destroy the entire fancy
neocortex, takes out von Economo neurons first—there’s something
extra fancy (and thus expensive and vulnerable) about those cells. The
tinkering and improvising was inspired.
What’s most interesting is that we see the beginnings of the “I know,
let’s persuade the ACC and insula to volunteer for these new jobs” in
other species. As we saw in chapter 14, the emotional contagion and
protoempathy that a rodent can feel for another one in pain is centered in
the anterior cingulate. And full-blown von Economo neurons are also
found in those same brain regions in the other apes, elephants, and
cetaceans—evolution’s Mensa club—and exist in rudimentary forms in
monkeys. It’s unclear if, say, a blue whale wants to wash its flippers after
a social-norm violation, but a handful of other species seem to have
taken the first steps into this strange new territory along with us.

570

THE METAPHORICAL DARK SIDE

O

ur brains’ confusion of the metaphorical with the literal literally
matters. Back to chapter 10 and the evolutionary emphasis on kin
selection. We saw the array of mechanisms used by various species for
recognizing kin and degree of relatedness—e.g., genetically shaped
pheromonal signatures and imprinting on the female whose birdsong you
heard a lot while you were still inside an egg. And we saw that among
other primates there are cognitive components as well (recall male
baboons’ degree of paternalism being predicted by their likelihood of
being the father). By the time we get to humans, the process is mostly
cognitive—we can think our way to deciding who is a relative, who is an
Us. And thus, as we saw, we can be manipulated into thinking that some
individuals are more related to us, and others less so, than they actually
are—pseudokinship and pseudospeciation. There are numerous ways to
get someone to think that an Other is so different that they barely count
as human. But as propagandists and ideologues have long known, if you
want to get someone to feel that an Other hardly counts as human, there’s
only one way to do it—engage the insula. And the surest way to do that
is with metaphor.
In 1994 many Westerners became aware of the existence of the
nation of Rwanda for the first time. The mountainous Central African
country is tiny, with one of the highest population densities in the world.
Way back when, it had been filled with hunter-gatherers who, as per
usual, had been displaced over the last millennium by agriculturalists and
pastoralists, who came to form the Hutu and Tutsi tribes, respectively. It
remains debated whether they arrived around the same century and
whether they were actually ethnically distinct groups, but the Hutu and
Tutsi Us/Them-ed with a vengeance. The minority Tutsi traditionally
dominated the Hutu, reflecting the common herdsman/farmer power
dynamics of Africa; German and Belgian colonials, in the classic divide
and conquer, exploited and inflamed the tribal animosities further.
With independence in 1962 came a turning of tables and Hutu
domination of the government. Discrimination and violence against
Tutsis drove many out of the country; over the subsequent years, many
571

Tutsi refugee populations in neighboring countries gave rise to rebel
groups seeking to invade Rwanda and establish safe havens there for
Tutsis. Predictably, this increased anti-Tutsi militancy among Hutus and
resulted in further discrimination and massacres. One of the ironies of
what was to come, reflecting the uncertainty as to whether the Hutu and
Tutsi were historically even separate people, was that it wasn’t always
possible to distinguish the two—identity cards were required to indicate
ethnicity.
By 1994 the Rwandan president, the dictator Juvénal Habyarimana, a
Hutu military man who had seized power in 1973, was under sufficient
pressure from Tutsi rebel groups that he signed a power-sharing peace
accord with the rebels. This was viewed as a sellout by the growing
“Hutu Power” extremist bloc. On April 6, 1994, Habyarimana’s plane
was shot down by a missile as it approached the capital, Kigali, killing
all on board. It is still unclear whether the assassination was carried out
by Tutsi rebels or Hutu Power elements in the military who were intent
on both eliminating Habyarimana and laying the blame on Tutsis. In any
case, within a day Hutu militants had killed essentially all moderate
Hutus in the government, seized power, officially laid blame for the
assassination on Tutsis, and urged all Hutus to take revenge. And most
Hutus complied. Thus began what is now known as the Rwandan
genocide.*
The killing ran for approximately one hundred days (until it was
finally halted by Tutsi rebels gaining control). During that time, there
was not only a Final Solution–style attempt to kill every Tutsi in Rwanda
but also killing of Hutus who were married to Tutsis, who attempted to
protect Tutsis, or who refused to participate in killings. By the time it
was done, approximately 75 percent of Tutsis—between 800,000 and
1,000,000 people—and around 100,000 Hutu had been killed. Roughly
one out of every seven Rwandans. This translated into five times the rate
of killing during the Nazi Holocaust. It was mostly ignored by the
West.28
Five times the rate. For those of us schooled in the modern Western
world’s atrocities, some translation is needed. The Rwandan genocide
did not involve tanks, airplanes dropping bombs, or shelling of civilians.
There were no concentration camps, no transport trains, no Zyklon B.
There was no bureaucratic banality of evil. There were hardly even many
guns. Instead Hutu—from peasant farmers to urban professionals—

572

bludgeoned their Tutsi neighbors, friends, spouses, business partners,
patients, teachers, students. Tutsis were beaten with sticks until they
were dead, killed with machetes after being gang-raped and sexually
mutilated, trapped in sanctuaries that were then burned to the ground. An
average of roughly ten thousand people per day. As perhaps the
genocide’s single most shocking atrocity, in the town of Nyange, the
local Catholic priest, a Hutu named Athanase Seromba, gave sanctuary
to between 1,500 and 2,000 Tutsi, many of them his parishioners, and
then led the Hutu militia that ultimately killed every person inside his
church. Rivers ran red, not just metaphorically.*
How could this have happened? There are many components to the
answer. The populace had a long tradition of unquestioning obedience to
authority, a helpful trait to develop in a brutally dictatorial nation. Hutu
militants had for months before been distributing machetes to the Hutu
populace. The government-controlled radio station (the main form of
mass media in this marginally literate country) proclaimed that the intent
of the invading Tutsi rebels was to kill every Hutu, and that one’s Tutsi
neighbors were a fifth column preparing to join in. And there was
another meaningful factor. The anti-Tutsi propaganda was ceaselessly
dehumanizing, with the infamous pseudospeciation of Tutsis being
referred to only as “cockroaches.” Stamp out the cockroaches. The
cockroaches are planning to kill your children. The cockroaches [the
supposedly devious and seductive Tutsi women] will steal your
husbands. The cockroaches [Tutsi men] will rape your wives and
daughters. Stamp out the cockroaches, save yourselves, kill the
cockroaches. And with insular cortices ablaze, machetes in one hand and
transistor radios in the other, most Hutus did.*

573

The aftermath

Dehumanization, pseudospeciation. The tools of the propagandists of
hate. Thems as disgusting. Thems as rodents, as a cancer, as a
transitional species, Thems as reekingly malodorous, as living in hives of
chaos that no normal human would. Thems as shit. Get the insulae of
your followers to confuse the literal and metaphorical, and you’re 99
percent of the way there.

574

575

A GLIMMER
goal might be to use the good side of a double-edged sword to cut
A
loose the silver linings of clouds and save them for rainy days. Or
something metaphorically like that. The tool of the propagandist is to
effectively exploit symbols of revulsion in the service of hate. But the
odd literal metaphoring of our brains can also provide the peacemaker
with a highly effective tool.
In a moving, important 2007 paper in Science, the American/French
anthropologist Scott Atran, along with Robert Axelrod (of chapter 10’s
Prisoner’s Dilemma fame) and Richard Davis, a conflict expert at
Arizona State University, considered the power of what they called
“sacred values” in conflict resolution.29 These are straight out of
Greene’s world of two different cultures of shepherds fighting over a
commons, each with a different moral vision as to what is correct, each
passionately focused on “rights” whose meaning and power are
incomprehensible to the other side. Sacred values are defended far out of
proportion to their material or instrumental importance or likelihood of
success, because to any group such values define “who we are.” And
therefore, not only are attempts to reach compromises on such issues by
using material incentives unlikely to be productive, but they can be
insultingly counterproductive. You can’t buy us off into dishonoring that
which we hold sacred.
Atran and colleagues have studied the roles played by sacred values
in the context of Middle East conflict. In a world of sheer rationality
where the brain didn’t confuse reality with symbols, bringing peace to
Israel and Palestine would revolve solely around the concrete, practical,
and specific—placement of borders, reparations for Palestinian land lost
in 1948, water rights, the extent of militarization allowed to Palestinian
police, and so on. Solving those nuts-and-bolts issues may be a way of
ending war, but peace is not the mere absence of war, and making true
peace requires acknowledging and respecting the sacred values of Them.
Atran and colleagues found that, from the person in the street to the
highest offices of power, sacred values loomed large. They interviewed
senior Hamas leader Ghazi Hamad, asking what he sees as a requirement
576

for true peace. This included, of course, reparations to Palestinians for
the homes and lands they lost almost seventy years ago. Necessary but
not sufficient. “Let Israel apologize for our tragedy in 1948,” he added.
And current Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, in discussing
with them what was needed for true peace, cited not only instrumental
issues of security but also how the Palestinians must “change their
textbooks and anti-Semitic characterizations.” As the authors state, “In
rational-choice models of decision-making, something as intangible as
an apology [or getting the likes of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion out
of schoolbooks] could not stand in the way of peace.” Yet they do,
because in recognizing the enemy’s sacred symbols, you are de facto
recognizing their humanity, their capacity for pride, unity, and
connection to their past and, probably most of all, their capacity for
experiencing pain.*

“Symbolic concessions of no apparent material benefit may be key in
helping to solve seemingly intractable conflicts,” write the authors. In
1994 the Kingdom of Jordan became the second Arab country to sign a
peace treaty with Israel. It ended war, bringing to an end decades of
hostilities. And it created a successful road map for the two nations to
coexist, built around addressing material and instrumental issues—water
rights (e.g., Israel would give Jordan fifty million cubic meters of water
577

annually), joint efforts to combat terrorism, joint efforts to facilitate
tourism between the countries. But it wasn’t until a year later that one
saw evidence that something resembling a true peace was forming. It
followed the creation of yet another martyr for peace, the assassination
of Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, one of the architects of the Oslo
Peace Accord, by a right-wing Israeli extremist. Extraordinarily, King
Hussein came to Rabin’s funeral and eulogized him, addressing his
widow in the front row:
My sister, Mrs. Leah Rabin, my friends, I had never thought that
the moment would come like this when I would grieve the loss of
a brother, a colleague and a friend.
Hussein’s presence and words were obviously irrelevant to any of the
rational stumbling blocks to peace. And were immeasurably important.30
A similar arc can be seen in Northern Ireland, where an IRA
ceasefire in 1994 facilitated an end to the violence of the Troubles and
the 1998 Good Friday Agreement laid the groundwork for Republicans
and Unionists to coexist, for ex-Unionist demagogues and ex-IRA
gunmen to serve in a government together. Much of the agreement was
material or instrumental, but there were elements of sacred values
addressed—for example, the establishment of a Parades Commission to
ensure that neither group had inflammatory, symbol-laden parades in the
other’s neighborhoods in Belfast. But in many ways the most palpable
sign of a lasting peace came from an unexpected corner. The unity
government formed after the agreement was led by Peter Robinson as
first minister and Martin McGuinness as deputy first minister. The
former had been a Unionist firebrand, the latter a leader of the political
wing of the IRA; they were two men who epitomized the hatreds of the
Troubles. They had a functional working relationship but nothing more
than that and had famously refused to ever actually shake hands
(something that even Rabin and Yasir Arafat had managed). What finally
broke the ice? In 2010 Robinson was upended in a major scandal
involving his politician wife, who had committed some major financial
improprieties in the name of another type of impropriety—funneling
money to her nineteen-year-old lover. And history was then made when

578

McGuinness offered, and Robinson accepted, a commiserative
handshake. A guy-code sacred-value moment.*31
Something similar happened in South Africa, much of it promulgated
by Nelson Mandela, a genius at appreciating sacred values.32 Mandela,
while at Robben Island, had taught himself the Afrikaans language and
studied Afrikaans culture—not just to literally understand what his
captors were saying among themselves at the prison but to understand
the people and their mind-set. At one point just before the birth of a free
South Africa, Mandela entered into secret negotiations with the
Afrikaans leader General Constand Viljoen. The latter, chief of the
apartheid-era South African Defence Force and founder of the Afrikaner
Volksfront group opposed to the dismantling of apartheid, commanded
an Afrikaans militia of fifty to sixty thousand men. He was therefore in a
position to doom South Africa’s impending first free election and
probably trigger a civil war that would kill thousands.
They met in Mandela’s house, with the general apparently
anticipating tense negotiations across a conference table. Instead the
smiling, cordial Mandela led him to the warm, homey living room, sat
beside him on a comfy couch designed to soften the hardest of asses, and
spoke to the man in Afrikaans, including small talk about sports, leaping
up now and then to get the two of them tea and snacks. While the general
did not quite wind up as Mandela’s soul mate, and it is impossible to
assess the importance of any single thing that Mandela said or did,
Viljoen was stunned by Mandela’s use of Afrikaans and warm, chatty
familiarity with Afrikaans culture. An act of true respect for sacred
values. “Mandela wins over all who meet him,” he later said. And over
the course of the conversation, Mandela persuaded Viljoen to call off the
armed insurrection and to instead run in the upcoming election as an
opposition leader. When Mandela retired from his presidency in 1999,
Viljoen gave a short, halting speech in Parliament praising Mandela . . .
in the latter’s native language, Xhosa.*
The successful birth of the new South Africa was rife with acts of
respect for sacred values. Perhaps the most famous was Mandela’s public
embrace of rugby, a sport highly symbolic of Afrikaans culture and
historically disdained by black South Africans. And famously, as
depicted in book and film, among the consequences was the tectonically
symbolic act of the heavily Afrikaans national rugby team singing the
ANC anthem, the hymn “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika,” followed by a black

579

choir singing the Afrikaans anthem, “Die Stem van Suid-Afrika,” a
craggy song with references to the country’s craggy mountains.* This
came before the South African host team’s mythic underdog winning of
the World Cup in 1995 in Johannesburg.
I could watch that YouTube clip of the anthems being sung at the
World Cup all day long, especially after having to write the section on
Rwanda. What do Hussein, McGuinness, Robinson, Viljoen, and
Mandela show? That our confusion of the literal and the metaphorical,
our granting of life-threatening sanctity to the symbolic, can be used to
bring about the best of our behaviors. Which prepares us for the final
chapter, soon to come.

580

Sixteen

Biology, the Criminal
Justice System, and (Oh,
Why Not?) Free Will*
DON’T FORGET TO CHECK THEIR TEAR
DUCTS

S

ome years back a foundation sent a letter to various people,
soliciting Big Ideas for a funding initiative of theirs. The letter said
something along the lines of “Send us a provocative idea, something
you’d never propose to another foundation because they’d label you
crazy.”
That sounded fun. So I sent them a proposal titled “Should the
Criminal Justice System Be Abolished?” I argued that the answer was
yes, that neuroscience shows the system makes no sense and they should
fund an initiative to accomplish that.
“Ha-ha,” they said. “Well, we asked for it. That certainly caught our
attention. That’s a great idea to focus on interactions between
neuroscience and the law. Let’s do a conference.”
So I went to a conference with some neuroscientists and some legal
types—law professors, judges, and criminologists. We learned one
another’s terminology, for example seeing how we neuroscientists and
the legal people use “possible,” “probable,” and “certainty” differently.
We discovered that most of the neuroscientists, including me, knew
nothing about the workings of the legal world, and that most of the legal
folks had avoided science since being traumatized by ninth-grade
biology. Despite the two-culture problem, all sorts of collaborations got
581

started there, which eventually grew into a network of people studying
“neurolaw.”
Fun, stimulating, interdisciplinary hybrid vigor. And frustrating to
me, because I kind of meant the title of the proposal that I had written.
The current criminal justice system needs to be abolished and replaced
with something that, while having some broad features in common with
the current system,* would have utterly different underpinnings. Which
I’m going to try to convince you of. And that’s just the first part of this
chapter.

—
You can’t be less controversial than stating that the criminal justice
system needs reform and that this should involve more science and less
pseudoscience in the courtroom. If nothing else, consider this: according
to the Innocence Project, nearly 350 people, a mind-boggling 20 of them
on death row, imprisoned an average of fourteen years, have been
exonerated by DNA fingerprinting.1
Despite that, I’m going to mostly ignore criminal justice reform by
science. Here are some hot-button topics in that realm that I’m going to
bypass entirely:
What to do about the power and ubiquity of automatic,
implicit biases (leading to, for example, juries meting
out harsher decisions to African American defendants
with darker skin). Should Implicit Association Tests be
used in jury selection to eliminate people with strong,
pertinent biases?
Whether neuroimaging information regarding a
defendant’s brain should be admissible in a courtroom.2
This has grown less contentious as neuroimaging has
transitioned from revolutionary to a standard approach
in science’s tool kit. But there remains the issue of
whether juries should be shown actual neuroimages—
the worry is that nonexperts are readily overly impressed
with exciting, color-enhanced Pictures of the Brain (it’s
turning out to be less of an issue than feared).
Whether neuroimaging data regarding someone’s
veracity should have a place in the courtroom (or in the
582

workplace regarding security clearances). Basically, I
know of no expert who thinks the technique is
sufficiently accurate. Nonetheless, there are
entrepreneurs selling the approach (including, I kid you
not, a company called No Lie MRI). This issue extends
to lower-tech but equally unreliable versions of is-thatbrain-lying? This includes electroencephalograms
(EEGs), which are admissible in Indian courtrooms.3
What should be the IQ cutoff for someone to be smart
enough to be executed? The standard is an IQ of 70 or
higher, and debate concerns whether it should be an
average of 70 across multiple IQ tests, or if achieving
that magic number even once qualifies you for being
executed. This issue pertains to about 20 percent of
people on death row.4
What to do with the fact that scientific findings can
generate new types of cognitive biases in jurors. For
example, the belief that schizophrenia is a biological
disorder makes jurors less likely to convict
schizophrenics for their actions but more likely to view
them as more incurably dangerous.5
The legal system distinguishes between thoughts and
actions; what to do as neuroscience increasingly reveals
the former. Are we approaching precrime detection,
predicting who will commit a crime? In the words of one
expert, “We’re going to have to make a decision about
the skull as a privacy domain.”6
And of course there’s that problem of judges judging
more harshly when their stomachs are gurgling.*7

—
All of these are important issues, and I think reforms are needed at the
intersection of progressive politics, civil liberties, and tough standards
about new science. In other words, a standard liberal agenda. Most of the
time I’m a clichéd card-carrying liberal; I even know the theme songs to
many of NPR’s programs. Nonetheless, this chapter won’t take anything
resembling a liberal approach to reforming criminal justice. The reason

583

why is summarized in the following example of a classically liberal
approach to a legal issue.
It’s the middle of the 1500s. Perhaps because of lax societal
standards and people being morally deprived and/or depraved, Europe is
overrun with witches. It’s a huge problem—people fear going out at
night; polls show that peasants-in-the-street list “witches” as more of a
threat than “the plague” or “the Ottomans”; would-be despots gain
supporters by vowing to be tough on witches.
Fortunately, there are three legal standards for deciding if someone is
guilty of witchcraft:8
The flotation test. Since witches reject the sacrament of
baptism, water will reject their body. Take the accused,
bound, and toss them into some water. If they float,
they’re a witch. If they sink, they’re innocent. Quickly
now, retrieve innocent person.
The devil’s-spot test. The devil enters someone’s body
to infect them with witch-ness, and that point of entry is
left insensitive to pain. Systematically do something
painful to every spot on the accused’s body. If some spot
is much less sensitive to pain than the rest, you’ve found
a devil’s spot and identified a witch.
The tear test. Tell the accused the story of the crucifixion
of Our Lord. Anyone not moved to tears is a witch.
These well-established criteria allow authorities fighting this witch
wave to identify and suitably punish thousands of witches.
In 1563 a Dutch physician named Johann Weyer published a book,
De Praestigiis Daemonum, advocating reform of the witch justice
system. He, of course, acknowledged the malign existence of witches,
the need to punish them sternly, and the general appropriateness of
witch-fighting techniques like those three tests.
However, Weyer aired an important caveat pertinent to older female
witches. Sometimes, he noted, elderly people, especially women, have
had atrophy of their lachrymal glands, making it impossible to cry tears.
Uh-oh—this raises the specter of false convictions of people as witches.
The concerned, empathic Weyer counseled, “Make sure you’re not

584

torching some poor elderly person simply because her tear ducts don’t
work anymore.”
Now that’s a liberal reform of the witch justice system, imposing
some sound thinking in one tiny corner of an irrational edifice. Much
like what scientifically based reform of our current system does, which is
why something more extreme is needed.*

585

THREE PERSPECTIVES

L

et’s get down to cases. There are three ways of viewing the place of
biology in making sense of our behaviors, criminal or otherwise:
1. We have complete free will in our behavior.
2. We have none.
3. Somewhere in between.

If people are forced to carefully follow the logical extensions of their
views, probably less than a thousandth of a percent would support the
first proposition. Suppose someone convulsing with a grand mal
epileptic seizure, flinging their arms around, strikes someone. If you
truly believe we freely control our behavior, you must convict them of
assault.
Virtually everyone considers that absurd. Yet that legal outcome
would have occurred half a millennium ago in much of Europe.9 That
seems ludicrous because in the last few centuries the West has crossed a
line and left it so far behind that a world on the other side is
unimaginable. We embrace a concept that defines our progress—“It’s not
him. It’s his disease.” In other words, at times biology can overwhelm
anything resembling free will. This woman didn’t bump into you
maliciously; she’s blind. This soldier standing in formation didn’t pass
out because he doesn’t have what it takes; he’s diabetic and needs his
insulin. This woman isn’t heartless because she didn’t help the elderly
person who had fallen; she’s paralyzed from a spinal cord injury. Similar
shifts in the perception of criminal responsibility have occurred in other
realms. For example, from two to seven centuries ago, prosecution of
animals, objects, and corpses thought to have intentionally harmed
someone was commonplace. Some of these trials had a weirdly modern
tint to them—in a 1457 trial of a pig and her piglets for eating a child,
the pig was convicted and executed, whereas the piglets were found to be
too young to have been responsible for their acts. Whether the judge
cited the maturational state of their frontal cortices is unknown.

586

Thus hardly anyone believes that we have complete conscious
control over our behavior, that biology never constrains us. We’ll ignore
this stance forever after.

587

DRAWING LINES IN THE SAND

N

early everyone believes in the third proposition, that we are
somewhere between complete and no free will, that this notion of
free will is compatible with the deterministic laws of the universe as
embodied in biology. Only a subset of versions of this view fit the fairly
narrow philosophical stance called “compatibilism.” Instead this broader
view is that we have something resembling a spirit, a soul, an essence
that embodies our free will, from which emanates behavioral intent; and
that this spirit coexists with biology that can sometimes constrain it. It’s
a kind of libertarian dualism (“libertarian” in the philosophical rather
than political sense), what Greene calls “mitigated free will.” It’s
encapsulated in the idea that well-intentioned spirit, while willing, can be
thwarted by flesh that is sufficiently weak.

—
Let’s start with the definitive legal framing of mitigated free will.
In 1842 a Scotsman named Daniel M’Naghten tried to assassinate
British prime minister Robert Peel.10 He mistook Peel’s private secretary,
Edward Drummond, for the prime minister and shot him at close range,
killing him. At his arraignment M’Naghten stated, “The Tories in my
native city have compelled me to do this. They follow and persecute me
wherever I go, and have entirely destroyed my peace of mind. They
followed me to France, into Scotland . . . wherever I go. I cannot get no
rest from them night or day. I cannot sleep at night. . . . I believe they
have driven me into a consumption. I am sure I shall never be the man I
formerly was. . . . They wish to murder me. It can be proved by
evidence. . . . I was driven to desperation by persecution.”
In today’s terminology M’Naghten had some form of paranoid
psychosis. It may not have been schizophrenia—his delusional
symptoms started many years later than the typical age of onset of the
disease. Regardless of the diagnosis, M’Naghten had abandoned his
business and spent the previous two years wandering Europe, hearing
voices, convinced that he was being spied upon and persecuted by
powerful people, with Peel his most diabolical tormentor. In the words of
588

a doctor who testified as to his insanity, “The delusion was so strong that
nothing but a physical impediment could have prevented him from
committing the act [i.e., murder].” M’Naghten was so clearly impaired
that the prosecution withdrew criminal charges, agreeing with the
defense that he was insane. The jury agreed, and M’Naghten spent the
rest of his life in insane asylums, reasonably well treated by the
standards of the time.
There was bellowing protest after the jury’s decision, ranging from
the man in the street to Queen Victoria—M’Naghten had gotten away
with murder. The presiding judge was grilled by Parliament and stood by
the decision. The equivalent of the Supreme Court was tasked by
Parliament with assessing the case and supported him. And out of the
decision came the formalization of what is now the common criterion for
finding someone innocent by reason of insanity, namely the “M’Naghten
rule”: if, at the time of the crime, the person is so “laboring under such a
defect of reason from disease of the mind,” that he cannot distinguish
right from wrong.*
The M’Naghten rule was at the core of John Hinckley Jr. being found
not guilty for reasons of insanity in his attempted assassination of
Reagan in 1981, being hospitalized rather than jailed. There was
considerable “He’s getting away with it” outrage afterward; a number of
states banned the M’Naghten criterion, and Congress essentially banned
it for federal cases with the 1984 Insanity Defense Reform Act.*
Nonetheless, the reasoning behind M’Naghten has generally withstood
the test of time.
This is the essence of a stance of mitigated free will—people need to
be held responsible for their actions, but being floridly psychotic can be
a mitigating circumstance. It is the idea that there can be “diminished”
responsibility for our actions, that something can be semivoluntary.
Here’s how I’ve always pictured mitigated free will:
There’s the brain—neurons, synapses, neurotransmitters, receptors,
brain-specific transcription factors, epigenetic effects, gene
transpositions during neurogenesis. Aspects of brain function can be
influenced by someone’s prenatal environment, genes, and hormones,
whether their parents were authoritative or their culture egalitarian,
whether they witnessed violence in childhood, when they had breakfast.
It’s the whole shebang, all of this book.

589

And then, separate from that, in a concrete bunker tucked away in the
brain, sits a little man (or woman, or agendered individual), a
homunculus at a control panel. The homunculus is made of a mixture of
nanochips, old vacuum tubes, crinkly ancient parchment, stalactites of
your mother’s admonishing voice, streaks of brimstone, rivets made out
of gumption. In other words, not squishy biological brain yuck.
And the homunculus sits there controlling behavior. There are some
things outside its purview—seizures blow the homunculus’s fuses,
requiring it to reboot the system and check for damaged files. Same with
alcohol, Alzheimer’s disease, a severed spinal cord, hypoglycemic
shock.
There are domains where the homunculus and that brain biology stuff
have worked out a détente—for example, biology is usually
automatically regulating your respiration, unless you must take a deep
breath before singing an aria, in which case the homunculus briefly
overrides the automatic pilot.
But other than that, the homunculus makes decisions. Sure, it takes
careful note of all the inputs and information from the brain, checks your
hormone levels, skims the neurobiology journals, takes it all under
advisement, and then, after reflecting and deliberating, decides what you
do. A homunculus in your brain, but not of it, operating independently of
the material rules of the universe that constitute modern science.
That’s what mitigated free will is about. I see incredibly smart people
recoil from this and attempt to argue against the extremity of this picture
rather than accept its basic validity: “You’re setting up a straw
homunculus, suggesting that I think that other than the likes of seizures
or brain injuries, we are making all our decisions freely. No, no, my free
will is much softer and lurks around the edges of biology, like when I
freely decide which socks to wear.” But the frequency or significance
with which free will exerts itself doesn’t matter. Even if 99.99 percent of
your actions are biologically determined (in the broadest sense of this
book), and it is only once a decade that you claim to have chosen out of
“free will” to floss your teeth from left to right instead of the reverse,
you’ve tacitly invoked a homunculus operating outside the rules of
science.
This is how most people accommodate the supposed coexistence of
free will and biological influences on behavior.* For them, nearly all
discussions come down to figuring what our putative homunculus should

590

and shouldn’t be expected to be capable of. To get a feel for that, let’s
look at some of these debates.

Age, Maturity of Groups, Maturity of Individuals
In 2005’s Roper v. Simmons decision, the Supreme Court ruled that
you can’t execute someone for a crime committed before the age of
eighteen. The appropriate reasoning was straight out of chapters 6 and 7:
the brain, especially the frontal cortex, is not yet at adult levels of
emotional regulation and impulse control. In other words, adolescents,
with their adolescent brains, aren’t as culpable as adults. The reasoning
was the same as why the pig was executed but not her piglets.
In the years since, there have been related rulings. In 2010’s Graham
v. Florida and 2012’s Miller v. Alabama, the Court emphasized that
juvenile offenders have the highest potential for reform (because of their
still-developing brains) and thus banned life sentences without parole for
them.
These decisions have prompted a number of debates:
Just because adolescents are, on the average, less
neurobiologically and behaviorally mature than adults
doesn’t rule out the possibility of some individual
adolescents being as mature, thus being appropriately
held to adult standards of culpability. Related to that is
the obvious absurdity of implying that something
neurobiologically magical happens on the morning of
someone’s eighteenth birthday, endowing them with
adult levels of self-control. The usual response to these
points is that, yes, these are true, but the law often relies
on group-level attributes with arbitrary age boundaries
(e.g., the age at which someone can vote, drink, or
drive). There is this willingness because you can’t test
every teenager each year, month, hour, to determine
whether they are mature enough yet to, say, vote. But
it’s worth doing so when it comes to a teenage murderer.
In another contrarian view the issue isn’t whether a
seventeen-year-old is as mature as an adult but whether

591

they are mature enough. Sandra Day O’Connor, in
dissenting from the Roper decision, wrote, “The fact that
juveniles are generally less culpable for their
misconduct than adults does not necessarily mean that a
17-year-old murderer cannot be sufficiently culpable to
merit the death penalty” (her emphasis). Another
dissenter, the late Antonin Scalia, wrote that it is “absurd
to think that one must be mature enough to drive
carefully, to drink responsibly, or to vote intelligently, in
order to be mature enough to understand that murdering
another human being is profoundly wrong.”11
Amid these differing opinions everyone, including O’Connor and
Scalia, agrees that there exist age-related boundaries on free will—
everyone’s homunculus was once too young to have its adult powers.12
Maybe it wasn’t tall enough yet to reach all the control dials; maybe it
was distracted from its job by fretting about that gross pimple on its
forehead. And that needs to be considered during legal judgments. Just
as with piglets and pigs, it’s just an issue of when a homunculus is old
enough.

The Nature and Magnitude of Brain Damage
Essentially everyone working with a model of mitigated free will
accepts that if there is enough brain damage, responsibility for a criminal
act goes out the window. Even Stephen Morse of the University of
Pennsylvania, a strident critic of neuroscience in the courtroom (much
more later), concedes, “Suppose we could show that the higher
deliberative centers in the brain seem to be disabled in these cases. If
these are people who cannot control episodes of gross irrationality,
we’ve learned something that might be relevant to the legal ascription of
responsibility.”13 In this view, mitigating biological factors are relevant if
the capacity for reasoning has been grossly impaired.
Thus, if someone had their entire frontal cortex destroyed, you
probably shouldn’t hold them responsible for their actions, because their
rationality is grossly impaired when deciding their own courses of
action.14 But the issue then becomes where a line is drawn on a

592

continuum—what if 99 percent of the frontal cortex is destroyed? What
if 98 percent? This is of great practical importance, since a large
percentage of death row inmates have a history of damage to the frontal
cortex, particularly of the most disabling type, namely early in life.
In other words, amid differing opinions about where a line should be
drawn, believers in mitigated free will agree that massive amounts of
brain damage overwhelm a homunculus, while it should be expected to
handle at least some damage.

Responsibility at the Level of the Brain and at the
Social Level
The renowned neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga, one of the leading
lights and elders of the field, has taken an extremely odd path in writing,
“Free will is an illusion, but you’re still responsible for your actions.”
This is expounded at length in a challenging book of his, Who’s in
Charge? Free Will and the Science of the Brain. Gazzaniga fully accepts
the entirely material nature of the brain but nonetheless sees room for
responsibility. “Responsibility exists at a different level of organization:
the social level, not in our determined brains.” I think either he is
actually saying, “Free will is an illusion, but for practical reasons, we are
still going to hold you responsible for your actions,” or he is
hypothesizing some manner of homunculus that exists only at a social
level. In response to the latter idea, the pages of this book show how our
social world is ultimately as much a product of our determined,
materialist brains as are our simple motor movements.*15

The Time Course of Decision Making
Another well-established fault line in a stance of mitigated free will
is that our capacity for free will moves to the forefront with decisions
that are slow and deliberative, whereas biological factors may push free
will aside in split-second-decision situations. In other words, the
homunculus is not always sitting right at the helm in the bunker; instead
it occasionally wanders off to grab a snack, and if something exciting
suddenly arises, those neurons may fire off commands to muscles and

593

produce a behavior before the homunculus can rush back and hit that big
red button on the control panel.
Issues of getting to the red button in time intersect with issues of the
adolescent brain. A number of critics of Roper v. Simmons, starting with
O’Connor in her dissenting opinion, noted a seeming contradiction. The
American Psychological Association (APA) had filed an amicus curiae
brief in the case, emphasizing that adolescents (i.e., their brains) are so
immature that they can’t be held to adult criminal standards with
sentencing. Turns out that the same APA had filed a brief some years
earlier in a different case, emphasizing that adolescents are sufficiently
mature that they should be able to choose whether to have an abortion,
even without parental consent.
Well, that’s a bit awkward, and it sure makes the APA and its ilk
appear to be flip-flopping along ideological grounds, O’Connor charged.
Laurence Steinberg, whose research on adolescent brain development
was covered heavily in chapter 7 (and whose work was influential in the
Roper v. Simmons decision), offers a logical resolution.16 Deciding
whether to have an abortion involves logical reasoning about moral,
social, and interpersonal issues, stretching out over days to weeks. In
contrast, deciding whether to, say, shoot someone can involve issues of
impulse control over the course of seconds. The frontal immaturity of the
adolescent brain is more pertinent to split-second issues of impulse
control than to slow, deliberative reasoning processes. Or in a mitigatedfree-will framework, rapid-fire, impulsive behaviors can occur while the
homunculus has gone to the bathroom.

Causation and Compulsion
Some proponents of mitigated free will distinguish between the
concepts of “causation” and “compulsion.”17 In a way that feels a bit
nebulous, the former involves every behavior having been caused by
something, of course, but the latter reflects only a subset of behaviors
being really, really caused by something, something that compromises
rational, deliberative processes. In this view some behaviors are more
deterministically biological than others.
This has been relevant to schizophrenic delusions. Suppose someone
suffering from schizophrenia has auditory hallucinations, including a

594

voice telling him to commit a crime; he does so.
Some courts have viewed this as not mitigating. If your friend
suggests that you mug someone, the law expects you to resist, even if it’s
an imaginary friend in your head.
But others see distinctions depending on qualities of the auditory
hallucinations. In that view, if a schizophrenic individual commits a
crime because a voice in his head demanded it, yes, his act was caused
by that voice, but that doesn’t excuse the crime. In contrast, consider a
schizophrenic individual committing a crime because thundering
choruses of taunting, threatening, cajoling voices in his head, complete
with baying hellhounds and choirs of trombones playing loud atonal
music, command him every waking moment to do the crime. When he
succumbs and does so, it is deemed more excusable, because those
voices constituted a compulsion to act.*
Thus in this view even a sensible homunculus can lose it and agree to
virtually anything, just to get the hellhounds and trombones to stop.

Starting a Behavior Versus Halting It
It is virtually ordained that any discussion of volition and biology
eventually considers the “Libet experiment.”18 In the 1980s
neuroscientist Benjamin Libet of UCSF reported something fascinating.
A subject is hooked up to an EEG machine, which monitors patterns of
electrical excitation in the brain. She sits quietly, looking at a clock. She
has been instructed to flick her wrist whenever she feels like it and to
note the time, down to the second, when she decided to do so.
Libet would identify something in the EEG data called a “readiness
potential”—a signal from the motor cortex and supplementary premotor
areas that a movement would soon be initiated. And consistently,
readiness potentials appeared about half a second before the reported
time of conscious intent to move. Interpretation: your brain “decided” to
move before you were even aware of it. Thus, how can you claim to have
chosen when to move, evidence of free will, if the cascade of neural
signaling culminating in movement started before you consciously
chose? Free will is an illusion.
Naturally, this finding generated speculation, controversy,
replications, elaborations, refutations, and nuances that are beyond me.
One criticism concerned a necessary limitation of the approach. In this
595

view, there’s free will, you freely decide when to move your wrist, and
that readiness potential is a consequence of your decision. What’s the
five-hundred-millisecond delay, in that case? That’s the lag time between
the instant when the decision to move first occurs and when (a) attention
is then focused on the clock and (b) the position of the second hand is
interpreted. In other words, the supposed half-second lag is an artifact of
the experimental design, not a real thing. Other criticisms concerned the
ambiguity of feeling that you intend to move. Other criticisms are more
arcane than I can follow.
A very different interpretation of the finding was offered,
interestingly, by Libet. Yes, maybe your brain prepares to initiate a
behavior before there is conscious awareness of the decision, meaning
that your belief that you consciously chose to move is wrong. But in that
lag time is the potential to consciously choose to veto that action. In the
pithy words of V. S. Ramachandran (of mirror neuron speculation in
chapter 14), we may not have free will, but we have “free won’t.”19
Predictably, this intriguing counterinterpretation has fueled more
discussions, experiments, and counter-counterinterpretations. For us,
surveying different disputes concerning mitigated free will, this entire
debate is about the nature of a homunculus’s control panel. How many of
its buttons and switches and dials that go up to eleven are involved in
initiating a behavior versus halting it?

—
Thus a view of mitigated free will makes room for both biological
causation of behavior and free will, and all the discussions merely
concern where lines in the sand are drawn and how inviolate they are.
This prepares us to consider what I think is the most important linedrawing debate.

“You Must Be So Smart” Versus “You Must Have
Worked So Hard”
Stanford psychologist Carol Dweck has done groundbreaking work
on the psychology of motivation. In the late 1990s she reported
something important. Kids do a task, take a test, something, where they
do it well. You then praise them in one of two ways—“What a great

596

score; you must be so smart” or “What a great score, you must have
worked so hard.” When you praise kids for working hard, they tend to
work harder the next time, show more resilience, enjoy the process more,
and become more likely to value the accomplishment for its own sake
(rather than for the grade). Praise kids for being smart, and precisely the
opposite occurs. When it becomes all about being smart, effort begins to
seem suspect, beneath you—after all, if you’re really so smart, you
shouldn’t have to work hard; you glide, you don’t sweat and grunt.20
Beautiful work that has achieved cult status among many thoughtful
parents of gifted kids, who want to understand when their child’s smarts
shouldn’t come into the picture.
Why do “You’re so smart” and “You work so hard” have such
different effects? Because they fall on either side of one of the deepest
lines drawn by believers in mitigated free will. It is the belief that one
assigns aptitude and impulse to biology and effort and resisting impulse
to free will.
It’s cool to see natural ability in action. The great all-around athlete
who has never seen pole-vaulting before, watches it once, tries it once,
and soars like a pro. Or the singer whose voice has always had a natural
timbre that evokes emotions you never knew existed. Or that student in
your class who obviously just gets it, two seconds into your explaining
something really abstruse.
That’s impressive. But then there’s inspiring. When I was a kid, I
repeatedly read a book about Wilma Rudolph. She was the fastest female
runner in the world in 1960, an Olympian who became a civil rights
pioneer. Definitely impressive. But consider that she was born
prematurely, underweight, one of twenty-two kids in a poor Tennessee
family, and—get this—at age four got polio, resulting in a leg brace and
a twisted foot. Polio, she was crippled by polio. And she defied every
expert’s expectations, worked and worked and worked through the pain,
and became the fastest there was. That’s inspiring.
In many domains we can sort of grasp the materialist building blocks
of natural ability. Someone has the optimal ratio of slow-twitch to fasttwitch muscle fibers, producing a natural pole-vaulter. Or has vocal cords
with the perfect degree of velvety peach fuzz (I’m winging it here) to
produce an extraordinary voice. Or the ideal combination of
neurotransmitters, receptors, transcription factors, and so on, producing a

597

brain that rapidly intuits abstractions. And we can also perceive the
building blocks in someone who is merely okay, or lousy, at any of these.
But Rudolph-esque accomplishments seem different. You’re
exhausted, demoralized, and it hurts like hell but you push on; you want
to take an evening off, see a movie with a friend, but resume studying;
there’s that temptation, no one’s looking, everyone else does it, but you
know it’s wrong. It seems so hard, so improbable to think of those same
neurotransmitters, receptors, or transcription factors when considering
feats of willpower. There seems a much easier answer—you’re seeing
the Calvinist work ethic of a homunculus sprinkled with the right kind of
fairy dust.
Here’s a great example of this dualism. Recall Jerry Sandusky, the
Penn State football coach who was a horrific serial child molester. After
his conviction came an opinion piece on CNN. Writing under the
provocative heading of “Do pedophiles deserve sympathy?” James
Cantor of the University of Toronto reviewed the neurobiology of
pedophilia. For example, it runs in families in ways suggesting genes
play a role. Pedophiles have atypically high rates of brain injuries during
childhood. There’s evidence of endocrine abnormalities during fetal life.
Does this raise the possibility that a neurobiological die is cast, that some
people are destined to be this way? Precisely. Cantor concludes, “One
cannot choose to not be a pedophile.”21
Brave and correct. And then Cantor does a stunning mitigated-freewill long jump. Does any of that biology lessen the condemnation and
punishment that Sandusky deserved? No. “One cannot choose to not be a
pedophile, but one can choose to not be a child molester.”
This establishes a dichotomy of what things are supposedly made of:
Biological stuff

Homuncular grit

Destructive sexual urges

Resisting acting upon them

Delusionally hearing voices

Resisting their destructive commands

Proclivity toward alcoholism

Not drinking

Having epileptic seizures

Not driving if you didn’t take your meds

Not all that bright

Getting going when the going gets tough

Not the loveliest of faces

Resisting getting that huge, hideous nose ring

Here are just a few of the things we’ve seen in this book that can
influence the column on the right: blood glucose levels; the
598

socioeconomic status of your family of birth; a concussive head injury;
sleep quality and quantity; prenatal environment; stress and
glucocorticoid levels; whether you’re in pain; if you have Parkinson’s
disease and which medication you’ve been prescribed; perinatal hypoxia;
your dopamine D4 receptor gene variant; if you have had a stroke in
your frontal cortex; if you suffered childhood abuse; how much of a
cognitive load you’ve borne in the last few minutes; your MAO-A gene
variant; if you’re infected with a particular parasite; if you have the gene
for Huntington’s disease; lead levels in your tap water when you were a
kid; if you live in an individualist or a collectivist culture; if you’re a
heterosexual male and there’s an attractive woman around; if you’ve
been smelling the sweat of someone who is frightened. On and on. Of all
the stances of mitigated free will, the one that assigns aptitude to biology
and effort to free will, or impulse to biology and resisting it to free will,
is the most permeating and destructive. “You must have worked so hard”
is as much a property of the physical universe and the biology that
emerged from it as is “You must be so smart.” And yes, being a child
molester is as much a product of biology as is being a pedophile. To
think otherwise is little more than folk psychology.

599

BUT DOES ANYTHING USEFUL
ACTUALLY COME OF THIS?

A

s I noted, the most formidable skeptic of the relevance of
neuroscience to the legal system is Stephen Morse, who has
written extensively and effectively about the subject.22 He is the
definitive advocate of free will being compatible with a deterministic
world. He’s fine with M’Naghten and recognizes that there can be
sufficient brain damage to compromise the notion of responsibility
—“Various causes can produce genuine excusing conditions, such as
lack of rational or control capacity.” But beyond those rare instances, he
believes, neuroscience offers little that should challenge the notion of
responsibility. As he has quipped, “Brains don’t kill people. People kill
people.”
Morse epitomizes the skepticism about bringing neuroscience into
the courtroom. For one thing, he viscerally cringes at how much of a fad
“neurolaw” and “neurocriminology” have become. A wonderfully
sardonic writer,* he has announced the discovery of the disorder “brain
overclaim syndrome,” whose sufferers have gotten carried away with the
importance of neuroscience because they’ve been “infected and inflamed
by stunning advances in our understanding of the brain,” causing them to
“make moral and legal claims that the new neuroscience does not entail
and cannot sustain.”
One absolutely valid criticism of his is a narrow, practical one. This
is the worry, aired earlier, that juries will give undue weight to
neuroimaging data just because of how impressive the images are.
Apropos of that, Morse has called neuroscience “determinism du jour,
grabbing the attention previously given to psychological or genetic
determinism. . . . The only thing different about neuroscience is that we
have prettier pictures and it appears more scientific.”
Another valid criticism concerns findings in neuroscience usually
merely being descriptive (e.g., “Brain region A projects to brain region
Q”) or correlative (e.g., “Elevated levels of neurotransmitter X and of
behavior Z tend to go together”). Data such as those don’t disprove free

600

will. In the words of philosopher Hilary Bok, “The claim that a person
chose her action does not conflict with the claim that some neural
processes or states caused it; it simply redescribes it.”23
This is a point I’ve made throughout the book, namely that
description and correlation are nice, but actual causal data are the gold
standard (e.g., “When you raise the levels of neurotransmitter X,
behavior Z happens more often”). That is the source of some of our most
powerful demonstrations of the material bases of our more complex
behaviors—for example, transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques
that transiently activate or inactivate a part of the cortex can change
someone’s moral decision making, decisions about punishment, or levels
of generosity and empathy. That’s causality.
It is when we get to the issue of causality that Morse distinguishes
between causation and compulsion. He writes, “Causation is neither an
excuse per se nor the equivalent of compulsion, which is an excusing
condition.” Morse describes himself as a “thoroughgoing materialist”
and states, “We live in a causal universe, which includes human action.”
But try as I might, I cannot see any way of making this distinction that
does not tacitly require a homunculus that is outside the causal universe,
a homunculus that can be overwhelmed by “compulsion” but that can
and should handle “causation.” In the words of philosopher Shaun
Nichols, “It seems like something has to give, either our commitment to
free will or our commitment to the idea that every event is completely
caused by the preceding events.”24
Despite these criticisms of his criticisms, my stance has a major
problem, one that causes Morse to conclude that the contributions of
neuroscience to the legal system “are modest at best and neuroscience
poses no genuine, radical challenges to concepts of personhood,
responsibility, and competence.”25 The problem can be summarized in a
hypothetical exchange:
Prosecutor: So, professor, you’ve told us about the extensive
damage that the defendant sustained to his frontal cortex when he
was a child. Has every person who has sustained such damage
become a multiple murderer, like the defendant?
Neuroscientist testifying for the defense: No.
Prosecutor: Has every such person at least engaged in some
sort of serious criminal behavior?
601

Neuroscientist: No.
Prosecutor: Can brain science explain why the same amount
of damage produced murderous behavior in the defendant?
Neuroscientist: No.
The problem is that, even amid all these biological insights that allow
us to be snitty about those silly homunculi, we still can’t predict much
about behavior. Perhaps at the statistical level of groups, but not when it
comes to individuals.

Explaining Lots and Predicting Little
If a person’s leg is fractured, how predictable is it that they will have
trouble walking? I think it would be safe to predict something close to
100 percent. If they have serious inflammatory lung disease, how
predictable is it that their breathing will be labored at times and that they
will tire easily? Again, around 100 percent. Same for the effects of
significant blockage of blood flow to the legs or extensive cirrhosis of
the liver.
Let’s switch to the brain and neurological dysfunction. What if
someone has had a brain injury, and the neurons around the resulting scar
tissue rewire so that they stimulate both themselves and one another—
how predictable is it that the person will have a seizure? How about if
they have congenital weaknesses in the walls of the blood vessels
throughout the brain—how likely is a cerebral aneurysm at some point?
How about if they have a mutation in the gene that causes Huntington’s
disease—how likely are they to have a neuromuscular disorder by age
sixty? Really high in all cases; probably approaching 100 percent.
Let’s incorporate behavior. If someone has extensive frontocortical
damage, how predictable is it that you’d note something odd about them,
behaviorally, after a five-minute conversation? Something like 75
percent.
Now let’s consider a broader range of behaviors. How predictable is
it that this person with the frontal damage will do something horrifically
violent at some point? Or that someone who was abused repeatedly as a
child will become an abusive adult? That a soldier who went through a
battle that killed his buddies will develop PTSD? That a person with the

602

“montane vole” polygamous version of the vasopressin receptor gene
promoter will have numerous failed marriages? That a person with a
particular array of glutamate receptor subtypes throughout their cortex
and hippocampus will have an IQ above 140? That someone raised with
extensive childhood adversity and loss will have a major depressive
disorder? All under 50 percent, often way under.
So how do a fractured leg inevitably impairing locomotion and the
noninevitabilities of the previous paragraph differ? Do the latter
somehow involve “less” biology? Is the point that the brain contains a
nonbiological homunculus but that leg bones do not?
Hopefully, after this many pages, the start of an answer is apparent.
It’s not that there’s “less” biology in those circumstances related to social
behavior. It’s that it’s qualitatively different biology.
When a bone shatters, there’s a relatively straight line of steps
leading to inflammation and pain that will impair the person’s gait
(should he try to walk an hour later). That straight line of biology won’t
be altered by conventional variation in his genome, his prenatal hormone
exposure, the culture he was raised in, or when he ate lunch. But as
we’ve seen, all of those variables can influence social behaviors that
shape our best and worst moments.
The biology of the behaviors that interest us is, in all cases,
multifactorial—that is the thesis of this book.
Let’s see what “multifactorial” means in a practical sense. Consider
someone with frequent depression who is visiting a friend today, pouring
her heart out about her problems. How much could you have predicted
the global depression and today’s behavior by knowing about her
biology?
Suppose “knowing about her biology” consisted only of knowing
what version of the serotonin transporter gene she has. How much
predictive power does that give you? As we saw in chapter 8, not much
—say, 10 percent. What if “knowing about her biology” consists of
knowing the status of that gene plus knowing if one of her parents died
when she was a child? More, maybe 25 percent. How knowing her
serotonin transporter gene status + childhood adversity status + whether
she is living alone in poverty? Maybe up to 40 percent. Add knowledge
of the average level of glucocorticoids in her bloodstream today. Maybe
a bit more. Toss in knowing if she’s living in an individualist or a
collectivist culture. Some more predictability.* Know if she is

603

menstruating (which typically exacerbates symptoms in seriously
depressed women, making it more likely that they’ll be socially
withdrawn rather than reaching out to someone). Some more
predictability. Maybe even above the 50 percent mark by now. Add
enough factors, many of which, possibly most of which, have not yet
been discovered, and eventually your multifactorial biological
knowledge will give you the same predictive power as in the fracturedbone scenario. Not different amounts of biological causation; different
types of causation.
The artificial intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky once defined free
will as “internal forces I do not understand.”26 People intuitively believe
in free will, not just because we have this terrible human need for agency
but also because most people know next to nothing about those internal
forces. And even the neuroscientist on the witness stand can’t accurately
predict which individual with extensive frontal damage will become the
serial murderer, because science as a whole still knows about only a
handful of those internal forces. Shattered bone → inflammation →
constricted movement is easy. Neurotransmitters + hormones +
childhood + ____ + ____ + isn’t.*27
Another factor comes into play. When I go to the Web of Science, a
search engine for scanning databases of papers published in science and
medical journals. Under search terms I put in “oxytocin” and “trust”—
just to pick an example of the umpteen links between biology and social
behavior that we’ve covered. And up comes the news that 193 papers
have been published on the subject. Consider the following figure,
showing that most of those papers have been published in the last few
years.
Same with the next figure, a search for “oxytocin” and “social
behavior” or, after that, “transcranial magnetic stimulation” and
“decision-making,” and then “brain” and “aggression.”

604

605

Visit bit.ly/2nyi5Ip for a larger version of these graphs.

And just to give a sense of some more of these:

606

Visit bit.ly/2neYFVP for a larger version of this table.

Our behaviors are constantly shaped by an array of subterranean
forces. What these figures and the table show is that most of these forces
involve biology that, not that long ago, we didn’t know existed.
So what do we do with Minsky’s definition of free will needing to be
amended to “internal forces I do not understand yet”?

607

HOW THEY WILL VIEW US

I

f you still think there is mitigated free will, there are three possible
routes to take at this juncture.
To appreciate the first, let’s briefly consider epilepsy. Scientists
understand a lot about the neurological bases of seizures and how they
involve firing with abnormally high frequency and synchrony. But not
that long ago, say, a century ago, epilepsy was viewed as a type of
mental illness. And before that it was thought by many to be a
communicable infectious disease. And at other times and places, it was
thought to be caused by menstruation, or excessive sex, or excessive
masturbation. But in 1487 two German scholars uncovered a cause of
epilepsy that really seemed to hit the nail on the head.
The two Dominican friars, Heinrich Kramer and Jakob Sprenger,
published Malleus Maleficarum (Latin for “Hammer of the Witches”),
the definitive treatise about why someone becomes a witch, how to
identify them, and what to do with them. What was one of the surest
ways to identify a witch? If they are seized by Satan, if they convulse
from the malign power of the devil within them.
Their guideline was the Gospel according to Mark, 9:14–29. A man
brings his son to Jesus, saying there is something wrong with him and
asking Jesus to cure him—a spirit comes and seizes him, making him
mute, and then that spirit throws him to the ground, where he foams at
the mouth and grinds his teeth and becomes rigid. The man presents his
son, who is promptly seized by that spirit and falls to the ground,
convulsing and foaming. Jesus perceives that the boy is infested with an
unclean spirit and commands that vile spirit to come out and be gone.
The seizing ceases.
Thus seizures were a sign of demonic possession, a certain marker of
a witch. Malleus Maleficarum arrived in time to take advantage of mass
production through the recently invented printing press. In the words of
historian Jeffrey Russell, “The swift propagation of the witch hysteria by
the press was the first evidence that Gutenberg had not liberated man
from original sin.” The book was widely read and went through more
than thirty editions over the subsequent century. Estimates are that from
608

100,000 to a million people were persecuted, tortured, or killed as
witches in the aftermath.*28
I don’t think much of Kramer and Sprenger. My assumption is that
they were sadistic monsters, but that could reflect my being influenced
too much by the likes of The Name of the Rose or The Da Vinci Code.
Maybe they were opportunists who reasoned that the book would make
their careers. Maybe they were utterly sincere.
Instead I imagine a scenario of an evening during the late fifteenth
century. A church inquisitor comes home from work weary, burdened.
His wife coaxes him to talk—“It was a usual day of condemning
witches, but this one case bothered me. Everyone testified about this
woman who falls and gnashes and convulses—a witch, without a doubt.
I don’t feel sorry for her—no one told her to open wide for Satan. But
she had these two beautiful kids—you should have seen them, just so
confused as to why their mother was being taken away. Distraught
husband also. So that part was hard, seeing them suffer. But it is what it
is—we burned her, of course.” Burnings and killings and centuries were
to pass until we in the West would have learned enough to say, “It’s not
her; it’s her disease.”*
We’re only a first few baby steps into understanding any of this, so
few that it leaves huge, unexplained gaps that perfectly smart people fill
in with a homunculus. Nevertheless, even the staunchest believers in free
will must admit that it is hemmed into tighter spaces than in the past. It’s
less than two centuries since science first taught us that the frontal cortex
has something to do with appropriate behavior. Less than seventy years
since we learned that schizophrenia is a biochemical disorder. Perhaps
fifty years since we learned that reading problems of a type that we now
call dyslexia aren’t due to laziness but instead involve microscopic
cortical malformations. Twenty-five since we learned that epigenetics
alters behavior. The influential philosopher Daniel Dennett has written
about the free will that is “worth wanting.” If there really is free will, it’s
getting consigned to domains too mundane to be worth the effort to want
—do I want briefs or boxer shorts today?29
Recall those charts and table showing the recentness of these
scientific discoveries. If you believe that starting tonight, at midnight,
something will happen and science will stop, that there will be no new
publications, findings, or knowledge relevant to this book, that we now
know everything there is, then it is clear what one’s stance should be—

609

there are some rare domains where extremes of biological dysfunction
cause involuntary changes in behavior, and we’re not great at predicting
who undergoes such changes. In other words, the homunculus is alive
and well.
But if you believe that there will be the accrual of any more
knowledge, you’ve just committed to either the view that any evidence
for free will ultimately will be eliminated or the view that, at the very
least, the homunculus will be jammed into ever tinier places. And with
either of those views, you’ve also agreed that something else is virtually
guaranteed: that people in the future will look back at us as we do at
purveyors of leeches and bloodletting and trepanation, as we look back at
the fifteenth-century experts who spent their days condemning witches,
that those people in the future will consider us and think, “My God, the
things they didn’t know then. The harm that they did.”
Archaeologists do something impressive, reflecting disciplinary
humility. When archaeologists excavate a site, they recognize that future
archaeologists will be horrified at their primitive techniques, at the
destructiveness of their excavating. Thus they often leave most of a site
untouched to await their more skillful disciplinary descendants. For
example, astonishingly, more than forty years after excavations began,
less than 1 percent of the famed Qin dynasty terra-cotta army in China
has been uncovered.
Those adjudicating trials don’t have the luxury of adjourning for a
century until we really understand the biology of behavior. But at the
very least the system needs the humility of archaeology, a sense that,
above all else, we shouldn’t act irrevocably.
But what do we actually do in the meantime? Simple (which is easy
for me to say, looking at the legal world from the soothing distance of
my laboratory): probably just three things. One is easy, one is very
challenging to implement, and the third is nearly impossible.
First the easy one. If you reject free will and the discussion turns to
the legal system, the crazy-making, inane challenge that always surfaces
is that you’d do nothing about criminals, that they’d be free to walk the
streets, wreaking havoc. Let’s trash this one instantly—no rational
person who rejects free will actually believes this, would argue that we
should do nothing because, after all, the person has frontal damage, or
because, after all, evolution has selected for the damaging trait to
traditionally be adaptive, or because, after all . . . People must be

610

protected from individuals who are dangerous. The latter can no more be
allowed to walk the streets than you can allow a car whose brakes are
faulty to be driven. Rehabilitate such people if you can, send them to the
Island of Misfit Toys forever if you can’t and they are destined to remain
dangerous. Josh Greene and Jonathan Cohen of Princeton wrote an
extremely clearheaded piece on this, “For the Law, Neuroscience
Changes Nothing and Everything.” Where neuroscience and the rest of
biology change nothing is in the continued need to protect the
endangered from the dangerous.30
Now for the nearly impossible issue, the one that “changes
everything”—the issue of punishment. Maybe, just maybe, a criminal
must suffer punishment at junctures in a behaviorist framework, as part
of rehabilitation, part of making recidivism unlikely by fostering
expanded frontal capacity. It is implicit in the very process of denying a
dangerous individual their freedom by removing them from society. But
precluding free will precludes punishment being an end in and of itself,
punishment being imagined to “balance” the scales of justice.
It is the punisher’s mind-set where everything must be changed. The
difficulty of this is explored in the superb book The Punisher’s Brain:
The Evolution of Judge and Jury (2014) by Morris Hoffman, a practicing
judge and legal scholar.31 He reviews the reasons for punishment: As we
see from game theory studies, because punishment fosters cooperation.
Because it is in the fabric of the evolution of sociality. And most
important, because it can feel good to punish, to be part of a righteous
and self-righteous crowd at a public hanging, knowing that justice is
being served.
This is a deep, atavistic pleasure. Put people in brain scanners, give
them scenarios of norm violations. Decision making about culpability for
the violation correlates with activity in the cognitive dlPFC. But decision
making about appropriate punishment activates the emotional vmPFC,
along with the amygdala and insula; the more activation, the more
punishment.32 The decision to punish, the passionate motivation to do
so, is a frothy limbic state. As are the consequences of punishing—when
subjects punish someone for making a lousy offer in an economic game,
there’s activation of dopaminergic reward systems. Punishment that feels
just feels good.
It makes sense that we’ve evolved such that it is limbic froth that is at
the center of punishing, and that a pleasurable dopaminergic surge
611

rewards doing so. Punishment is effortful and costly, ranging from
forgoing a reward when rejecting a lowball offer in the Ultimatum Game
to our tax dollars paying for the dental plan of the prison guard who
operates the lethal injection machine. That rush of self-righteous pleasure
is what drives us to shoulder the costs. This was shown in one
neuroimaging study of economic game play. Subjects alternated between
being able to punish lousy offers at no cost and having to spend points
they had earned to do so. And the more dopaminergic activation during
no-cost punishment, the more someone would pay to punish in the other
condition.33
Thus the nearly impossible task is to overcome that. Sure, as I said,
punishment would still be used in an instrumental fashion, to acutely
shape behavior. But there is simply no place for the idea that punishment
is a virtue. Our dopaminergic pathways will have to find their
stimulation elsewhere. I sure don’t know how best to achieve that mindset. But crucially, I sure do know we can do it—because we have before:
Once people with epilepsy were virtuously punished for their intimacy
with Lucifer. Now we mandate that if their seizures aren’t under control,
they can’t drive. And the key point is that no one views such a driving
ban as virtuous, pleasurable punishment, believing that a person with
treatment-resistant seizures “deserves” to be banned from driving.
Crowds of goitrous yahoos don’t excitedly mass to watch the epileptic’s
driver’s license be publicly burned. We’ve successfully banished the
notion of punishment in that realm. It may take centuries, but we can do
the same in all our current arenas of punishment.
Which brings us to the huge practical challenge. The traditional
rationales behind imprisonment are to protect the public, to rehabilitate,
to punish, and finally to use the threat of punishment to deter others.
That last one is the practical challenge, because such threats of
punishment can indeed deter. How can that be done? The broadest type
of solution is incompatible with an open society—making the public
believe that imprisonment involves horrific punishments when, in reality,
it doesn’t. Perhaps the loss of freedom that occurs when a dangerous
person is removed from society must be deterrence enough. Perhaps
some conventional punishment will still be needed if it is sufficiently
deterring. But what must be abolished are the views that punishment can
be deserved and that punishing can be virtuous.

612

None of this will be easy. When contemplating the challenge to do
so, it is important to remember that some, many, maybe even most of the
people who were prosecuting epileptics in the fifteenth century were no
different from us—sincere, cautious, and ethical, concerned about the
serious problems threatening their society, hoping to bequeath their
children a safer world. Just operating with an unrecognizably different
mind-set. The psychological distance from them to us is vast, separated
by the yawning chasm that was the discovery of “It’s not her, it’s her
disease.” Having crossed that divide, the distance we now need to go is
far shorter—it merely consists of taking that same insight and being
willing to see its valid extension in whatever directions science takes us.
The hope is that when it comes to dealing with humans whose
behaviors are among our worst and most damaging, words like “evil”
and “soul” will be as irrelevant as when considering a car with faulty
brakes, that they will be as rarely spoken in a courtroom as in an auto
repair shop. And crucially, the analogy holds in a key way, extending to
instances of dangerous people without anything obviously wrong with
their frontal cortex, genes, and so on. When a car is being dysfunctional
and dangerous and we take it to a mechanic, this is not a dualistic
situation where (a) if the mechanic discovers some broken widget
causing the problem, we have a mechanistic explanation, but (b) if the
mechanic can’t find anything wrong, we’re dealing with an evil car; sure,
the mechanic can speculate on the source of the problem—maybe it’s the
blueprint from which the car was built, maybe it was the building
process, maybe the environment contains some unknown pollutant that
somehow impairs function, maybe someday we’ll have sufficiently
powerful techniques in the auto shop to spot some key molecule in the
engine that is out of whack—but in the meantime we’ll consider this car
to be evil. Car free will also equals “internal forces we do not understand
yet.”*34
Many who are viscerally opposed to this view charge that it is
dehumanizing to frame damaged humans as broken machines. But as a
final, crucial point, doing that is a hell of a lot more humane than
demonizing and sermonizing them as sinners.

613

POSTSCRIPT: NOW FOR THE HARD
PART

W

ell, so much for the criminal justice system. Now on to the really
difficult part, which is what to do when someone compliments
your zygomatic arches.
If we deny free will when it comes to the worst of our behaviors, the
same must also apply to the best. To our talents, displays of willpower
and focus, moments of bursting creativity, decency, and compassion.
Logically it should seem as ludicrous to take credit for those traits as to
respond to a compliment on the beauty of your cheekbones by thanking
the person for implicitly having praised your free will, instead of
explaining how mechanical forces acted upon the zygomatic arches of
your skull.
It will be so difficult to act that way. I am willing to admit that I have
acted egregiously in this regard. My wife and I have brunch with a
friend, who serves fruit salad. We proclaim, “Wow, the pineapple is
delicious.” “They’re out of season,” our host smugly responds, “but I
lucked out and found a decent one.” My wife and I express awestruck
worship—“You really know how to pick fruit. You are a better person
than we are.” We are praising the host for this supposed display of free
will, for the choice made at the fork in life’s road that is pineapple
choosing. But we’re wrong. In reality, genes had something to do with
the olfactory receptors our host has that help detect ripeness. Maybe our
host comes from a people whose deep and ancient cultural values include
learning how to feel up a pineapple to tell if it’s good. The sheer luck of
the socioeconomic trajectory of our host’s life has provided the resources
to prowl an overpriced organic market playing Peruvian folk Muzak. Yet
we praise our host.
I can’t really imagine how to live your life as if there is no free will.
It may never be possible to view ourselves as the sum of our biology.
Perhaps we’ll have to settle for making sure our homuncular myths are
benign, and save the heavy lifting of truly thinking rationally for where it
matters—when we judge others harshly.

614

Seventeen

War and Peace

L

et’s review some facts. The amygdala typically activates when
seeing a face of another race. If you’re poor, by the time you’re
five, your frontal cortical development probably lags behind average.
Oxytocin makes us crappy to strangers. Empathy doesn’t particularly
translate into compassionate acts, nor does refined moral development
translate into doing the harder, right thing. There are gene variants that,
in particular settings, make you prone toward antisocial acts. And
bonobos aren’t perfectly peaceful—they wouldn’t be masters of
reconciliation if they didn’t have conflicts to reconcile.
All this makes one mighty pessimistic. Yet the rationale for this book
is that, nonetheless, there’s ground for optimism.
Thus this final chapter’s goals are (a) to evidence that things have
improved, that many of our worst behaviors are in retreat, our best ones
ascendant; (b) to examine ways to improve this further; (c) to derive
emotional support for this venture, to see that our best behaviors can
occur in the most unlikely circumstances; (d) and finally, to see if I can
actually get away with calling this chapter “War and Peace.”

615

SOMEWHAT BETTER ANGELS

W

hen it comes to our best and worst behaviors, the world is
astonishingly different from that of the not-so-distant past. At the
dawn of the nineteenth century, slavery occurred worldwide, including in
the colonies of a Europe basking in the Enlightenment. Child labor was
universal and would soon reach its exploitative golden age with the
Industrial Revolution. And there wasn’t a country that punished
mistreatment of animals. Now every nation has outlawed slavery, and
most attempt to enforce that; most have child labor laws, rates of child
labor have declined, and it increasingly consists of children working
alongside their parents in their homes; most countries regulate the
treatment of animals in some manner.
The world is also safer. Fifteenth-century Europe averaged 41
homicides per 100,000 people per year. Currently only El Salvador,
Venezuela, and Honduras, at 62, 64, and 85, respectively, are worse; the
world averages 6.9, Europe averages 1.4, and there are Iceland, Japan,
and Singapore at 0.3.
Here are things that are rarer in recent centuries: Forced marriages,
child brides, genital mutilation, wife beating, polygamy, widow burning.
Persecution of homosexuals, epileptics, albinos. Beating of
schoolchildren, beating of beasts of burden. Rule of a land by an
occupying army, by a colonial overlord, by an unelected dictator.
Illiteracy, death in infancy, death in childbirth, death from preventable
disease. Capital punishment.
Here are things invented in the last century: Bans on the use of
certain types of weapons. The World Court and the concept of crimes
against humanity. The UN and the dispatching of multinational
peacekeeping forces. International agreements to hinder trafficking of
blood diamonds, elephant tusks, rhino horns, leopard skins, and humans.
Agencies that collect money to aid disaster victims anywhere on the
planet, that facilitate intercontinental adoption of orphans, that battle
global pandemics and send medical personnel to any place of conflict.
Yes, I know, I’m an utter naïf if I think laws are universally enforced.
For example, in 1981 Mauritania became the last country to ban slavery;
616

nevertheless, today roughly 20 percent of its people are slaves, and the
government has prosecuted a total of one slave owner.1 I recognize that
little has changed in many places; I have spent decades in Africa living
around people who believe that epileptics are possessed and that the
organs of murdered albinos have healing powers, where beating of
wives, children, and animals is the norm, five-year-olds herd cattle and
haul firewood, pubescent girls are clitoridectomized and given to old
men as third wives. Nonetheless, worldwide, things have improved.
The definitive account of this is Pinker’s monumental The Better
Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined.2 It’s a scholarly
work that’s gut-wrenchingly effective in documenting just how bad
things once were. Pinker graphically describes the appalling historical
inhumanity of humans. Roughly half a million people died in the Roman
Colosseum to supply audiences of tens of thousands the pleasure of
watching captives raped, dismembered, tortured, eaten by animals.
Throughout the Middle Ages, armies swept across Eurasia, destroying
villages, killing every man, consigning every woman and child to
slavery. Aristocracy accounted for a disproportionate share of violence,
savaging peasantry with impunity. Religious and governmental
authorities, ranging from Europeans to Persians, Chinese, Hindus,
Polynesians, Aztecs, Africans, and Native Americans, invented means of
torture. For a bored sixteenth-century Parisian, entertainment might
consist of a cat burning, execution of a “criminal” animal, or bearbaiting,
where a bear, chained to a post, would be torn apart by dogs. It is a
sickeningly different world; Pinker quotes the writer L. P. Hartley: “The
past is a foreign country: they do things differently there.”
Better Angels has provoked three controversies:

Why Were People So Awful Then?
For Pinker the answer is clear. Because people had always been so
awful. This is chapter 9’s debate—when was war invented, was ancestral
hunter-gatherer life about Hobbes or Rousseau? As we saw, Pinker is in
the camp holding that organized human violence predates civilization,
stretching back to our last common ancestor with chimps. And as
reviewed, most experts convincingly disagree, suggesting that data have
been cherry-picked, hunter-horticulturalists mislabeled as hunter-

617

gatherers, and newfangled sedentary hunter-gatherers inappropriately
grouped with traditional nomadic ones.

Why Have People Gotten Less Awful?
Pinker’s answer reflects two factors. He draws on the sociologist
Norbert Elias, whose notion of the “civilizing process” centered on the
fact that violence declines when states monopolize force. That is coupled
with spread of commerce and trade, fostering realpolitik self-restraint—
recognizing that it’s better to have this other person alive and trading
with you. Their well-being begins to matter, prompting what Pinker calls
an “escalator of reasoning”—an enlarged capacity for empathy and Usness. This underlies the “rights revolution”—civil rights, women’s rights,
children’s rights, gay rights, animal rights. This view is a triumph of
cognition. Pinker yokes this to the “Flynn effect,” the well-documented
increase in average IQ over the last century; he invokes a moral Flynn
effect, as increasing intelligence and respect for reasoning fuel better
Theory of Mind and perspective taking and an increased ability to
appreciate the long-term advantages of peace. In the words of one
reviewer, Pinker is “not too fainthearted to call his own culture
civilized.”3
Predictably, this has drawn fire from all sides. The Left charges that
this giddy overvaluing of the dead-white-male Enlightenment fuels
Western neoimperialism.4 My personal political instincts run in this
direction. Nonetheless, one must admit that the countries with minimal
violence, extensive social safety nets, few child brides, numerous female
legislators, and sacrosanct civil liberties are usually direct cultural
descendants of the Enlightenment.
Meanwhile, the Right claims that Pinker ignores religion, pretending
that decency was invented in the Enlightenment.5 He is eloquently
unapologetic about this—for him much of what has gone right reflects
people’s “shifting from valuing souls to valuing lives.” For others the
criticism is that this escalator of reasoning fetishizes cognition over
affect—after all, sociopaths have great Theory of Mind, a (damageinduced) purely rational mind makes abhorrent moral judgments, and a
sense of justice is fueled by the amygdala and insula, not the dlPFC.

618

Obviously, this many pages into the book, I feel that the interaction of
reasoning and feeling is key.

Have People Really Gotten Less Awful?
This has been very contentious. Pinker offers the sound bite “We
may be living in the most peaceful era in our species’ existence.” The
fact most driving this optimism is that, except for the Balkan wars,
Europe has been at peace since 1945, the longest stretch in history. For
Pinker, this “Long Peace” represents the West coming to its senses after
the ruin of World War II, seeing how the advantages of being a common
market outweigh those of being a perpetually warring continent, plus
some expanding empathy thrown in on the side.
Critics characterize this as Eurocentrism. Western countries may
kumbaya one another, but they’ve sure made war elsewhere—France in
Indochina and Algeria, Britain in Malaya and Kenya, Portugal in Angola
and Mozambique, the USSR in Afghanistan, the United States in
Vietnam, Korea, and Latin America. Moreover, parts of the developing
world have been continuously at war for decades—consider the eastern
Congo. Most important, such wars have been made bloodier because the
West invented the idea of having client states fight proxy wars for them.
After all, the late twentieth century saw the United States and USSR arm
the warring Somalia and Ethiopia, only to switch to arming the other
side within a few years. The Long Peace has been for Westerners.
The claim of violence declining steadily over the last millennium
also must accommodate the entire bloody twentieth century. World War
II killed 55 million people, more than any conflict in history. Throw in
World War I, Stalin, Mao, and the Russian and Chinese civil wars, and
you’re up to 130 million.
Pinker does something sensible that reflects his being a scientist. He
corrects for total population size. Thus, while the eighth century’s An
Lushan Rebellion and civil war in Tang dynasty China killed “only” 36
million, that represented one sixth of the world’s population—the
equivalent of 429 million in the midtwentieth century. When deaths are
expressed as a percentage of total population, World War II is the only
twentieth-century event cracking the top ten, behind An Lushan, the
Mongol conquests, the Mideast slave trade, the fall of the Ming dynasty,

619

the fall of Rome, the deaths caused by Tamerlane, the annihilation of
Native Americans by Europeans, and the Atlantic slave trade.
Critics have questioned this—“Hey, stop using fudge factors to
somehow make World War II’s 55 million dead less than the fall of
Rome’s 8 million.” After all, 9/11’s murders would not have evoked only
half as much terror if America had 600 million instead of 300 million
citizens. But Pinker’s analysis is appropriate, and analyzing rates of
events is how you discover that today’s London is much safer than was
Dickens’s or that some hunter-gatherer groups have homicide rates that
match Detroit’s.
But Pinker failed to take things one logical step further—also
correcting for differing durations of events. Thus he compares the half
dozen years of World War II with, for example, twelve centuries of the
Mideast slave trade and four centuries of Native American genocide.
When corrected for duration as well as total world population, the top ten
now include World War II (number one), World War I (number three),
the Russian Civil War (number eight), Mao (number ten), and an event
that didn’t even make Pinker’s original list, the Rwandan genocide
(number seven), where 700,000 people were killed in a hundred days.*
This suggests both good and bad news. Compared with the past, we
are extraordinarily different in terms of whom we extend rights to and
feel empathy for and what global ills we counter. And things are better in
terms of fewer people acting violently and societies attempting to contain
them. But the bad news is that the reach of the violent few is ever
greater. They don’t just rage about events on another continent—they
travel there and wreak havoc. The charismatically violent inspire
thousands in chat rooms instead of a mob in their village. Like-minded
lone wolves more readily meet and metastasize. And the chaos once let
loose with a cudgel or machete occurs now with an automatic weapon or
bomb, with far more horrific consequences. Things have improved. But
that doesn’t mean they’re good.
Thus we now consider insights provided by this book that might
help.

620

SOME TRADITIONAL ROUTES

F

irst there’s the strategy for reducing violence that stretches back tens
of thousands of years—moving. If two individuals in a huntergatherer band are having tensions, one frequently shifts to a neighboring
band, sometimes voluntarily, sometimes not. Similarly, interband
tensions are reduced when one shifts to a different location, an advantage
of nomadicism. A recent study of the hunter-gathering Hadza of
Tanzania showed an additional benefit to this fluidity straight out of
chapter 10. Specifically, it facilitates highly cooperative individuals
associating with one another.6
Then there are the beneficial effects of trade, as emphasized by
anthropologists, as well as Pinker. From trading at a village market to
signing international trade agreements, it is often true that where goods
do not pass frontiers, armies will. It’s a version of Thomas Friedman’s
somewhat tongue-in-cheek Golden Arches Theory of peace—countries
with McDonald’s don’t fight one another. While there are exceptions
(e.g., the U.S. invasion of Panama, the Israeli invasion of Lebanon),
Friedman’s broad point holds—countries that are sufficiently stable that
they are integrated into global markets with the likes of McDonald’s and
prosperous enough that their people keep those establishments in
business likely conclude that the trade advantages of peace outweigh the
imagined spoils of war.**7
This isn’t surefire—for example, despite being major trading
partners, Germany and the UK fought World War I—and there’s no
shortage of people willing to go to war, even at the cost of disrupted
trade and scarce commodities. Moreover, “trade” is double-edged. It’s
certifiably groovy when occurring between indigenous rain forest
hunters; it’s certifiably vile if you’re protesting the WTO. But as long as
countries can wage war on distant nations, long-distance trade that
makes them interdependent is a good deterrent.
Cultural diffusion in general (which includes trade) can also facilitate
peace. This can have a modern tint—across 189 countries, digital access
predicts increased civil liberties and media freedom. Moreover, the more

621

civil liberties in a neighboring country, the stronger this effect, as ideas
flow with goods.8

Religion
Well, I’d love to skip this section, but I can’t. That’s because religion
is arguably our most defining cultural invention, an incredibly powerful
catalyst for both our best and worst behaviors.
When introducing the pituitary in chapter 4, I didn’t feel obliged to
first disclose my feelings about the gland. But the equivalent feels
appropriate here. Thus: I was raised highly observant and Orthodox, felt
intensely religious. But then, around age thirteen, the whole edifice
collapsed; ever since, I’ve been incapable of any religiosity or
spirituality and more readily focus on religion’s destructive than its
beneficial aspects. But I like being around religious people and am
moved by them—while baffled by how they can believe that stuff. And I
fervently wish that I could. The end.
As emphasized in chapter 9, we’ve created a staggering variety of
religions. In considering solely religions with worldwide reaches, there
are some important commonalities:
a. They all involve facets of religiosity that are intensely
personal, solitary, and individualized, as well as facets
that are about community; as we’ll see, these are very
different realms when it comes to fostering our best and
worst behaviors.
b. All involve personal and communal ritualized behaviors
that comfort in times of anxiety; however, many of those
anxieties were created by the religion itself.
The anxiety-reducing effects of belief are
logical, given that psychological stress is about lack
of control, predictability, outlets, and social support.
Depending on the religion, belief brings an
explanation for why things happen, a conviction that
there is a purpose, and the sense of a creator who is
interested in us, who is benevolent, who responds to
human entreaties, who preferentially responds to

622

entreaties from people like you. No wonder
religiosity has health benefits (independent of the
community support that it brings and the decreased
rates of substance abuse).
Recall the role of the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) in sounding an alarm when there is a
discrepancy between how you thought things
worked and how they actually do. After controlling
for personality and cognitive abilities, more
religious people show less ACC activation when
getting news of a negative discrepancy. Other
studies show the anxiety-reducing effects of
repetitive religious rituals.9
c. Finally, all the world religions distinguish between Us
and Them, though they differ as to what is required to be
an Us and whether the pertinent attributes are
immutable.
Enough is known about the neurobiology of religiosity that there’s
even a journal called Religion, Brain and Behavior. Reciting a familiar
prayer activates mesolimbic dopaminergic systems. Improvising one
activates regions associated with Theory of Mind, as you try to
understand a deity’s perspective (“God wants me to be humble in
addition to grateful; better make sure I mention that”). Moreover, more
activation of this Theory of Mind network correlates with a more
personified image of a deity. Believing that someone is faith healing
deactivates the (cognitive) dlPFC, suspending disbelief. And performing
a familiar ritual activates cortical regions associated with habit and
reflexive evaluation.10
So are religious people nicer than nonreligious ones? It depends on
whether they’re interacting with in- or out-group members. Okay, are
religious people nicer to in-group members? Numerous studies say yes—
more volunteering (with or without a religious context), charitable
giving, and spontaneous prosociality, more generosity, trust, honesty, and
forgiveness in economic games. However, numerous studies show no
differences.11
Why the discrepancy? For starters, it matters whether data are selfreported—religious people tend to inflate reports of their prosociality
623

more than do nonreligious people. Another factor is whether the
prosociality is public—conspicuous display is particularly important to
those religious people who strongly need social approval. As more
context dependency, in one study religious people were more charitable
than nonreligious ones—but only on their Sabbath.12
Another important issue: what kind of religion? As introduced in
chapter 9, Ara Norenzayan, Azim Shariff, and Joseph Henrich of the
University of British Columbia have identified links between features of
various religions and aspects of prosociality.13 As we saw, small-band
cultures (such as hunter-gatherers) rarely invent moralizing deities. It is
not until cultures are large enough that people regularly interact
anonymously with strangers that it becomes commonplace to invent a
judgmental god—the Judeo-Christian/Muslim deity.
In such cultures overt and subliminal religious cues boost
prosociality. In one study religious subjects unscrambled sentences that
did or didn’t contain religious terms (e.g., spirit, divine, sacred); doing
the former prompted generosity afterward. This is reminiscent of chapter
3’s finding that merely seeing a pair of eyes posted on a wall makes
people more prosocial. And showing that this is about being monitored,
unscrambling sentences with secular terms such as “jury,” “police,” or
“contract” had the same effect.14
Thus reminders of a judgmental god(s) boosts prosociality. It also
matters what that deity does about transgressions. Within and among
cultures, the more punitive the god, the more generosity to an
anonymous coreligionist. Do punitive gods make for more punitive
people (at least in an economic game)? In one study, no—save your cash,
God’s got it covered. In another, yes—a punitive god would want me to
be punitive as well. The UBC group has shown something ironic.
Priming people to think of God as punitive decreases cheating; thinking
of God as forgiving increases it. The researchers then studied subjects
from sixty-seven countries, considering the prevalence in each of belief
in the existence of a heaven and hell. The greater the skew toward belief
in hell, rather than heaven, the lower the national crime rate. When it
comes to Eternity, sticks apparently work better than carrots.
And what about religion facilitating the worst in us, with respect to
Thems? Well, one piece of evidence for this is, uh, like, human history.
Every major religion has historical blood on its hands—Buddhist monks
led the persecution of Rohingya Muslims in Burma, and a Quaker in the
624

White House oversaw the carpet bombing of North Vietnam for
Christmas.*15 This ranges from religious wars, which are, to cite a quote
generally attributed to Napoleon, “people killing each other over who
has the better imaginary friend,” to secular ones where, nevertheless,
omniscient support is requested and proclaimed. Religion is a
particularly tenacious catalyst of violence. Catholics and Protestants
have been killing each other in Europe for nearly 500 years, Shiites and
Sunnis for 1,300. Violent disagreements about differing economic or
governmental models never last as long—this would be like people still
killing each other today over, say, Eastern Roman Emperor Heraclius’s
610 decision to switch the official language from Latin to Greek. As
shown in a study of six hundred terrorist groups spanning forty years,
religiously based terrorism persists the longest and is least likely to
subside due to fighters joining the political process.
Religious primes foster out-group hostility. In a “field study” where
people were surveyed in different locations in a cosmopolitan European
city, merely walking past a church made Christians express more
conservative, negative attitudes toward non-Christians. Another study
examined the priming effects of a violent god. Subjects read a Bible
passage in which a woman is murdered by a mob from another tribe. Her
husband consults with his tribesmen and forms an army that takes
revenge by attacking the other tribe (in biblical fashion, destroying their
cities and killing every human and animal). Half the subjects were told
this story. In the story told to the other half, while contemplating
revenge, the army asks for advice from God, who sanctions them to
majorly chasten the other tribe.16

625

Visit bit.ly/2mNNLLf for a larger version of this graph.

Participants then played a competitive game in which each round’s
loser was blasted with a loud noise at a volume chosen by the other
player. Reading the scene where God sanctions their desire for violence
increased the volume with which opponents were chastened.
No surprise: the effect was bigger in males than in females. Big
surprise: subjects were either devout Mormons at Brigham Young
University or students of typically liberal religions at a Dutch university,
and the effect was equally strong in both groups. Biggest surprise: even
among subjects who did not subscribe to the Bible (a surprisingly high 1
percent of the Brigham Young students and 73 percent of the Dutch),
godly sanction increased their aggressiveness (though to a lesser extent).
Thus, divine sanction of violence can increase aggression even in people
whose religiosity probably doesn’t include a vengeful god, as well as
among those who don’t even believe there’s divine anything.
Of course, this is not a uniform effect of religion; Norenzayan
distinguishes between private and communal religiosity in surveying
support for suicide bombers among Palestinians.17 In a refutation of
“Islam = terrorism” idiocy, people’s personal religiosity (as assessed by
how often they prayed) didn’t predict support for terrorism. However,
frequently attending services at a mosque did. The author then polled
Indian Hindus, Russian Orthodox adherents, Israeli Jews, Indonesian

626

Muslims, British Protestants, and Mexican Catholics as to whether
they’d die for their religion and whether people of other religions caused
the world’s troubles. In all cases frequent attendance of religious
services, but not frequent prayer, predicted those views. It’s not
religiosity that stokes intergroup hostility; it’s being surrounded by
coreligionists who affirm parochial identity, commitment, and shared
loves and hatreds. This is hugely important.

—
What should one make of these various findings? Religiosity isn’t going
anywhere.* Given that, it seems that boosting in-group sociality is best
done with a moralizing, punitive god. The standard, wearisome critique
of atheism is that lack of a god(s) produces nihilistic amorality; the
standard response is that it’s pretty unimpressive if you are kind only
because you fear damnation. Unimpressive or not, it appears to be useful.
The big challenge is when communal aspects of religiosity fuel outgroup hostility. It’s useless to call for religions to broaden the extent of
their Us-ness. Religions are quirky as to who is an Us, ranging from
“only those who look, act, talk, and pray like people in our sect” to “all
of life.” It will be discouragingly tough to shift religions from the former
to the latter.

Contact
As introduced in chapter 11, many have speculated that inter-group
tensions are reduced by contact—when people get to know one another,
everyone gets along. But despite that salutary possibility, intergroup
contact readily elevates hostilities.18
As seen in chapter 9, intergroup contact worsens things when the two
groups are treated unequally or are unequal in number; where the smaller
group is surrounded; where intergroup boundaries are ambiguous; when
the groups vie to display symbols of their sacred values (e.g., Northern
Irish Protestants marching with Orangemen flags through Catholic
neighborhoods). Elbows rubbed raw.
Obviously, the opposite is needed to minimize threat and anxiety—
groups encountering each other in equal numbers and treatment, in a
neutral setting free of agitprop and where there is institutional oversight
of the venture. Most important, interactions work best when there is a
627

shared goal, especially when it is successful. This revisits chapter 11—a
shared goal reprioritizes Us/Them dichotomies, bringing this novel
combined Us to the forefront.
Under those conditions, sustained intergroup contact generally
decreases prejudices, often to a large extent and in a generalized,
persistent manner. This was the conclusion of a 2006 meta-analysis of
some five hundred studies comprising over 250,000 subjects from thirtyeight countries; beneficial effects were roughly equal for group
differences in race, religion, ethnicity, or sexual orientation. As
examples, a 1957 study concerning desegregation of the Merchant
Marines showed that the more trips white seamen took with African
Americans, the more positive their racial attitudes. Same for white cops
as a function of time spent with African American partners.19
A more recent meta-analysis provides additional insights: (a) The
beneficial effects typically involve both more knowledge about and more
empathy for the Thems. (b) The workplace is a particularly effective
place for contact to do its salutary thing. Decreased prejudice about the
Thems at work often generalizes to Thems at large, and even sometimes
to other types of Thems. (c) Contact between a traditionally dominant
group and a subordinate minority usually decreases prejudice more in the
former; the latter have higher thresholds. (d) Novel routes of interacting
—such as sustained online relationships—can work a bit as well.20
All good news. Contact theory has prompted an experimental
approach where people, most typically adolescents or young adults, from
groups in conflict are brought together for anything from one-hour
discussions to summer camps. They’ve most frequently involved
Palestinians and Israelis, Northern Irish Catholics and Protestants, or
opposing groups from the Balkans, Rwanda, or Sri Lanka, with the idea
that participants will return home and spread their attitudinal shifts. This
notion of germination prompted the name of one such program, Seeds of
Peace.
Group pictures show Muslims and Jews, Catholics and Protestants,
Tutsis and Hutu, Croats and Bosnians arm in arm; this is better than
puppies. Do the programs work? Depends on what counts as “working.”
According to one expert, Stephen Worchel of the University of Hawaii,
effects are generally positive—less fear and more positive views of
Thems, more of a perception of Thems as heterogeneous, more

628

recognition of faults of the Us, and more of a perception of oneself as an
atypical Us.
This is the immediate aftermath. Disappointingly, these effects are
usually transient. Individuals from across lines rarely stay in touch; in
one survey of Palestinian and Israeli teenagers, 91 percent were not.
Persistent reductions in prejudice usually involve exceptionalism—“Yes,
most Thems are awful, but I hung out with a Them once who was okay.”
When there is major transformation, the peace-mongering convert loses
street cred back home when they broadcast this. For example, no
prominent peace activist has emerged from the thousands of participants
in the Middle Eastern Seeds of Peace.*
Here’s a way to think about contact: instead of hating a Them for
what his ancestors did, you await the day that you’re irritated with him
for, say, eating the last s’more, or setting the office thermostat too low, or
never returning to its proper place in the barn that plowshare that used to
be a sword. Now, that’s progress. The core of that thought is Susan
Fiske’s demonstration that automatic other-race-face amygdala responses
can be undone when subjects think of that face as belonging to a person,
not a Them. The ability to individuate even monolithic and
deindividuated monsters can be remarkable.
A moving example of this is told by Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela in
her book A Human Being Died That Night: A South African Story of
Forgiveness (Cape Town: David Philip, 2003). Gobodo-Madikizela,
raised in a black township of apartheid South Africa, managed to forge
an educational path all the way to a PhD in clinical psychology. As a free
South Africa dawned, she worked on the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, where she had a task to give anyone pause. It concerned
Eugene de Kock, the man with the most literal apartheid-era blood on his
hands. De Kock had commanded the elite counterinsurgency unit of the
South African Police and personally overseen kidnappings, torture, and
murders of black activists. He had been tried, convicted, and given a life
sentence. Gobodo-Madikizela was to interview him about his death
squad; clinical psychologist that she is, over the course of over forty
hours talking with him, her main focus became to understand this man.
He was a predictably multifaceted, contradictory, real human, rather
than an archetype. He was remorseful in some ways, unrepentant in
others; indifferent to some of his appalling brutality while proud of his
patchwork of principles about whom he wouldn’t kill; he pointed fingers

629

at his bosses (who mostly escaped justice by depicting him as a rogue
vigilante rather than the civil servant of apartheid that he was) while
emphasizing his command of his killers. He shattered her by tentatively
asking if he had killed any of her loved ones (he had not).
And Gobodo-Madikizela found herself deeply troubled by her
growing empathy for de Kock.
A defining moment came one day when de Kock was recounting
something that made him markedly distressed. Gobodo-Madikizela
reflexively reached out and—a taboo act—touched his finger between
the jail bars. The next morning her arm felt leaden, as if paralyzed by the
touch. She struggled with whether her granting him this contact was a
sign of her power or his (with him somehow manipulating her into the
act). When she next saw him, he compounded her storm of feelings by
thanking her and confessing that it was his trigger hand that she had
touched. No, this was not the start of an unlikely friendship, as violins
play in the background. But the automaticity, the empathy implicit in her
reaching out to him, shows that somehow, remarkably, the tenuous
elements of Us-ness she now shared with de Kock had dominated at that
moment.

Burning and Unburning Bridges
A phenomenon in many settings of conflict is burning cultural
bridges as a way to forge a new, powerful Us category. Consider the Mau
Mau rebellion in Kenya in the 1950s. The brunt of British colonialism in
Kenya had focused on one tribe, the Kikuyu, who had the bad luck of
living on precisely the rich farm land that the colonials appropriated;
Kikuyu suffering finally boiled over into the Mau Mau insurrection.*
The agricultural Kikuyu were not particularly bellicose (unlike, say,
the nearby pastoralist Maasai, who had been terrorizing the Kikuyu
forever), and inculcating new Mau Mau fighters required powerful
symbolic effort. Oath making had great cultural significance to Kikuyus,
and Mau Mau oath making notoriously involved horrendous violations
of Kikuyu norms and taboos, acts guaranteeing shunning at home. The
message was clear: “You have burned a bridge; your only Us is us.”
This strategy is often used in a horrifying realm of modern violence,
namely rebel groups transforming kidnapped children into soldiers.21
Sometimes this involves new recruits having to burn symbolic cultural
630

bridges. But also, perhaps reflecting recognition of kids’ limited abstract
cognition, something more concrete is employed—the forced killing of
family members by such children. We are your family now.
When child soldiers are liberated, their chances of growing into
healthy, functioning adults soars if a relative is found who will accept
them. If a bridge is unburned.22

—
631

As I write, there’s news of the rescue of a few of the two-hundred-plus
Nigerian schoolgirls kidnapped in 2014 by the terrorist group Boko
Haram. What these girls experienced is unimaginable—terror, pain,
forced labor, endless rapes, pregnancies, AIDS. And as these few are
returned home, many are shunned—for their AIDS, for the belief that
they’ve been brainwashed into being sleeper terrorists, for the rape-born
children they carry. This does not auger well for their being anything
other than broken forever.
Chapter 11 emphasized pseudospeciation, when Thems are made to
seem so different that they hardly count as human. Chapter 15
considered the skill of demagogues at this, framing hated Thems as
insects, rodents, bacteria, malignancies, and feces. That provides a clear
punch line: be wary of rabble-rousers who frame Thems as things to step
on, spray with toxins, or flush down toilets. Simple.
But pseudospeciating propaganda can be subtler. In the fall of 1990
Iraq invaded Kuwait, and in the run-up to the Gulf War, Americans were
sickened by a story that emerged. On October 10, 1990, a fifteen-yearold refugee from Kuwait appeared before a congressional Human Rights
Caucus.23
The girl—she would give only her first name, Nayirah—had
volunteered in a hospital in Kuwait City. She tearfully testified that Iraqi
soldiers had stolen incubators to ship home as plunder, leaving over three
hundred premature infants to die.
Our collective breath was taken away—“These people leave babies
to die on the cold floor; they are hardly human.” The testimony was seen
on the news by approximately 45 million Americans, was cited by seven
senators when justifying their support of war (a resolution that passed by
five votes), and was cited more than ten times by George H. W. Bush in
arguing for U.S. military involvement. And we went to war with a 92
percent approval rating of the president’s decision. In the words of
Representative John Porter (R-Illinois), who chaired the committee, after
Nayirah’s testimony, “we have never heard, in all this time, in all
circumstances, a record of inhumanity, and brutality, and sadism, as the
ones that [Nayirah had] given us today.”
Much later it emerged that the incubator story was a
pseudospeciating lie. The refugee was no refugee. She was Nayirah alSabah, the fifteen-year-old daughter of the Kuwaiti ambassador to the
United States. The incubator story was fabricated by the public relations

632

firm Hill + Knowlton, hired by the Kuwaiti government with the help of
Porter and cochair Representative Tom Lantos (D-California). Research
by the firm indicated that people would be particularly responsive to
stories about atrocities against babies (ya think?), so the incubator tale
was concocted, the witness coached. The story was disavowed by human
rights groups (Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch) and the
media, and the testimony was withdrawn from the Congressional Record
—long after the war.
Be careful when our enemies are made to remind us of maggots and
cancer and shit. But also beware when it is our empathic intuitions,
rather than our hateful ones, that are manipulated by those who use us for
their own goals.

Cooperation
As explored in chapter 10, understanding the evolution of
cooperation poses two challenges.
The first is the fundamental problem of how cooperation ever starts;
the dispiriting logic of the Prisoner’s Dilemma shows that whoever takes
the first cooperative step becomes one step behind.
As we saw, one plausible solution concerns founder populations—
when a subset of a population becomes isolated and its average degree of
relatedness rises, fueling cooperation through kin selection.24 Should that
founder population rejoin the general population, their cooperative
tendencies will outcompete everyone else, thus propagating cooperation.
Another solution involves green-beard effects, that poor man’s version of
kin selection, where a genetic trait generates a conspicuous marker and a
cooperative bent toward bearers of that marker. In that setting the green
beard–less will be outcompeted unless they also evolve cooperation. As
we saw, green-beard effects occur in various species.
This raises the second challenge, namely understanding why humans
are so extraordinarily cooperative with nonrelatives. We hold elevator
doors open for strangers, take turns at four-way stop signs, get off buses
in an orderly manner. We build cultures involving millions of people
sharing conventions. This requires more than founder effects and green
beards; in the years since Hamilton and Axelrod made “tit for tat” trendy,
tons of work has explored human-specific mechanisms for fostering
cooperation. There are many.
633

Open-ended play. Two individuals play the Prisoner’s Dilemma,

knowing that after a single round, they’ll never meet again. Rationality
decrees that you defect; there’ll never be a chance to catch up if you fall
behind in that first round. What about two rounds? Well, the second
round requires noncooperation for the same reasons the single-round
game does. In other words, it never makes sense to cooperate in the final
round. Thus, round 2 behavior determined, the game defaults to a singleround game—where the rational strategy is to defect. Three rounds? The
same. In other words, playing for a known number of rounds biases
against cooperation, and the more rational the players, the more they
foresee this. It’s open-ended play that fosters cooperation—an unknown
number of rounds, producing the shadow of the future, where retribution
is possible and the advantages of sustained mutual cooperation
accumulate with increasing numbers of interactions.25
Multiple games. Two individuals play two games against each other
simultaneously (alternating rounds between the two) where one game
has a much lower threshold for establishing cooperation than the other.
Once cooperation is established in that less cutthroat game, there is
psychological spillover of cooperation into the other. This is why
managers of tense, competitive offices bring in soothing outsiders to lead
trust games, hoping that the low-threshold demands for trust there will
spill over into work life.
Open-book play. This is where the other player can see if you’ve been a
jerk to people in the past. Reputation is a powerful facilitator of
cooperation. That’s what a moralizing god is about—the book whose
play is eternally open. As we saw in chapter 9, everyone from huntergatherers to urbanites gossip, doing so to open reputation books wider.26
Open-book play mediates a uniquely sophisticated type of human
cooperation, namely “indirect reciprocity.” Person A helps person B,
who helps C, who helps D. . . . The reciprocity between two individuals
in a closed interaction is like barter. But indirect, pay-it-forward
reciprocity is like money, where the common currency is reputation.27

Punishment
Other animals don’t have reputations or ponder whether their
interactions are open-ended. However, punishment to promote

634

cooperation occurs in numerous species—this is shown when a male
baboon who is being an aggressive brute to a female is chased out of the
troop for a while by the victim and her relatives. Punishment can
strongly facilitate cooperation, but its implementation is potentially
double-edged in humans.
All cultures show some degree of willingness to pay a cost to punish
norm violators, and high degrees of willingness correlate with high
levels of prosociality. One study examined rural Ethiopians who
subsisted on selling charcoal made from wood from local forests—a
classic tragedy of the commons scenario: no one is likely to
spontaneously limit logging to keep the forest healthy. The study showed
that villages with high average levels of willingness to administer costly
punishment in an economic game were the ones with the most patrols to
prevent overcutting of trees and the healthiest forests. And as seen in
chapter 9, cultures with gods who punish norm violations are atypically
prosocial.28
A complication in costly punishment is the cost—the danger that the
costs of monitoring for and punishing violations may outweigh the
benefits of the cooperation induced. A solution is to reduce surveillance
after long stretches of cooperation—in other words, to trust. For
example, probably very few Amish purchase costly retinal-scanner home
security systems.29
Another complication concerns who does the punishing. In other
species it is usually the victim, the second party. By definition,
punishment in two-person games in humans (e.g., the Ultimatum Game)
is always by the second party. In that setting the punisher forgoes the
measly share offered, (a) in the hopes of deriving visceral satisfaction
from depriving the first party of their larger share (and, as seen in the last
chapter, that is a major motivator of punishment, fueled by the amygdala
and insula); (b) in an effort to shape the first party into making fairer
offers to the second party in the future; or (c) as an altruistic act, hoping
to shape the first party into being more decent to whomever they play
next. This is complex for second parties, balancing costs and benefits,
heart and mind, birds in the hand and in the bush. It might also result in
the first party being offended by the rejection and becoming even less
cooperative thereafter—an outcome in some game scenarios.30
Humans uniquely and very effectively boost cooperation through
third-party punishment meted out by objective outsiders. However, such
635

punishing can be costly to the third party, meaning that there’s the
evolutionary challenge not just of jump-starting cooperation but also of
jump-starting altruistic third-party punishment.31
The answer, as repeatedly derived by humans, is to add layers.
Develop secondary punishment, punishing someone who fails to do
third-party punishment—the world of honor codes, where you’re
punished if you don’t report a violation. An alternative is to reward thirdparty punishers—humans make livings as cops and judges. Moreover,
recent theoretical and empirical work shows that being a conspicuous
third-party punisher makes people trust you. But who monitors thirdparty punishers? Here is where you get people to share and lower the
cost by taking sociality to the max—costs are shouldered by everyone,
and free riders are punished (e.g., we pay taxes and punish tax evaders).
When the moving parts are balanced, you generate extraordinary levels
of cooperation.32
The moving parts were examined in a fascinating 2010 Science
paper. The authors studied 113,000 online participants, who each
purchased an item (a souvenir photo) under one of the following
conditions:33
a. Could buy for a set price. (This was the control
condition.)
b. Could pay whatever they wanted; sales soared but
people tended to pay tiny amounts, putting the “store” in
the red.
c. Were charged the original price, knowing that the
company gave X percent of earnings to charity; sales
increased, but less than X percent, and the store lost
money.
d. Could pay whatever they wanted, with half of that going
to a charity. This boosted both sales and the price
voluntarily paid, yielding profits for the store and a large
charitable contribution.
In other words, while evidence of corporate social responsibility
(scenario C) boosts sales a bit, it’s far more effective when the individual

636

and the business share social responsibility and the individual determines
the amount of money donated.

Choosing Your Partner
As we’ve seen, cooperators outcompete more numerous
noncooperators to the extent that the former can find one another. This is
the logic behind green beards facilitating finding a kindred soul (if not
kin). Thus, when that element is introduced into a game (with the ability
to refuse to play with someone), cooperation soars, and more cheaply
than by punishing defectors.34

—
These findings reveal numerous theoretical routes for fostering
cooperation, and with real-life equivalents; moreover, we’ve learned a lot
about which work best when. This is how we’ve evolved to collectively
raise barns for neighbors, plant and harvest the whole village’s rice crop,
or coordinate marching-band members to form a picture of their school’s
mascot.
And, oh yeah, to reiterate an idea aired previously, “cooperation” is a
value-free term. Sometimes it takes a village to ransack a neighboring
village.

Reconciliation, and Things That Are Not
Synonymous with It
“So I’d caught a colobus monkey and was eating, getting to the good
part, when this guy comes by, starts really begging for some. This got on
my nerves and I snarled at him. Instead of taking a hint, he lunges, grabs
the monkey’s arm, starts yanking—so I bit his shoulder. He cleared out
fast and sat at the other end of the clearing, his back to me.
“Once I calmed down, I thought a bit. To be honest, I probably
should have shared some food with him. And while he definitely crossed
a line when he grabbed, I probably should have nipped him instead of a
real bite. So I’m feeling kind of bad. And besides, we work well together
on patrols—it’s probably good if we sort things out.

637

“So I take the monkey, sit near him. We’re all awkward—he’s not
looking at me, I pretend there’s a nettle between my toes. But eventually
I give him some of the meat, he grooms me a bit. The whole thing was
stupid, we should have done that in the first place.”
If you’re a chimp, reconciliation is easy once your heart rate returns
to normal. Sometimes for us too—touch a friend’s shoulder, give a selfeffacing grimace, say, “Hey, look, just now I was being a—” and they cut
you off, saying, “No, no, it was me. I shouldn’t . . .” and things are okay.
Easy. How about when everyone’s trying to patch things up after
your people have slaughtered three quarters of theirs, or after they came
as colonials, stole your land, and forced you to live in slum “homelands”
for decades? Trickier.
We’re the only species that institutionalizes reconciliation and that
grapples with “truth,” “apology,” “forgiveness,” “reparations,”
“amnesty,” and “forgetting.”
The apogee of institutionalized complexity is the truth and
reconciliation commission (TRC). The first came in the 1980s, and
they’ve been depressingly useful ever since, occurring, for example, in
Bolivia, Canada, Australia, Nepal, Rwanda, and Poland. Some TRCs
have been in stable countries (Canada and Australia) facing up to their
long history of abuse of indigenous peoples. Most, however, have come
after a nation emerged from a bloody, divisive transition—a dictator
overthrown, a civil war settled, a genocide halted. The popular
perception is that their purpose is for perpetrators of abuse to confess,
express remorse, and beg for forgiveness from victims, who then grant it,
resulting in tearful embraces between the two.
But instead TRCs are typically exercises in pragmatism, where
perpetrators basically say, “This is what I did, and I vow to never harm
your people again,” and the victims basically say, “Okay, we vow to not
seek extrajudicial retribution.” An often towering achievement, if less
heartwarming.
Probably the best-studied TRC was South Africa’s after the defeat of
apartheid. It came with enormous moral legitimacy, being overseen by
Desmond Tutu, and gained further legitimacy by, though
overwhelmingly focusing on the acts of whites, also examining atrocities
by African liberation fighters. Hearings were public and included victims
getting to tell their stories. More than six thousand of the perpetrators
testified and applied for amnesty; this was granted to 13 percent.

638

What happened to the tearful forgiveness scenarios? What about
perpetrators at least showing remorse for their actions? It was not
required, and few did. The goal was not to transform those individuals; it
was to increase the odds that the shattered nation would function. In
follow-up studies by the South African Centre for the Study of Violence
and Reconciliation, victim participants commonly felt “that the TRC had
been more successful at the national than the local level.” Many were
outraged that there were no apologies, no reparations, that many
perpetrators remained in their jobs. Interestingly, echoing chapter 15,
many were equally angry about symbolic changes that had not occurred
—not only is this killer still a cop, but there’s still a
holiday/monument/street name celebrating apartheid. A wide majority of
black (but not white) South Africans saw the TRC as fair and successful,
and it accompanied South Africa’s miraculously transitioning to
freedom, rather than descending into civil war. Thus TRCs show the
differences between reconciliation and the likes of remorse and
forgiveness.*35
As every parent knows, a transparently insincere apology
accomplishes little and can even worsen things. But deep remorse is
different. The New Yorker recounts the story of Lu Lobello, an American
Iraq War veteran who accidentally killed three members of a family,
collateral damage during a firefight; haunted by it, he spent nine years
tracking down the survivors to apologize. Or consider Hazel Bryan
Massery, the snarling white teenager at the center of the iconic 1957
civil-rights-movement photograph of Elizabeth Eckford attempting to
integrate Little Rock Central High School. A few years later Massery
contacted Eckford to apologize.36
Do apologies “work”? It depends. One issue is what the person is
apologizing for, ranging from the concrete (“I’m sorry I broke your toy”)
to the global and essentialist (“I’m sorry I’ve viewed your people as not
fully human”). Another is what the apologizer aims to do about their
remorse. And there’s the makeup of the recipient of the apology. Studies
show that (a) victims who are oriented toward the workings of a
collective system respond most to apologies that emphasize failure of
that system (“I’m sorry, we police are supposed to protect, not break
laws”); (b) victims most oriented to relationships respond most to
apologies that are empathic (“I’m sorry for the pain that I caused you, for
taking your son”); and (c) victims who are most autonomous and

639

independent respond most to apologies accompanied by offers of
compensation. There is also the issue of who is apologizing. What does it
mean that in 1993 Bill Clinton apologized to Japanese Americans for
their World War II internment? While the apology was laudable, and
accompanied by reparative money, could Clinton speak for FDR?37
The issue of reparations is immensely complicated. At one extreme,
reparations can be the ultimate proof of sincerity. This is at the heart of
the slavery reparations movement—so much of America’s growth into
economic privilege was built on slavery, and so many of the subsequent
benefits of the successful economy have been systematically denied to
African Americans, that there should be reparations to the descendants of
slaves. At the other extreme, reparations meant to purchase forgiveness
offend—this was the reasoning behind the newly born state of Israel’s
refusal of reparations from Germany, unless it was accompanied by
adequate remorse.
At the end of these steps might arise one of the strangest things
humans do—we forgive.38 For starters, forgiving is not forgetting. If
nothing else, that’s neurobiologically unlikely. A rat learns to associate a
bell with a shock and freezes when it hears it. When the next day the bell
repeatedly sounds without being accompanied by a shock, causing the
freezing behavior to “extinguish,” the memory trace of that learning does
not evaporate. Instead it is overlaid with newer learning—“Today the
bell is not bad news.” As proof, suppose that the day after that, the bell
again signals shock. If the initial learning of “bell = shock” had been
erased, it would take as long this day to learn the association as it did the
first. Instead there is rapid reacquisition: “bell = shock again.” Forgiving
someone doesn’t mean you’ve forgotten what he did.
There is a subset of victims who claim to have forgiven the
perpetrator, to have relinquished their anger and desire for punishment. I
include the word “claim” not to imply skepticism but to indicate that
forgiveness is a self-reported state that can be claimed but not proven.
Forgiveness can occur as a religious imperative. In the June 2015
Charleston church massacre, white supremacist Dylann Roof killed nine
parishioners at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church. Two
days later, at Roof’s arraignment, stunningly, family members of the
dead were there to forgive him and pray for his soul.39
Forgiveness can take extraordinary cognitive reappraisal. Consider
the case of Jennifer Thompson-Cannino and Ronald Cotton.40 In 1984
640

Thompson-Cannino was raped by a stranger. In a police lineup she
identified Cotton with great certainty; despite claiming innocence, he
was convicted and sentenced to life in prison. In the years after, friends
tentatively wondered if she could now put the nightmare behind her.
“Like hell I’m able to” would be her response. She was consumed with
her hatred for Cotton, with her desire to harm him. And then, more than
ten years into his prison sentence, DNA evidence exonerated Cotton.
Another man had done it; he was incarcerated in Cotton’s prison for
other rapes and bragged about getting away with this one. ThompsonCannino had identified the wrong man and convinced a jury. Issues of
hatred or forgiveness were now on the other foot.
When they finally met, after Cotton’s release and pardon, ThompsonCannino said, “If I spent every minute of every hour of every day for the
rest of my life telling you that I’m sorry, can you ever forgive me?” And
Cotton said, “Jennifer, I forgave you years ago.” His ability to do so
involved profound reappraisal: “Forgiving Jennifer for picking me out of
that lineup as her rapist took less time than people think. I knew she was
a victim and was hurting real bad. . . . We were the victims of the same
injustice by the same man, and this gave us a common ground to stand
on.” A complete reappraisal that made them Us in their victimhood. The
two now lecture together about the need for judicial reform.
Ultimately, forgiveness is usually about one thing—“This is for me,
not for you.” Hatred is exhausting; forgiveness, or even just indifference,
is freeing. To quote Booker T. Washington, “I shall allow no man to
belittle my soul by making me hate him.” Belittle and distort and
consume. Forgiveness seems to be at least somewhat good for your
health—victims who show spontaneous forgiveness, or who have gone
through forgiveness therapy (as opposed to “anger validation therapy”)
show improvements in general health, cardiovascular function, and
symptoms of depression, anxiety, and PTSD. Chapter 14 explored how
compassion readily, perhaps inevitably, contains elements of selfinterest. The compassionate granting of forgiveness epitomizes this.41
We’ve now focused on forgiveness, apology, reparation,
reconciliation, and the extent to which TRCs were about reconciliation
rather than forgiveness. What about the “truth” part? It facilitates the
healing process enormously. In the TRCs, perpetrators spilling truth—
detailed, exhaustive, unflinching, and public—was the highest priority

641

for victims. It’s the need to know what happened; it’s getting the villain
to say the words; it’s to show the world, “Look what they did to us.”

Recognizing Our Irrationalities
Despite the claims of some economists, we are not rational
optimization machines. We are more generous in games than logic
predicts; we decide if someone is guilty based on reasoning but then
decide their punishment based on emotion; roughly half of us make
different decisions about sacrificing one to save five, depending if it
involves pushing a person versus pulling a lever; we effortlessly resist
cheating in circumstances where no one would know; we make strong
moral decisions without being able to explain why. Thus it’s a good idea
to recognize the systematic features to our irrationality.
Sometimes we aim to eliminate these irrationalities. Perhaps the most
fundamental one is the common visceral resistance to a simple fact—you
don’t make treaties with friends; it’s to be expected that you passionately
hate those whose hands you are about to shake, and that can’t be an
impediment to doing so. Another domain concerns discrepancies
between our conscious opinions and what our implicit biases lead us to
do. As we saw, Us/Them edges can be softened when implicit biases are
made explicit. Doing so need not eliminate that bias—after all, you can’t
readily reason yourself out of a belief that you weren’t originally
reasoned into. Instead, revealing implicit biases indicates where to focus
your monitoring to lessen their impact. This notion can be applied to all
the realms of our behaviors being shaped by something implicit,
subliminal, interoceptive, unconscious, subterranean—and where we
then post-hoc rationalize our stance. For example, every judge should
learn that judicial decisions are sensitive to how long it’s been since they
ate.
Another example to watch out for is the human potential for
irrational optimism. For example, while people might accurately assess
the risk of a behavior, they tend toward distortive optimism when
assessing risk to themselves—“Nah, that couldn’t happen to me.”
Irrational optimism can be great; it’s why only about 15 percent instead
of 99 percent of humans get clinically depressed. But as emphasized by
the Nobel Prize–winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman, irrational
optimism in warfare is disastrous. This can range from the theologically
642

optimistic conviction that God is on your side to the tendency of military
strategists to overestimate their side’s capabilities and underestimate
those of the opposition—“piece of cake, full steam ahead” becomes the
logical conclusion.42
A final domain of irrationality that must be recognized concerns
chapter 15’s “sacred values,” where purely symbolic acts can count for
more than hard-nosed material concessions. Rationality may be key to
establishing peace, but the irrational importance of sacred values is key
to establishing lasting peace.

Our Incompetence at and Aversion to Killing
Video cameras are sufficiently ubiquitous these days to make
“privacy” a threatened phenomenon. One consequence of such ubiquity
is that scientists can be voyeuristic in new ways. Which has produced an
interesting finding.
It concerns riots in soccer stadiums—“football hooliganism,” battles
between ethnic or nationalist groups, partisans of each team, or often
right-wing skinheads going at it. Footage of such events shows that few
people actually fight. Most are on the sidelines watching or running
around like agitated, headless chickens. Of those who fight, most throw
an ineffectual punch or two before discovering that punching makes your
hand hurt. The actual fighters are a tiny subset. As stated by one
researcher, “humans are bad at [close-range, hand-to-hand] violence,
even if civilization makes us a bit better at it.”43
Even more interesting is the evidence of our strong inhibitions
against doing grievous harm to someone up close.
The definitive exploration of this is the 1995 book On Killing: The
Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society, by David
Grossman, a professor of military science and retired U.S. Army
colonel.44
He frames the book around something noted after the Battle of
Gettysburg. Of the almost 27,000 single-load muskets recovered from
the field, almost 24,000 of them were loaded and unfired; 12,000 were
loaded multiple times, 6,000 loaded three to ten times. Lots of soldiers
were standing there thinking, “I’m going to shoot soon, yes I am, hmm,
maybe I should reload my rifle first.” These weapons were recovered

643

from the thick of the battlefield, from men whose lives were at risk while
they were reloading. In Gettysburg most deaths were caused by artillery,
not the infantry on the ground. In the heat of crazed battle, most men
would load, tend to the wounded, shout orders, run away, or wander in a
daze.
Similarly, in World War II only 15 to 20 percent of riflemen ever
fired their guns. The rest? Running messages, helping people load
ammunition, tending to buddies—but not aiming a rifle at someone
nearby and pulling a trigger.
Psychologists of warfare emphasize how, in the heat of battle, people
don’t shoot another human out of hatred or obedience, or even from
knowing that this enemy is trying to kill them. Instead it’s the
pseudokinship of bands of brothers—to protect your buddies, to not let
the guys next to you down. But outside those motivations, humans show
a strong natural aversion to killing at close range. The most resistance is
against hand-to-hand combat with a knife or bayonet. Next comes shortrange firing with a pistol, then long-range firing, all the way to the
easiest, which is bombs and artillery.
The resistance can be psychologically modified. It’s easier when you
aren’t targeting an identified individual—throwing a grenade into a
group rather than shooting at one person. Killing as an individual is
harder than in a group—while only that small subset of World War II
riflemen fired their weapons, nearly all weapons operated by a team
(e.g., machine guns) were fired. Responsibility is diluted, much as when
a firing squad would know that one of them had received a blank,
allowing every shooter to know that they might not have actually killed
someone.
Grossman’s premise is supported by something new and startling.
Since it morphed from “battle fatigue” or “shell shock” into a formal
psychiatric illness, combat PTSD has been framed as a result of the sheer
terror of being under attack, of someone trying to kill you and those
around you. As we’ve seen, it is an illness where fear conditioning is
overgeneralized and pathological, an amygdala grown large,
hyperreactive, and convinced that you are never safe. But consider drone
pilots—soldiers who sit in control rooms in the United States, directing
drones on the other side of the planet. They are not in danger. Yet their
rates of PTSD are just as high as those of soldiers actually “in” war.

644

Why? Drone pilots do something horrifying and fascinating, a type
of close-range, intimate killing like nothing in history, using imaging
technology of extraordinary quality. A target is identified, and a drone
might be positioned invisibly high in the sky over the person’s house for
weeks, the drone operators always watching, waiting, say, for a gathering
of targets in the house. You watch the target coming and going, eating
dinner, taking a nap on his deck, playing with his kids. And then comes
the command to fire, to release your Hellfire missile at supersonic speed.
Here’s one drone pilot, describing his first “kill”—three Afghanis
targeted from his air force base in Nevada. The missile has hit, and he
watches through an infrared camera, which transmits heat signatures:
The smoke clears, and there’s pieces of the two guys around the
crater. And there’s this guy over here, and he’s missing his right
leg above his knee. He’s holding it, and he’s rolling around, and
the blood is squirting out of his leg, and it’s hitting the ground,
and it’s hot. His blood is hot. But when it hits the ground, it starts
to cool off; the pool cools fast. It took him a long time to die. I
just watched him. I watched him become the same color as the
ground he was lying on.45
But there would be more. Pilots wait to see who retrieves the bodies,
who comes to the funeral, ready to perhaps release another strike. Or in
other circumstances the pilot might watch as an American convoy
approaches a roadside IED booby trap, unable to warn them, or watch
insurgents execute a shrieking civilian begging for mercy.
The pilot above was twenty-one when he made that first kill; he
would eventually accumulate 1,626 drone-mediated kills.* No personal
danger, an omnipresent eye in the sky. He could finish his shift and get a
doughnut on the way home. Yet he and many of his fellow drone pilots
succumb to devastating PTSD.
After reading Grossman, the explanation is simple. The deepest
trauma is not the fear of being killed. It’s doing the close-up,
individuated killing, watching someone for weeks and then turning him
the color of the ground. Grossman cites that during World War II there
were low rates of psychiatric breakdowns among sailors and medics—
people who were just as endangered as infantrymen but killed either
impersonally or not at all.
645

Militaries train soldiers to override their inhibitions against killing,
and Grossman notes that the training has become more effective—
trainees no longer fire at bull’s-eyes; instead it’s rapid-fire situations of
mobile virtual-reality figures coming at you, where shooting becomes
reflexive. In the Korean War, 55 percent of American riflemen fired their
weapons; in the Vietnam War, over 90 percent. And this was before the
rise of violent, desensitizing video games.
Maybe there will soon be completely different types of wars. Perhaps
drones themselves will decide when to fire. Maybe wars will consist of
autonomous weapons fighting each other, or each side racing to win with
the most effective cyberattack on the other’s computers. But as long as
we still see the faces of those we kill, this seemingly natural inhibition
will be vital.

646

THE POSSIBILITIES

I

t’s remarkable the things humans can spend their lives studying. You
can be a coniologist or a caliologist, studying dust or birds’ nests,
respectively. There are batologists and brontologists, pondering brambles
and thunder, and vexillologists and zygologists, with their dazzling
knowledge of flags and of methods for fastening things. On and on—
odontology and odonatology, phenology and phonology, parapsychology
and parasitology. A rhinologist and a nosologist fall in love and have a
child who becomes a rhinological nosologist, studying the classification
of nose diseases.
The preceding pages suggest the possibility of “peaceology,” the
scientific study of the effects of trade, demographics, religion, intergroup
contact, reconciliation, and so on, on the ability of humans to live in
peace. An intellectual venture with great potential to help the world.
But with each new example of us at our worst, from the pinpricks of
petty meanness to massive carnage, this intellectual venture can feel like
rolling a boulder uphill. And thus, to falsely separate cognition and
affect, we conclude these many pages by fueling the emotional rather
than intellectual certainty that there is hope, that things can change, that
we can be changed, that we personally can cause change.

Rousseau with a Tail
For more than thirty years I spent my summers studying savanna
baboons in the Serengeti ecosystem in East Africa. I love baboons, but I
must admit that they’re often violent and abusive, so that the weak suffer
at the canines of the strong. Okay, some detachment—they’re a highly
sexually dimorphic tournament species with extensive escalated
aggression and a strong propensity toward frustration displacement—i.e.,
they can be intensely shitty to one another.

—
647

In the mid-1980s the baboon troop adjacent to my study group hit the
jackpot. Their territory included a tourist lodge; as at tourist places
anywhere in the wilds, it had always been a challenge keeping wildlife
from feeding on food garbage. Hidden in a grove of trees far from the
lodge was a deep garbage pit, surrounded by a fence. But baboons climb
fences, fences get knocked down, gates are left open—and that
neighboring troop had taken to foraging daily in the dump. Like another
widely dispersed primate, humans, baboons eat almost anything—fruit,
plants, tubers, insects, eggs, prey they’ve killed, dead things they’ve
scavenged.
The remainders of one of my males, the
morning after being attacked by a
coalition of rivals

This transformed the “Garbage
Dump” troop. Baboons normally
descend from their sleeping trees at
dawn and walk ten miles a day
foraging. Garbage Dumpers slept in
trees above the dump, waddled
down at eight o’clock to meet the
garbage tractor from the lodge, spend ten minutes in frenzied
competition for discarded roast beef and drumsticks and plum pudding,
and then waddle out for a nap. I’d even darted Garbage Dump animals
and studied them with colleagues—they put on weight, thickened with
subcutaneous fat, had elevated circulating levels of insulin and
triglycerides, had the start of metabolic syndrome.46

648

Breakfast time, as garbage is dumped from a cart

Somehow baboons in “my” troop got word of the feasting over the
hill, and soon half a dozen would head over each morning to join. It
wasn’t random who did this, who would try to compete for food against
fifty or sixty Thems. The ones who tried were male, big, and aggressive.
And morning is when baboons do much of their socializing—sitting in
contact, grooming, playing—so going for garbage meant forgoing the
socializing. The males who went each morning were the most
aggressive, least affiliative members of the troop.
Not long after, there was a tuberculosis outbreak among the Garbage
Dump baboons. In humans tuberculosis is a chronic disease, slowly
consuming you with “consumption.” In nonhuman primates, TB is
wildfire, spreading rapidly, killing within weeks. Kenyan wildlife vet
colleagues and I identified the cause of the outbreak—the meat inspector
at the lodge was being bribed to approve tubercular cows for slaughter;
animals were killed, unsightly lesionish organs discarded and then
consumed by baboons. Most of the Garbage Dump troop died, as did all
my males who raided the dump.47
This was kinda upsetting to me; I habituated a new troop at the other
end of the park and wouldn’t go anywhere near the remnants of my troop
for half a dozen years. Finally, my soon-to-be wife visiting Kenya for the
first time, I worked up the nerve to return to the troop, to show her the
baboons of my youth.

649

They were unlike any baboon troop documented, exactly like what
you’d expect if you eliminated half the adult males, producing a 2:1
female-to-male ratio instead of the typical 1:1, and if the males
remaining were particularly unaggressive and affiliative.48
They stayed close together, sat in contact, and groomed more than
average. Levels of aggression were lower, and in an informative way.
Males still had a dominance hierarchy; number three would still fight
with numbers four and two, defending his status and seeking a
promotion. But there was minimal displacement aggression onto
innocent bystanders—when number three lost a fight, he’d rarely
terrorize number ten or a female. Stress hormone levels were low; the
neurochemistry of anxiety and benzodiazepines worked differently in
these individuals.
Here’s a measure of it, a picture
that, if you’re a baboon-ologist, is
more surprising than one showing
baboons inventing the wheel—two
adult males grooming. That hardly
ever happens. Except in this troop.
And now the most important
part. Female baboons remain in
their birth troop, whereas males get
itchy around puberty and leave,
trying their luck anywhere from the
troop next door to one thirty miles
away. By the time I returned to this troop, most of the males who had
avoided the TB had died; the troop was filled with males who had
transferred in after the TB. In other words, adolescent males had grown
up in typical baboon troops and then joined this one and adopted the
style of low aggression and high affiliation. The troop’s social culture
was being transmitted.
How? Adolescents who joined the troop were no less aggressive or
displacing than those joining other troops—there wasn’t self-selection.
There was no evidence of social instruction occurring. Instead the most
likely explanation involved resident females. These were probably the
least stressed female baboons on earth, not being subject to typical male
displacement aggression. In this more relaxed state, they were more
willing to risk affiliative overtures to new individuals—in a typical

650

baboon troop it is more than two months before females first groom or
sexually solicit new transfer males; in this troop it was a matter of days
to weeks. Coupled with the lack of displacement aggression from
resident males, this caused the new-transfer males to gradually change,
assimilating into the troop culture in about six months. Thus, when
treated in a less aggressive, more affiliative manner, adolescent baboons
start doing the same.
In 1965 a rising star of primatology, Irven DeVore of Harvard,
published the first overview of the subject.49 Discussing his own
specialty, savanna baboons, he wrote that they “have acquired an
aggressive temperament as a defense against predators, and
aggressiveness cannot be turned on and off like a faucet. It is an integral
part of the monkeys’ personalities, so deeply rooted that it makes them
potential aggressors in every situation.” Thus savanna baboons became,
literally, textbook examples of an aggressive, stratified, male-dominated
primate. Yet as we see here, this picture is not universal or inevitable.
Humans have formed both small nomadic bands and megastates and
have demonstrated a flexibility whereby uprooted descendants of the
former function in the latter. Human mating patterns are atypically
flexible, and our societies feature monogamy, polygyny, or polyandry.
We have fashioned religions where certain types of violence earn you
paradise and others where the same violence consigns you to hell.
Basically, if baboons unexpectedly show this much social plasticity, so
can we. Anyone who says that our worst behaviors are inevitable knows
too little about primates, including us.

One Person
Somewhere between neurons, hormones, and genes on one hand and
culture, ecological influences, and evolution on the other, sits the
individual. And with more than seven billion of us, it’s easy to feel that
no single individual can make much of a difference.
But we know that’s not true. There’s the obligatory list of those who
changed everything—Mandela, Gandhi, MLK, Rosa Parks, Lincoln,
Aung San Suu Kyi. Yes, they often had scads of advisers. But they were
the catalysts, the ones who paid with their freedom or their lives. And
there are whistle-blowers who took great risks to trigger change—Daniel
Ellsberg, Karen Silkwood, W. Mark Felt (Watergate’s Deep Throat),
651

Samuel Provance (the U.S. soldier who revealed the abuses at Abu
Ghraib Prison), Edward Snowden.*
But there are also lesser-known people, acting alone or in small
numbers, with extraordinary impact. Take Mohamed Bouazizi, a twentysix-year-old fruit seller in Tunisia, then in its twenty-third year of corrupt
and repressive rule by a dictator. At the market the police hassled
Bouazizi about an imaginary permit, expecting a bribe. He refused, not
out of principle—he’d often bribed—but because he lacked the money.
He was kicked and spat upon, his fruit cart overturned. His complaint at
the government office was ignored. And within an hour of being preyed
upon by the police, on December 10, 2010, Bouazizi stood in front of
that office, doused himself with gasoline, shouted, “How do you expect
me to make a living?” and set himself on fire.
Bouazizi’s immolation and death triggered protests in Tunisia against
the leader, Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, against his ruling party, against the
police. The protests grew, and within a month the government and Ben
Ali were overthrown. Bouazizi’s act led to protests in Egypt, toppling
Hosni Mubarak’s thirty-year dictatorship. Likewise in Yemen, ending Ali
Abdullah Saleh’s thirty-four-year rule. And in Libya, leading to the
overthrow and killing of Muammar Gaddafi after forty-three years in
power. And in Syria, where protests morphed into civil war. And in
Jordan, Oman, and Kuwait, leading to the resignations of their prime
ministers. And in Algeria, Iraq, Bahrain, Morocco, and Saudi Arabia,
producing semblances of governmental reform. The Arab Spring.
Bouazizi wasn’t thinking about political reform in the Muslim world
when he lit the match; instead there was rage with nowhere to go but
inward. Make what you will of the Arab Spring’s brief hopefulness,
followed by new strongmen, violence, refugees, and the catastrophe of
Syria and ISIS. And perhaps history makes the self-immolator as much
as the self-immolator makes history—regional discontent had long been
brewing. Regardless, Bouazizi’s singular act catalyzed millions in twenty
countries to decide that they could cause change.

652

Antigovernment protestors displaying a picture of Bouazizi

There have been other singular acts. In the mid-1980s a
commemoration was being held at the Pearl Harbor Memorial on the
anniversary of the attack. A group of survivors who had gathered were
approached by an elderly man. This was his third trip to the memorial,
trying to work up his nerve. He approached the survivors and, in halting
English, apologized.50
The man, Zenji Abe, was a fighter pilot in the 1937 Japanese
invasion of China and throughout the Pacific during World War II—
including helping to lead the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Little in his earlier life predicted Abe’s apologizing as an old man.
His inculcation into war started early, when he joined a military academy
as a seventh grader. His experience of war was detached—he never
killed an American soldier at close quarters. The Pearl Harbor attack felt
like a training exercise. His sense of responsibility could readily have
been blunted, as the bomb he dropped hadn’t detonated. And his country
had been defeated.
Some things favored Abe’s gesture. He had been captured and spent
a year as a POW, treated decently by Americans. And he felt shame
about the attack—pilots had been told that war against America had been

653

declared that morning, that American defenses would be ready. He soon
learned that instead it was a sneak attack.
Some larger factors favored his gesture as well. Japanese/American
relations had transformed. And Americans were not traditional enemies.
The racial, cultural, and geographic distance might have facilitated
pseudospeciation of Americans, but it was nouveau pseudospeciation,
contrasting with centuries of hatred of a nearby enemy—Abe never went
to China to apologize for the Rape of Nanking. As we know, Thems
come in different categories.
So these likelihoods and unlikelihoods converged, and Abe stood
there, along with nine other pilots who had flown that day, apologizing.
Some survivors refused the overture. Most accepted it. Abe and other
pilots made subsequent trips to Pearl Harbor and had multiday meetings
with American survivors; reconciliative handshakes were broadcast on
the Today show for the fiftieth anniversary. Survivors generally
considered the pilots to have just been following orders and found their
current actions brave and admirable. Abe became close with one
survivor, Richard Fiske, a docent at the memorial. Fiske had been on one
of the ships during the attack, lost many friends among the 2,390
Americans killed, fought at Iwo Jima, described himself as so hating the
Japanese that he developed a bleeding ulcer. For reasons he never fully
understood, Fiske was the first to accept Abe’s gesture. Other Japanese
and Americans became close as well, visiting the homes and, eventually,
the grave sites of their ex-enemies.

654

Left: Zenji Abe, December 6th, 1941; right: Abe and Richard Fiske, December
6th, 1991

The process was rich in symbols, starting with an apology that, as
we’ve seen, changes nothing and everything. Abe gave Fiske money so
that, for the rest of his life, Fiske placed flowers monthly at the
memorial. Fiske, a bugler, took to playing not only taps at the memorial,
but the Japanese equivalent as well. Some semblance of Us-ness had
emerged that included everyone there that infamous day.
Perhaps most important, Abe’s singular act isn’t singular. There are
now travel agencies specializing in serving American Vietnam War vets
returning to Vietnam for reconciliation ceremonies with ex–Viet Cong.
Veterans have spearheaded organizations such as Friends of Danang,
doing service projects in Vietnam, building schools, clinics, and literal
bridges.51
This picture segues into another extraordinary act. Arguably the
single most shocking event of the Vietnam War, an atrocity that finally
shook America’s self-perception as a force of good, was the My Lai
Massacre.
On March 16, 1968, a company of American soldiers, under the
command of Lieutenant William Calley Jr., attacked the unarmed
civilians of the village of My Lai.52 The company had been in Vietnam
all of three months and had had no direct enemy contact. They had,

655

however, suffered twenty-eight deaths or injuries due to booby traps and
mines, reducing the company’s number to around one hundred. The
common interpretation, one that we readily recognize by now, is that
they had a fierce, vengeful desire to connect faces to this faceless enemy.
The official rationale was that the village harbored Viet Cong fighters
and civilian sympathizers; there is minimal evidence to support this.
Some of the participants reported being instructed to kill only Viet Cong
fighters; others that they should kill everyone, burn houses, kill
livestock, and destroy wells.
Regardless of these conflicting reports, the rest, as they say, is
agonizing history. Between 350 and 500 unarmed civilians, including
infants and elderly people, were killed. Bodies were mutilated and
dumped down wells, huts and fields set ablaze, numerous women gangraped before being killed. Calley was described to have personally shot
children under their mothers who had died sheltering them. The
Americans encountered no enemy fire, found no military-aged men. It
was destruction of biblical proportions, or Roman proportions, or
Crusader, or Viking, or . . . This destruction was photographed. The
horror is worsened because My Lai was not a solitary atrocity, and the
government labored to conceal events and slapped Calley on the wrist,
sentencing him to three years of house arrest.
There was by no means universal participation by Americans
(ultimately twenty-six soldiers were criminally charged, with Calley the
only one convicted; “just following orders” was the order of the day).*53
Individual thresholds varied. One soldier killed a mother and child and
then refused to do more. Another helped herd civilians together but
refused to fire. Some refused orders outright, even in the face of threats
of court-martial or being shot. One, PFC Michael Bernhardt, refused and
threatened to report events to superiors; officers subsequently placed him
on more dangerous patrols, perhaps hoping he’d be killed.

656

Iconic photos of the nightmare. Left: civilians seconds before being killed; the
woman in the back holding her child had just been raped. Right: dead villagers

And three men halted the killings. Predictably, they were outsiders.
The catalyst was Warrant Officer Hugh Thompson Jr., age twenty-five,
who was flying a helicopter, along with two crew members, Glenn
Andreotta and Lawrence Colburn. Perhaps pertinent to what occurred
was the fact that Thompson descended from Native American survivors
of the Trail of Tears death march; his religious parents raised him, in the
1950s in rural Georgia, to oppose segregation. Colburn and Andreotta
were observant Catholics.
Thompson and his crew had flown over the village, intending to aid
the infantry fighting Viet Cong. Instead of evidence of a battle, they saw
masses of dead civilians. Thompson initially thought that the village was
under attack, with Americans protecting villagers, but couldn’t figure out
where the attack was coming from. He landed the copter amid the chaos
and saw one soldier, Sergeant David Mitchell, firing into a mass of
injured, wailing civilians in a ditch and another, Captain Ernest Medina,
shoot a woman point-blank; Thompson realized who was doing the
attacking. He confronted Calley, who was higher ranking than him and
told him to mind his damn business.
Thompson saw a group of women, children, and elderly men
huddling by a bunker with American soldiers approaching them,
preparing to attack. Discussing what happened next, more than twenty
years later, he described his feelings about those soldiers: “It’s—they
were the enemy at that time, I guess. They were damn sure the enemy to
the people on the ground.” He did something of dizzying strength and
657

bravery, something that proves every word in this book about how
Us/Them categorizations can change in an instant. Hugh Thompson
landed his helicopter between the villagers and the soldiers, trained his
machine guns on his fellow Americans, and ordered his crew to mow
them down if they attempted to further harm the villagers.*,*

Left: Glenn Andreotta; Right, right to left: Hugh Thompson, Lawrence Colburn,
and Do Hoa, who they rescued from the ditch as a child, My Lai village, 1998

Thus we have one person impulsively changing history in twenty
countries, another who overcame decades of hatred to catalyze
reconciliation, others who overcame every reflex of their training to do
the right thing. Time for one last singular person, one who inspires me
enormously.
The person was the Anglican cleric John Newton, born in 1725.54
Well, that doesn’t sound too exciting. He’s best known for composing the
hymn “Amazing Grace.” Oh, cool; that, along with Leonard Cohen’s
“Hallelujah,” always move me. Newton also was an abolitionist, a
mentor to William Wilberforce in his parliamentary battle to outlaw
slavery in the British Empire. Okay, getting better. Now get this—as a
young man, Newton had captained a slave ship. Bingo, that’s the setup—
a man overseeing and profiting from slavery, a flash of religious and
moral insight, dramatic recategorization of Us and Them, dramatic
expansion of his humanity, dramatic commitment to make amends for

658

the savagery he had done. You can practically see chapter 5’s neural
plasticity on fire in Newton’s brain.
Nothing resembling this occurred.
Newton, the son of a ship captain, goes to sea with his father at age
eleven. At eighteen he is pressed into service in the navy, tries to desert,
and is flogged. Newton manages to escape and works on a West African
slave ship. Get ready for him to see the similarity between the captivity
of these people and his own experience, to have a revelation.
No such thing occurs.
He works on the slave ship and is apparently so detested by everyone
that they dump him in what is now Sierra Leone with a slaver who gives
him to his wife as a slave. He’s rescued; the ship he is on, returning to
England, is caught in a horrific storm and starts to sink. Newton calls out
to God, the ship doesn’t sink, and he has a spiritual conversion to
evangelical Christianity. He signs up to work on another slave ship. Get
ready now—he’s found God, has just been a slave himself, and is poised
to suddenly recognize the horror that was the slave trade.
Nope.
He professes some sympathy for slaves, grows deeper into his
evangelical conversion. He eventually becomes captain of a slave ship
and works another six years before stopping. At last he’s seen his actions
for what they are.
Not that either.
It’s because his health was declining from those tough voyages. He
works as a tax collector, studies theology, applies to become an Anglican
priest. And he invests his money in slave-trading ventures. In the
parlance of my native Brooklyn, from when it was not yet trendy, can
you believe this fuggin’ guy?
He becomes a popular preacher, known for his sermons and pastoral
concern; he composes hymns, speaks out for the poor and downtrodden.
Presumably, somewhere along the way he stops investing in slavery;
maybe because of his conscience, maybe because better investments
come along. Still, not a word about slavery. Finally he publishes a
pamphlet denouncing it, thirty-four years after stopping being a slaver.
That’s a lot of time spent as a blind wretch. Newton’s is a rare voice
among abolitionists, someone who has witnessed those horrors, let alone
inflicted them. He becomes the major abolitionist voice in England and
lives to see England ban the slave trade in 1807.

659

There’s no way I could ever be Thompson, Andreotta, or Colburn.
I’m not brave; I run away to solitary African field sites instead of
confronting difficult things. Maybe, at best, I would have been one of the
soldiers standing in confusion, compelled by the inhibitions that
Grossman discusses into repeatedly checking my rifle to make sure it
was loaded, rather than firing it. I see little indication that as an old man I
will achieve the grace and moral stature of a Zenji Abe or a Richard
Fiske. Bouazizi’s act is incomprehensible to me.
But Newton, Newton is different; Newton is familiar. He takes
convenient comfort from the Bible’s embrace of slavery, spends decades
resisting the possibility of his personal morality moving past its
conventions. He shows great empathy but applies it selectively. He
expands his circle of who counts as an Us, but only so far. We saw how
the person who emerges from the crowd to run into the burning building
typically acts before thinking, displaying an ingrained automaticity of
doing the harder, better thing. There’s no automaticity with Newton. We
can practically see his dlPFC laboring with all that rationalizing
—“There’s nothing I can do,” “It’s too big for one person to challenge,”
“Better to be concerned about the needy who are close to home,” “I can
use the profits from the investments for good works,” “Those people
really are so fundamentally different,” “I’m tired.” Yes, journeys begin
with a single step, but with Newton it’s ten steps forward, nine selfserving ones back. Thompson’s moment of moral perfection feels as
unattainable to me as aspiring to be a gazelle or a waterfall or an
incandescent sunset. But there’s hope for us, with our foibles and
inconsistencies and frailties, as we watch Newton slowly lurch his way
toward being a moral titan.

660

661

1788 illustration created by abolitionists of the number of slaves (487) a British
ship could legally hold during a trans-Atlantic voyage. In actuality, ships
transported far more people than that.

Finally—the Potential for Collective Power
There is an anecdote from the Peninsular War of 1807–14, told by
Major General George Bell, then an ensign: There was a bridge
separating the opposing British and French, with a sentry posted by each
side to sound an alarm should the enemy rush across the bridge.55 A
British officer was making rounds and found the British sentry there in
an unlikely situation—carrying British and French muskets, one on each
shoulder, seemingly guarding the bridge for the two opposing armies,
with no French sentry in sight. His explanation? His French counterpart
had snuck off to buy some liquor for them to share and, naturally, he was
watching the other guy’s gun.
Fraternizing between enemy soldiers is remarkably frequent in war.
It’s most common when they’re the same race and major religion and
when they are enlisted men rather than officers. It’s also more common
when individual enemies, rather than groups, encounter each other, when
it’s the same person day after day (e.g., guarding the bridge opposite
you), when someone could have shot you but didn’t. Fraternizing rarely
involves discussions about life, death, and geopolitics; instead it’s things
like bartering food (since the other side’s rations can’t be as bad as
yours), cigarettes, or alcohol or complaining about the miserable
weather, the miserable officers.56

662

In the Spanish Civil War, Republican and Fascist troops regularly
met at night to drink, barter, and exchange newspapers, everyone on the
lookout for officers. In the Crimean War there was regular bartering
across enemy lines of Russian vodka for French baguettes. One British
soldier in the Peninsular War described how in the evenings, British and
French troops played cards around campfires. And in the American Civil
War, Yankee and Rebel soldiers would fraternize, barter, trade
newspapers, and, with piercing poignancy, hold joint baptismal services
the evening before a battle that would clearly be a bloodbath.
Thus enemy soldiers have frequently found common ground. A little
over a hundred years ago, two such events occurred on a stunning scale.
It must be admitted that some good came of World War I—thanks to
the subsequent collapse of three empires, people in the Baltic, the
Balkans, and Eastern Europe gained independence. But from anyone
else’s perspective, it was a pointless slaughter of fifteen million people.
The war to end all wars, leading to the ruinous peace to end all peace,
turned out to be just another of centuries of examples of Europe
devouring its young with meaningless conflict. But amid the quagmire of
World War I came two examples of hope that, for want of a better word,
seem almost miraculous.

German and British soldiers posing together

First is the Christmas Truce of 1914, when officers up and down the
trenches tentatively shouted, “No shoot,” in another language and met
663

opposing officers in no-man’s-land. The truce began as an agreement to
halt hostilities during Christmas dinner and for retrieval of the dead.
Things spread from there. As extensively documented, soldiers on
both sides loaned each other shovels for digging graves. And then helped
out. And then held joint burial services. Which led to exchanges of food,
drink, and tobacco. Eventually, unarmed soldiers swarmed into noman’s-land, prayed and caroled together, shared dinner, exchanged gifts.
Enemy combatants took group portraits; buttons and helmets were
exchanged as souvenirs; plans were made to meet when the war was
over. Most famously, soccer matches were held with improvised balls,
with scores rarely kept.57
One historian records a chilling anecdote concerning a German
soldier writing home about the truce, mentioning that not everyone
participated—there was one soldier who condemned the others as
traitors, an obscure corporal named . . . Hitler. But for most of the five
hundred miles of trenches, the truce held through Christmas, and often
even New Year’s. It took officers’ threats of court-martial to get
everyone back to fighting, soldiers wishing their counterparts a safe war.
Stunning, moving, heartbreaking. And with only sporadic exceptions, it
never happened again, as even brief Christmas truces to retrieve the dead
led to court-martials.
Why did the 1914 truce work? The unique static nature of trench
warfare meant that soldiers faced each other day after day. This
prompted often-friendly taunting across the lines in the period preceding
Christmas, establishing a vague sense of connection. Moreover, the
repeated interactions produced a “shadow of the future”—betray the
truce, and expect no-holds-barred revenge.
The success was also aided by everyone sharing the same JudeoChristian tradition and Western European culture; many knew the others’
language, had visited the others’ country. They were of the same race,
and pejoratively calling the enemy “Fritz” completely differs from the
pseudospeciation of the Vietnam War’s “gooks,” “slants,” and “dinks.”
Additional factors explain why the truce mostly involved British and
German troops. While the French fought passionately on their own soil,
Brits had no particular animosity toward Germans and typically
perceived themselves as fighting to save les derrières of the French, their
frequent historical enemy. Ironically, during the truce British soldiers
would tell Germans that they both should be fighting the French.

664

Meanwhile, by chance, most of the German soldiers were Saxons, who
expressed a cousinly affinity for British Anglo-Saxons, suggesting that
they should both be fighting the Prussians, the resented dominating
group in Germany.
And perhaps most important, the truce was aided by top-down
approval. Officers typically negotiated; figures such as the pope called
for a truce; it was a holiday that stood for peace and good will toward all
men.
Thus we have the Christmas Truce. Remarkably, something even
more miraculous occurred during the war. In what has been termed the
Live and Let Live phenomenon, soldiers in the trenches repeatedly
evolved stable truces without exchanging a word, without a shared
religious holiday, without the sanction of officers and leaders.
How did this occur? As documented by the historian Tony Ashworth
in Trench Warfare: 1914–1918, it would begin passively. Troops on both
sides ate around the same time, and guns would go silent then—who
wants to interrupt dinner in order to kill someone or be killed? The same
would occur during awful weather, when everyone’s priority became
flooded trenches or avoiding freezing to death.58
Mutual restraint also emerged in circumstances shadowed by the
future. Wagon trains delivering food were easy artillery targets but were
left unharmed, to prevent reciprocal shelling. Similarly, latrines were
spared.
These truces emerged when soldiers chose not to do something. But
truces were also established by overt action. How? Have your best sniper
put a bullet into the wall of an abandoned house near enemy lines. Then
have him do it again and again, repeatedly hitting the same spot. What
are you communicating? “Look how good our guy is. He could have
aimed at you instead but chose not to. What are you going to do about
it?” And the other side would reciprocate with their best sniper. An
agreement to shoot over each other’s heads had been established.
The key was ritualization—shooting repeatedly at the same
inconsequential target, renewing the commitment to peace daily at the
same time.
Live and Let Live truces could withstand perturbations. Soldiers
signaled the other side that they had to shoot for real for a while—
officers were coming. The system survived violations. If some gung-ho
rookie lobbed a shell into the others’ trenches, the most common

665

convention was two shells back, often aimed at important targets. And
then the peace would resume. (Ashworth describes such a violation,
where Germans unexpectedly fired a shell into British trenches. Soon a
German shouted, “We are very sorry about that; we hope no one was
hurt. It is not our fault, it is that damned Prussian artillery.” And back
flew two British shells.)
Live and Let Live truces emerged repeatedly. And repeatedly brass in
the rear would intervene, rotating troops, threatening court-martials,
ordering savage raids requiring hand-to-hand combat that would shatter
any sense of shared interests between enemies.
We see the evolution—initial low-cost overtures with immediate
benefits, such as not shooting during dinner, transitioning through
gradations of increasingly elaborate restraint and signaling. And we
recognize the modified Tit for Tat in dealing with truce violations, with
its propensity toward cooperation, punishment for violations,
mechanisms for forgiveness, and clear rules.
So, hooray, just like social bacteria, we can evolve cooperation. But
one thing that a cooperative bacterium lacks is a psyche. Ashworth
thoughtfully explored the psychology of how Live and Let Live
participants began to view the enemy.
He described a sequence of steps. First, once any mutual restraint
emerged, the enemy had established that they were rational, with
incentives to hold fire. This prompted a sense of responsibility in dealing
with them; this was initially purely self-serving—don’t violate an
agreement because they’ll violate back. With time, the responsibility
developed a moral tinge, tapping into most people’s resistance to
betraying someone who deals reliably with them. The specific
motivations for truces generated insights—“Hey, they don’t want dinner
disturbed any more than we do; they don’t want to fight in this rain
either; they also deal with officers who screw up everything.” There’d be
a creeping sense of camaraderie.
This produced something striking. The war machines in combatant
countries spewed the usual pseudospeciating propaganda. But in
studying soldiers’ diaries and letters, Ashworth observed minimal
hostility toward the enemy expressed by trench soldiers; the further from
the front, the more hostility. In the words of one frontline soldier, quoted
by Ashworth, “At home one abuses the enemy, and draws insulting
caricatures. How tired I am of grotesque Kaisers. Out here, one can

666

respect a brave, skillful, and resourceful enemy. They have people they
love at home, they too have to endure mud, rain and steel.”
Us and Them would be in flux. If someone is shooting at you or your
band of brothers, they are certainly a Them. But otherwise Them was
more likely to be the rats and lice, the mold in the food, the cold. As well
as any comfortable officer at headquarters who would be—in the words
of another trench soldier—“[an] abstract tactician who from far away
disposes of us.”

American and German propaganda posters

These truces could not persist; the final phases of the war obliterated
them, as the British High Command adopted a nightmarish strategy of
war by attrition.
In thinking of the Christmas Truce and the Live and Let Live system,
I always have the same fantasy, a very different one from the fantasy that
began this book. What would have happened if there had been two
additional inventions during World War I? The first is modern mass
communications—texting, Twitter, Facebook. The second is a mind-set
that emerged only among World War I’s shattered survivors—the
cynicism of modernity. Men up and down hundreds of miles of trenches
repeatedly reinvented Live and Let Live, unaware that they were not
alone. Imagine texts bouncing along and across the trenches, a million
soldiers at death’s door saying, “This is bullshit. None of us here want to
fight anymore, and we’ve figured out a way to stop.” They could have

667

ended it, tossed down their guns, could have ignored or ridiculed or
killed any objecting officer spouting obscenities about God and country,
could have gone home to kiss their loved ones and then face the real
enemy, the bloated aristocracy who would sacrifice them for their own
power.

—
It is easy to have this fantasy about the Great War, a distant museum
piece festooned with twirly mustaches and silly plumed officers’
helmets. It behooves us to step back from the grainy black-and-white
photos and to consider a hugely difficult thought experiment. Our
contemporary adversaries kidnap girls and sell them into slavery, commit
atrocities and, instead of concealing them, display the evidence online.
When I read the news of the things they’ve done, I hate them
passionately. It’s impossible to imagine kicking back, having a group
sing-along of “I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus” and exchanging
Christmas tchotchkes with Al-Qaeda grunts.
Yet time does interesting things. The hatred between Americans and
Japanese during World War II was boundless. American recruiting
posters advertised “Jap Hunting Licenses”; one veteran of the Pacific
theater described a common event, writing in the Atlantic in 1946:
[American soldiers] “boiled the flesh off enemy skulls to make table
ornaments for sweethearts, or carved their bones into letter openers.”59
And there’s the bestial treatment of American POWs by the Japanese. If
Richard Fiske had wound up a POW, Zenji Abe might have helped
march him to death; if the former had killed the latter in battle, he might
have made a souvenir of his skull. And instead, more than fifty years
later, one would write a letter of condolence to the other’s grandchildren
upon the death of Grandpa.

—
A key point of the previous chapter was that those in the future will look
back on us and be appalled at what we did amid our scientific ignorance.
A key challenge in this chapter is to recognize how likely we are to
eventually look back at our current hatreds and find them mysterious.
Daniel Dennett has pondered a scenario of someone undergoing
surgery without anesthesia but with absolute knowledge that afterward
they’d receive a drug that would erase all memory of the event. Would

668

pain be less painful if you knew that it would be forgotten? Would the
same happen to hatred, if you knew that with time it would fade and the
similarities between Us and Them would outweigh the differences? And
that a hundred years ago, in a place that was hell on earth, those with the
most temptation to hate often didn’t even need the passage of time for
that to happen?

The philosopher George Santayana provided us with an aphorism so
wise that it has suffered the fate of becoming a cliché—“Those who
cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” In the context of
669

this final chapter, we must turn Santayana on his head—those who do
not remember the extraordinary truces of the World War I trenches, or
who do not learn of Thompson, Colburn, and Andreotta, or of the
reconciliative distances traveled by Abe and Fiske, Mandela and Viljoen,
Hussein and Rabin, or of the stumbling, familiar moral frailties that
Newton vanquished, or who do not recognize that science can teach us
how to make events like these more likely—those who do not remember
these are condemned to be less likely to repeat these reasons to hope.

670

Epilogue

W

e’ve covered lots of ground, and some themes have arisen
repeatedly. It’s worth reviewing them before considering two
final points.
As the single most important of them, virtually every scientific fact
presented in this book concerns the average of what’s being measured.
There is always variation, and it’s often the most interesting thing about
a fact. Not every person activates the amygdala when seeing the face of a
Them; not every yeast adheres to another one bearing the same surface
protein marker. Instead, on the average, both do. Reflecting this, I’ve just
discovered that this book contains variations on “average,” “typically,”
“usually,” “often,” “tend to,” and “generally” more than five hundred
times. And I probably should have inserted them even more as
reminders. There are individual differences and interesting exceptions
everywhere you look in science.
Now, in no particular order:
It’s great if your frontal cortex lets you avoid temptation,
allowing you to do the harder, better thing. But it’s
usually more effective if doing that better thing has
become so automatic that it isn’t hard. And it’s often
easiest to avoid temptation with distraction and
reappraisal rather than willpower.
While it’s cool that there’s so much plasticity in the
brain, it’s no surprise—it has to work that way.
Childhood adversity can scar everything from our DNA
to our cultures, and effects can be lifelong, even
multigenerational. However, more adverse consequences
can be reversed than used to be thought. But the longer
you wait to intervene, the harder it will be.
671

Brains and cultures coevolve.
Things that seem morally obvious and intuitive now
weren’t necessarily so in the past; many started with
nonconforming reasoning.
Repeatedly, biological factors (e.g., hormones) don’t so
much cause a behavior as modulate and sensitize,
lowering thresholds for environmental stimuli to cause
it.
Cognition and affect always interact. What’s interesting
is when one dominates.
Genes have different effects in different environments; a
hormone can make you nicer or crummier, depending on
your values; we haven’t evolved to be “selfish” or
“altruistic” or anything else—we’ve evolved to be
particular ways in particular settings. Context, context,
context.
Biologically, intense love and intense hate aren’t
opposites. The opposite of each is indifference.
Adolescence shows us that the most interesting part of
the brain evolved to be shaped minimally by genes and
maximally by experience; that’s how we learn—context,
context, context.
Arbitrary boundaries on continua can be helpful. But
never forget that they are arbitrary.
Often we’re more about the anticipation and pursuit of
pleasure than about the experience of it.
You can’t understand aggression without understanding
fear (and what the amygdala has to do with both).
Genes aren’t about inevitabilities; they’re about
potentials and vulnerabilities. And they don’t determine
anything on their own. Gene/environment interactions
are everywhere. Evolution is most consequential when
altering regulation of genes, rather than genes
themselves.
We implicitly divide the world into Us and Them, and
prefer the former. We are easily manipulated, even
subliminally and within seconds, as to who counts as
each.

672

We aren’t chimps, and we aren’t bonobos. We’re not a
classic pair-bonding species or a tournament species.
We’ve evolved to be somewhere in between in these and
other categories that are clear-cut in other animals. It
makes us a much more malleable and resilient species. It
also makes our social lives much more confusing and
messy, filled with imperfection and wrong turns.
The homunculus has no clothes.
While traditional nomadic hunter-gatherer life over
hundreds of thousands of years might have been a little
on the boring side, it certainly wasn’t ceaselessly
bloody. In the years since most humans abandoned a
hunter-gatherer lifestyle, we’ve obviously invented
many things. One of the most interesting and
challenging is social systems where we can be
surrounded by strangers and can act anonymously.
Saying a biological system works “well” is a value-free
assessment; it can take discipline, hard work, and
willpower to accomplish either something wondrous or
something appalling. “Doing the right thing” is always
context dependent.
Many of our best moments of morality and compassion
have roots far deeper and older than being mere
products of human civilization.
Be dubious about someone who suggests that other
types of people are like little crawly, infectious things.
When humans invented socioeconomic status, they
invented a way to subordinate like nothing that
hierarchical primates had ever seen before.
“Me” versus “us” (being prosocial within your group) is
easier than “us” versus “them” (prosociality between
groups).
It’s not great if someone believes it’s okay for people to
do some horrible, damaging act. But more of the world’s
misery arises from people who, of course, oppose that
horrible act . . . but cite some particular circumstances
that should make them exceptions. The road to hell is
paved with rationalization.

673

The certainty with which we act now might seem
ghastly not only to future generations but to our future
selves as well.
Neither the capacity for fancy, rarefied moral reasoning
nor for feeling great empathy necessarily translates into
actually doing something difficult, brave, and
compassionate.
People kill and are willing to be killed for symbolic
sacred values. Negotiations can make peace with Them;
understanding and respecting the intensity of their
sacred values can make lasting peace.
We are constantly being shaped by seemingly irrelevant
stimuli, subliminal information, and internal forces we
don’t know a thing about.
Our worst behaviors, ones we condemn and punish, are
the products of our biology. But don’t forget that the
same applies to our best behaviors.
Individuals no more exceptional than the rest of us
provide stunning examples of our finest moments as
humans.

Two Last Thoughts
If you had to boil this book down to a single phrase, it
would be “It’s complicated.” Nothing seems to cause
anything; instead everything just modulates something
else. Scientists keep saying, “We used to think X, but
now we realize that . . .” Fixing one thing often messes
up ten more, as the law of unintended consequences
reigns. On any big, important issue it seems like 51
percent of the scientific studies conclude one thing, and
49 percent conclude the opposite. And so on. Eventually
it can seem hopeless that you can actually fix something,
can make things better. But we have no choice but to try.
And if you are reading this, you are probably ideally
suited to do so. You’ve amply proven you have
intellectual tenacity. You probably also have running
water, a home, adequate calories, and low odds of
674

festering with a bad parasitic disease. You probably
don’t have to worry about Ebola virus, warlords, or
being invisible in your world. And you’ve been
educated. In other words, you’re one of the lucky
humans. So try.
Finally, you don’t have to choose between being
scientific and being compassionate.

675

Acknowledgments

The naturalist Edward O. Wilson, one of the most influential thinkers of
our time, has found himself at the center of fiery controversies related to
the evolution of human social behavior (discussed in chapter 10). An
elegant and graceful man, he has written about those disputes and those
who have most strongly opposed him—“Without a trace of irony I can
say I have been blessed with brilliant enemies. I owe them a great debt,
because they redoubled my energies and drove me in new directions.”
When it comes to this book, I count myself even luckier than Wilson,
in that I’ve had the good fortune of brilliant friends, ones who have been
enormously helpful and generous with their time in vetting the chapters
of this book. They’ve flagged my errors of omission and commission and
my under-, over-, and misinterpretations, and tactfully let me know areas
where I was twenty years out of date in my knowledge, or just plain
woefully wrong. This book has benefited enormously from their collegial
kindness, and I thank them all deeply (while taking credit for any errors
remaining). They are:
Ara Norenzayan, University of British Columbia, Canada
Carsten de Dreu, Leiden University/University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Daniel Weinberger, Johns Hopkins University
David Barash, University of Washington
David Moore, Pitzer College and Claremont Graduate University
Douglas Fry, University of Alabama at Birmingham
Gerd Kempermann, Dresden University of Technology,
Germany
James Gross, Stanford University
James Rilling, Emory University
Jeanne Tsai, Stanford University

676

John Crabbe, Oregon Health and Science University
John Jost, New York University
John Wingfield, University of California at Davis
Joshua Greene, Harvard University
Kenneth Kendler, Virginia Commonwealth University
Lawrence Steinberg, Temple University
Owen Jones, Vanderbilt University
Paul Whalen, Dartmouth College
Randy Nelson, Ohio State University
Robert Seyfarth, University of Pennsylvania
Sarah Hrdy, University of California at Davis
Stephen Manuck, University of Pittsburgh
Steven Cole, University of California at Los Angeles
Susan Fiske, Princeton University
I have also had the fortune to interact with the spectacular students at
Stanford University, and a number of them have directly contributed to
this book. This has taken the form of their being library assistants,
helping out with specific topics, or being members of a small seminar
that I taught a few times that focused on the content of this book.
They’ve been wonderful to work with and learn from. They are:
Adam Widman, Alexander Morgan, Ali Maggioncalda, Alice
Spurgin, Allison Waters, Anna Chan, Arielle Lasky, Ben Wyler, Bethany
Michel, Bilal Mahmood, Carl Cummings, Catherine Le, Christopher
Schulze, Davie Yoon, Dawn Maxey, Dylan Alegria, Elena Bridgers,
Elizabeth Levey, Ellen Edenberg, Ellora Karmarkar, Erik Lehnert, Ethan
Lipka, Felicity Grisham, Gabe Ben-Dor, Gene Lowry, George Capps,
Helen McLendon, Helen Shen, Jeffrey Woods, Jonathan Lu, Kaitlin
Greene, Katharine Tomalty, Katrina Hui, Kian Eftekhari, Kirsten
Hornbeak, Lara Rangel, Lauren Finzer, Lindsay Louie, Lisa Diver,
Maisy Samuelson, Morgan Freret, Nick Hollon, Patrick Wong, Pilar
Abascal, Robert Schafer, Sam Bremmer, Sandy Kory, Scott Huckaby,
Sean Bruich, Sonia Singh, Stacie Nishimoto, Tom McFadden, Vineet
Singhal, Will Peterson, Wyatt Hong, Yun Chu.
I also thank Lisa Pereira of Stanford University, Christopher
Richards of Penguin Books, Thea Traff of the New Yorker, and Ethan
Lipka of the Nueva School for helping tremendously in getting this book
into shape during the final stretch. Thanks to Kevin Berger for thinking
677

of the title to chapter 6. Warm, heartfelt thanks to Katinka Matson and
Steven Barclay, my publishing and speaking agents, sounding boards,
and friends—you both know how long and difficult the gestation of this
book was, and thank you for sticking with me throughout. I thank Scott
Moyers of Penguin with huge gratitude—you have been a dream of an
editor. And I apologize to anyone whose support I have missed noting
here, as I rush frantically to meet the deadline for this book. . . .
Finally, above all else, I thank and madly love those who have given
the most support, and who have withstood the most interruptions of
board games, while I worked on the book—my family.

678

Appendix 1

Neuroscience 101

C

onsider two different scenarios. First:
Think back to when you hit puberty. You’d been primed by a
parent or teacher about what to expect. You woke up with a funny
feeling, found your jammies alarmingly soiled. You excitedly woke up
your parents, who got tearful; they took embarrassing pictures, a sheep
was slaughtered in your honor, and you were carried through town in a
sedan chair while neighbors chanted in an ancient language. This was a
big deal.
But be honest—would your life be so different if those endocrine
changes had instead occurred twenty-four hours later?
Second:
Emerging from a store, you are unexpectedly chased by a lion. As
part of the stress response, your brain increases your heart rate and blood
pressure, dilates blood vessels in your leg muscles, which are now
frantically working, and sharpens sensory processing to produce a tunnel
vision of concentration.
How would things have turned out if your brain took twenty-four
hours to send those commands? You’d be dead meat.
That’s what makes the brain special. Hit puberty tomorrow instead of
today? So what. Make some antibodies tonight instead of now? Rarely
fatal. Same for delaying depositing calcium in your bones. But much of
what the nervous system is about is encapsulated in the framing of
chapter 2—what happened one second before? Incredible speed.

679

The nervous system is about contrasts, unambiguous extremes
between having something and having nothing to say, maximizing
signal-to-noise ratios. And this is demanding and expensive.*

ONE NEURON AT A TIME

T

he basic cell type of the nervous system, what we typically call a
“brain cell,” is the neuron. The hundred billion or so in our brains
communicate with one another, forming complex circuits. In addition,
there are glia cells, which do a lot of gofering—providing structural
support and insulation for neurons, storing energy for them, helping to
mop up neuronal damage.
Naturally, this neuron/glia comparison is all wrong. There are about
ten glial cells for every neuron, coming in various subtypes. They greatly
influence how neurons speak to one another, and also form glial
networks that communicate completely differently from neurons. So glia
are important. Nonetheless, to make this primer more manageable, I’m
going to be very neuron-centric.
Part of what makes the nervous system so
distinctive is how distinctive neurons are as cells.
Cells are usually small, self-contained entities—
consider little round red blood cells:
Neurons, in contrast, are highly asymmetrical,
elongated beasts, typically with processes sticking
out all over the place:
These processes can be elaborated to nutty
extents. Consider this single neuron, drawn in the
early twentieth century by one of the gods in the
field, Santiago Ramón y Cajal:
It’s like the branches of a manic tree, explaining the jargon that this is
a highly “arborized” neuron.

680

Many neurons are also outlandishly large. A zillion red blood cells fit
on the proverbial period at the end of this sentence. In contrast, there are
single neurons in the spinal cord that send out projection cables many
feet long. There are spinal cord neurons in blue whales that are half the
length of a basketball court.

Now for the subparts of a neuron, the key to understanding its
function.
What neurons do is talk to one another, cause one another to get
excited. At one end of a neuron are its metaphorical ears, specialized
processes that receive information from another neuron. At the other end
are the processes that are the mouth, that communicate with the next
neuron in line.
The ears, the inputs, are called dendrites. The output begins with a
single long cable called an axon, which then ramifies into axonal endings
—these axon terminals are the mouths (ignore the myelin sheath for the

681

moment). Those axon terminals connect to the dendrites of the next
neuron in line. Thus a neuron’s dendritic ears are informed that the
neuron behind it is excited. The flow of information then sweeps from
the dendrites to the cell body to the axon to the axon terminals, and is
then passed to the next neuron.

Let’s translate “flow of information” into quasi chemistry. What
actually goes from the dendrites to the axon terminals? A wave of
electrical excitation. Inside the neuron are various positively and
negatively charged ions. Just outside the neuron’s membrane are other
positively and negatively charged ions. When a neuron has gotten an
exciting signal from the previous neuron at the end of one single
dendritic fiber, channels in the membrane in that dendrite open, allowing
various ions to flow in and others to flow out, and the net result is that
the inside of the end of that dendrite becomes more positively charged.
The charge spreads toward the axon terminal, where it is passed to the
next neuron. That’s it for the chemistry.
Two gigantically important details:
The resting potential. So when a neuron has gotten a hugely excitatory
message from the previous neuron in line, its insides can become
positively charged relative to the extracellular space around it. Back to
682

our earlier metaphor—the neuron now has something to say and it is
screaming its head off. What might things look like then when the
neuron has nothing to say, has not been stimulated? Maybe a state of
equilibrium, where the inside and outside have equal, neutral charges?*
No, never! That’s good enough for some cell in your spleen or your big
toe. But back to that critical issue, that neurons are all about contrasts.
When a neuron has nothing to say, that isn’t some passive state of things
just trickling down to zero. Instead it’s an active process. An active,
intentional, forceful, muscular, sweaty process. Instead of the “I have
nothing to say” state being one of charge neutrality, the inside of the
neuron is negatively charged relative to the outside.
You couldn’t ask for a more dramatic contrast: I have nothing to say
= inside of the neuron is negatively charged. I have something to say =
inside is positive. No neuron ever confuses the two. The internally
negative state is called the “resting potential.” The excited state is called
the “action potential.” And why is generating this dramatic resting
potential such an active process? Because neurons have to work like
crazy, using various pumps in their membranes, to push some positively
charged ions out and to keep some negatively charged ones in, all in
order to generate that negative internal resting state. Along comes an
excitatory signal; the pumps stop working, channels open, and ions rush
this way and that to generate the excitatory positive internal charge. And
when that wave of excitation has passed, the channels close and the
pumps go back into action, regenerating that negative resting potential.
Remarkably, neurons spend nearly half their energy on the pumps that
generate the resting potential. It doesn’t come cheap to generate dramatic
contrasts between having nothing to say and having some exciting news.
Now that we understand resting potentials and action potentials, on
to the other gigantically important detail:
That’s not what action potentials really are. What I’ve just outlined is that a
single dendritic fibril receives an excitatory signal from the previous
neuron (i.e., the previous neuron has had an action potential); this
generates an action potential in that dendrite, which propagates toward
the cell body, over it, on to the axon, to the axon terminals, and signals
the next neuron in line. Not true. Instead:
So the neuron is sitting there with nothing to say, which is to say that
it’s displaying a resting potential; all of its insides are negatively
charged. Along comes an excitatory signal at that one dendritic fibril,

683

emanating from the previous neuron in line. As a result, channels open
and ions flow in and out of that one dendrite. But only a little bit. Not
enough to make the entire inside of the neuron positively charged,
simply a little less negatively charged just inside that dendrite (just to
attach some numbers here that don’t matter in the slightest, the resting
potential charge shifts from around –70 millivolts to around –60
millivolts). Then the channels close. That little hiccup of becoming less
negative* spreads farther up the shaft of that dendrite. The pumps have
started working, pumping ions back to where they were in the first place.
So at the end of that dendritic fibril, the charge went from –70 to –60
mV. But a little bit up the shaft of that fibril, things then go from –70 to –
65 mV. Farther up the shaft, –70 to –69. In other words, that excitatory
signal dissipates. You’ve taken a nice smooth calm lake, in its resting
state, and tossed a little pebble in. It causes a bit of a ripple right there,
which spreads outward, getting smaller in its magnitude, until it
dissipates not far from where the pebble hit. And miles away, at the
lake’s axonal end, that ripple of excitation has had no effect whatsoever.
In other words, if a single dendritic fibril is excited, that’s not enough
to pass on the excitation down to the axonal end and on to the next
neuron. How does a message ever get passed on? Back to that wonderful
drawing of a neuron by Cajal here.
That arborized array of bifurcating dendritic branches ends in lots of
ends of fibrils (time to introduce the term commonly used: “ends in lots
of dendritic spines”). And in order to get sufficient excitation to sweep
from the dendritic end of the neuron to the axonal end, you have to have
summation—the same spine must be stimulated repeatedly and/or, more
commonly, a bunch of the spinal neurons must be stimulated at once.
You can’t get a wave, rather than just a ripple, unless you throw in a lot
of pebbles.
At the base of the axon, where it emerges from the cell body, is a
specialized part (called the axon “hillock”). If all those summated
dendritic inputs produce enough of a ripple to move the resting potential
around the hillock from –70 mV to around –40 mV, a threshold is
passed. And once that happens, all hell breaks loose. A different class of
channels opens in the membrane of the hillock, which allows a massive
migration of ions, producing, finally, a positive charge (about 30 mV). In
other words, an action potential. Which then opens up those same types
of channels in the next smidgen of axonal membrane, regenerating the

684

action potential there, and then the next, and the next, all the way down
to the axon terminals.
From an informational standpoint, a neuron has two different types
of signaling systems. From the dendritic spines to the starts of the axon
hillock, it’s an analogue signal, with gradations of signals that dissipate
over space and time. And from the axon hillock to the axon terminals,
it’s a digital system with all-or-none signaling that regenerates down the
length of the axon.
Let’s throw in some imaginary numbers. Suppose an average neuron
has about one hundred dendritic spines and about one hundred axon
terminals. What are the implications of this in the context of the
analogue/digital feature of neurons?
Sometimes nothing interesting. Consider neuron A, which, as just
introduced, has one hundred axon terminals. Each one of those connects
to one of the dendritic spines of the next neuron in line, neuron B.
Neuron A has an action potential, which propagates down to all of its
one hundred axon terminals, which excites all one hundred dendritic
spines in neuron B. The threshold at the axon hillock of neuron B
requires fifty of the dendrites to get excited around the same time in
order to generate an action potential; thus, with all one hundred of the
dendrites firing, neuron B is guaranteed to get an action potential.
Now, instead, neuron A projects half of its axon terminals to neuron
B and half to neuron C. It has an action potential; does that guarantee
one in neurons B and C? Yes. Each of those neurons’ axon hillocks has
that threshold of needing a signal from fifty dendritic pebbles at once in
order to have an action potential.
Now, instead, neuron A evenly distributes its axon terminals among
ten different target neurons, neurons B through K. Is its action potential
going to produce action potentials in the target neurons? No way—
continuing our example, the ten dendritic spines’ worth of pebbles in
each target neuron is way below the threshold of fifty pebbles.
So what will ever cause an action potential in, say, neuron K, which
has only ten of its dendritic spines getting excitatory signals from neuron
A? Well, what’s going on with its other ninety dendritic spines? They’re
getting inputs from other neurons—nine of them, with ten inputs from
each. When will neuron B have an action potential? When at least half of
the neurons projecting to it have action potentials. In other words, any
given neuron integrates the inputs from all the neurons projecting to it.

685

And out of this comes a rule: the more neurons that neuron A projects to,
by definition, the more neurons it can influence; however, the more
neurons it projects to, the smaller its average influence will be at each of
those target neurons. There’s a trade-off.

This doesn’t matter in the spinal cord, where one neuron typically
sends all its projections to the next one in line. But in the brain one
neuron will disperse its projections to scads of other ones and receive
inputs from scads of other ones, with each neuron’s axon hillock
determining whether the threshold is reached and an action potential

686

generated. The brain is wired in networks of divergent and convergent
signaling.

—
Now to put in a flabbergasting real number—your average neuron has
about ten thousand dendritic spines and about the same number of axon
terminals. Factor in a hundred billion neurons, and you see why brains,
rather than kidneys, write poetry.
Just for completeness, here are a couple of final facts. Neurons have
some additional tricks, at the end of an action potential, to enhance the
contrast between nothing to say/something to say even more, two means
of ending the action potential really fast and dramatically: something
called delayed rectification and another thing called the hyperpolarized
refractory period. Another minor detail from that diagram above—a type
of glial cell wraps around an axon, forming a layer of insulation called a
myelin sheath; this “myelination” causes the action potential to shoot
down the axon faster.
And one final detail of great future importance: the threshold of the
axon hillock can change over time, thus changing the neuron’s
excitability. What things change thresholds? Hormones, nutritional state,
experience, and other factors filling this book’s pages.
We’ve now made it from one end of a neuron to the other. How
exactly does a neuron with an action potential communicate its excitation
to the next neuron in line?

TWO NEURONS AT A TIME: SYNAPTIC
COMMUNICATION

S

o an action potential has been triggered at the hillock in neuron A
and has swept down to all ten thousand axon terminals. How is this
excitation passed on to the next neuron(s)?

The Defeat of the Synctitium-ites

687

For your average nineteenth-century neuroscientist, the answer was
easy. Their explanation would be that a fetal brain is made up of huge
numbers of separate neurons that slowly grow their dendritic and axonal
processes. And eventually the axon terminals of one neuron reach and
touch the dendritic spines of the next neuron(s), and they merge, forming
a continuous membrane between the two cells. From all those separate
fetal neurons, the mature brain forms this continuous, vastly complex net
of one single superneuron, which was called a “synctitium.” Thus
excitation readily flows from one neuron to the next because they aren’t
really separate neurons.
Late in the nineteenth century an alternative view emerged, namely
that each neuron remains an independent unit, and that the axon
terminals of one neuron don’t actually touch the dendritic spines of the
next. Instead there’s a tiny gap between the two. This notion was called
the “neuron doctrine.”
The adherents of the synctitium school thought that the neuron
doctrine was asinine. “Show me the gaps between axon terminals and
dendritic spines,” they demanded of these heretics, “and tell me how
excitation jumps from one neuron to the next.”
And then in 1873 it all got solved by the Italian neuroscientist
Camillo Golgi, who invented a technique for staining brain tissue in a
novel fashion. And the aforementioned Cajal used this “Golgi stain” to
stain all the processes, all the branches and branchlets and twigs of the
dendrites and axon terminals of single neurons. Crucially, the stain didn’t
spread from one neuron to the next. There wasn’t a continuous, merged
net of a single superneuron. Individual neurons are discrete entities. The
neuron doctrine-ers vanquished the synctitium-ites.*
Hooray, case closed; there are indeed micro-microscopic gaps
between axon terminals and dendritic spines; these gaps are called
“synapses” (which weren’t directly visualized, putting the last nail in the
synctitial coffin, until the invention of electron microscopy in the 1950s).
But there’s still that problem of how excitation propagates from one
neuron to the next, leaping across the synapse.
The answer, whose pursuit dominated neuroscience in the middle
half of the twentieth century, is that the electrical excitation doesn’t leap
across the synapse. Instead it gets translated into a different type of
signal.

688

Neurotransmitters
Sitting inside each axon terminal, tethered to the membrane, are little
balloons called vesicles, filled with many copies of a chemical
messenger. Along comes the action potential that initiated miles away in
that neuron’s axon hillock. It sweeps over the terminal and triggers the
release of those chemical messengers into the synapse. Which they float
across, reaching the dendritic spine on the other side, where they excite
the neuron. These chemical messengers are called neurotransmitters.
How do neurotransmitters, released from the “presynaptic” side of
the synapse, cause excitation in the “postsynaptic” dendritic spine?
Sitting on the membrane of the spine are receptors for the
neurotransmitter. Time to introduce one of the great clichés of biology.
The neurotransmitter molecule has a distinctive shape (with each copy of
the molecule having the same). The receptor has a binding pocket of a
distinctive shape that is perfectly complementary to the shape of the
neurotransmitter. And thus the neurotransmitter—cliché time—fits into
the receptor like a key into a lock. No other molecule fits snugly into that
receptor; the neurotransmitter molecule won’t fit snugly into any other
type of receptor. Neurotransmitter binds to receptor, which triggers those
channels to open, and the currents of ionic excitation begin in the
dendritic spine.
This describes “transsynaptic” communication with
neurotransmitters. Except for one detail: what happens to the
neurotransmitter molecules after they bind to the receptors? They don’t
bind forever—remember that action potentials occur on the order of a
millisecond. Instead they float off the receptors, at which point the
neurotransmitters have to be cleaned up. This occurs in one of two ways.
First, for the ecologically minded synapse, there are “reuptake pumps” in
the membrane of the axon terminal. They take up the neurotransmitters
and recycle them, putting them back into those secretory vesicles to be
used again.* The second option is for the neurotransmitter to be
degraded in the synapse by an enzyme, with the breakdown products
flushed out to sea (i.e., the extracellular environment, and from there on
to the cerebrospinal fluid, the bloodstream, and eventually the bladder).

689

These housekeeping steps are hugely important. Suppose you want to
increase the amount of neurotransmitter signaling across a synapse. Let’s
translate that into the excitation terms of the previous section—you want
to increase excitability across the synapse, such that an action potential
in the presynaptic neuron has more of an oomph in the postsynaptic
neuron, which is to say it has an increased likelihood of causing an
action potential in that second neuron. You could increase the amount of
neurotransmitter released—the presynaptic neuron yells louder. Or you
could increase the amount of receptor on the dendritic spine—the
postsynaptic neuron is listening more acutely.
But as another possibility, you could decrease the activity of the
reuptake pump. As a result, less of the neurotransmitter is removed from
the synapse. Thus it sticks around longer and binds to the receptors
repeatedly, amplifying the signal. Or, as the conceptual equivalent, you
could decrease the activity of the degradative enzyme; less
neurotransmitter is broken down, so more sticks around longer in the
synapse, having an enhanced effect. As we saw, some of the most
interesting findings that help explain individual differences in the
behaviors that concern us in this book relate to amounts of
neurotransmitter made and released, and the amounts and functioning of
the receptors, reuptake pumps, and degradative enzymes.

690

Types of Neurotransmitters
So what is this mythic neurotransmitter molecule, released by action
potentials from the axon terminals of all of the hundred billion neurons?
Here’s where things get complicated, because there is more than one type
of neurotransmitter.
Why more than one? The same thing happens in every synapse,
which is that the neurotransmitter binds to its key-in-a-lock receptor and
triggers the opening of various channels that allow the ions to flow and
makes the inside of the spine a bit less negatively charged.
One reason is that different neurotransmitters depolarize to different
extents—in other words, some have more excitatory effects than others
—and for different durations. This allows for a lot more complexity in
information being passed from one neuron to the next.
And now to double the size of our palette, there are some
neurotransmitters that don’t depolarize, don’t increase the likelihood of
the next neuron in line having an action potential. They do the opposite
—they “hyperpolarize” the dendritic spine, opening different types of
channels that make the resting potential even more negative (e.g.,
shifting from –70 mV to –80 mV). In other words, there are such things
as inhibitory neurotransmitters. You can see how that has just made
things more complicated—a neuron with its ten thousand dendritic
spines is getting excitatory inputs of differing magnitudes from various
neurons, getting inhibitory ones from other neurons, and integrating all
of this at the axon hillock.
Thus there are lots of different classes of neurotransmitters, each
binding to a unique receptor site that is complementary to its shape. Are
there a bunch of different types of neurotransmitters in each axon
terminal, so that an action potential triggers the release of a whole
orchestration of signaling? Here is where we invoke Dale’s Principle,
named for Henry Dale, one of the grand pooh-bahs of the field, who in
the 1930s proposed a rule whose veracity forms the very core of each
neuroscientist’s sense of well-being: an action potential releases the same
type of neurotransmitter from all of the axon terminals of a neuron.
Therefore there will be a distinctive neurochemical profile to a particular
neuron—“Oh, that neuron is a neurotransmitter A–type neuron. And
what that also means is that the neurons that it talks to have
neurotransmitter A receptors on their dendritic spines.”*

691

There are dozens of neurotransmitters that have been identified.
Some of the most renowned: serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine,
acetylcholine, glutamate (the most excitatory neurotransmitter in the
brain), and GABA (the most inhibitory). It’s at this point that medical
students are tortured with all the multisyllabic details of how each
neurotransmitter is synthesized—its precursor, the intermediate forms
the precursor is converted to until finally arriving at the real thing, the
painfully long names of the various enzymes that catalyze the syntheses.
Amid that there are some pretty simple rules built around three points:
a. You do not ever want to find yourself running for your
life from a lion and, oopsies, the neurons that tell your
muscles to run fast go off-line because they’ve run out
of neurotransmitter. Neurotransmitters are therefore
made from precursors that are plentiful; often they are
simple dietary constituents. Serotonin and dopamine, for
example, are made from the dietary amino acids
tryptophan and tyrosine, respectively. Acetylcholine is
made from dietary choline and lecithin.
b. A neuron can potentially have dozens of action
potentials a second. Each involves restocking the
vesicles with more neurotransmitter, releasing them, and
mopping up afterward. Given that, you do not want your
neurotransmitters to be huge, complex, ornate
molecules, each of which requires generations of
stonemasons to construct. Instead they are all made in a
small number of steps from their precursors. They’re
cheap and easy to make. For example, it takes only two
simple synthetic steps to turn tyrosine into dopamine.
c. Finally, to complete this pattern of neurotransmitter
synthesis as cheap and easy, multiple neurotransmitters
can be generated from the same precursor. In neurons
that use dopamine as the neurotransmitter, for example,
there are two enzymes that do those two construction
steps. Meanwhile, in norepinephrine-releasing neurons
there’s an additional enzyme that converts dopamine to
norepinephrine.

692

Cheap, cheap, cheap. Which makes sense. Nothing becomes obsolete
faster than a neurotransmitter after it has done its postsynaptic thing.
Yesterday’s newspaper is useful today only for house-training puppies.

Neuropharmacology
As these neurotransmitterology insights emerged, they allowed
scientists to begin to understand how various “neuroactive” and
“psychoactive” drugs and medicines work.
Broadly, such drugs fall into two categories: those that increase
signaling across a particular type of synapse, and those that decrease it.
We already saw some of the strategies for increasing signaling: (a)
Stimulate more synthesis of the neurotransmitter (for example, by
administering the precursor or using a drug that increases the activity of
the enzymes that synthesize the neurotransmitter). As an example,
Parkinson’s disease involves a loss of dopamine in one brain region, and
a staple of treatment is to boost dopamine levels by administering the
drug L-DOPA, which is the immediate precursor of dopamine. (b)
Administer a synthetic version of the neurotransmitter, or a drug that is
structurally close enough to the real thing to fool the receptors.
Psilocybin, for example, is structurally similar to serotonin and activates
a subtype of its receptors. (c) Stimulate the postsynaptic neuron to make
more receptors. Fine in theory, but not easily done. (d) Inhibit
degradative enzymes so that more of the neurotransmitter sticks around
in the synapse. (e) Inhibit the reuptake of the neurotransmitter,
prolonging its effects in the synapse. The modern antidepressant of
choice, Prozac, does exactly that in serotonin synapses. Thus it is often
referred to as an “SSRI”—a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Meanwhile, a pharmacopeia of drugs are available to decrease
signaling across synapses, and you can see what their underlying
mechanisms are going to include—blocking the synthesis of a
neurotransmitter, blocking its release, blocking its access to its receptor,
and so on. Fun example: Acetylcholine stimulates your diaphragm to
contract. Curare, the poison used in darts by Amazonian tribes, blocks
acetylcholine receptors. You stop breathing.
A final, very relevant point—just as the threshold of the axon hillock
can change over time in response to experience, nearly every facet of the

693

nuts and bolts of neurotransmitterology can be changed by experience as
well.

MORE THAN TWO NEURONS AT A TIME

W

e have now triumphantly reached the point of thinking about
three neurons at a time. And within not too many pages, we will
have gone wild and considered even more than three. The purpose of this
section is to see how circuits of neurons work, the intermediate step
before examining what entire regions of the brain have to do with the
best and worst of our behaviors. Therefore, the examples here were
chosen merely to give a flavor of how things work at this level.

Neuromodulation
Consider the following diagram:

The axon terminal of neuron B forms a synapse with the dendritic
spine of the postsynaptic neuron (let’s call it neuron C) and releases an
excitatory neurotransmitter. The usual. Meanwhile, neuron A sends an
694

axon terminal projection on to neuron B. But not to a normal place, a
dendritic spine. Instead its axon terminal synapses onto the axon terminal
of neuron B.
What’s up with this? Neuron A releases the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA, which floats across that “axoaxonic” synapse
and binds to receptors on that side of neuron B’s axon terminal. And
such an inhibitory effect (i.e., making that –70 mV resting potential even
more negative) snuffs out any action potential hurtling down that branch
of the axon, keeps it from getting to the very end and releasing
neurotransmitter; in the jargon of the field, neuron A is having a
neuromodulatory effect on neuron B.

Sharpening a Signal over Time and Space
Now for a new type of circuitry. To accommodate this, I’m using a
simpler way of representing neurons. As diagrammed, neuron A sends
all of its axonal projections to neuron B and releases an excitatory
neurotransmitter, symbolized by the plus sign. The circle in neuron B
represents the cell body plus all the dendritic branches.

Now consider the next circuit. Neuron A stimulates neuron B, as
usual. In addition, it also stimulates neuron C. This is routine, with
neuron A splitting its axonal projections between the two target cells,
exciting both. And what does neuron C do? It sends an inhibitory
projection back onto neuron A, forming a negative feedback loop. Back
to the brain loving contrasts, energetically screaming its head off when it
has something to say, and energetically being silent otherwise. This is a
more macro level of the same. Neuron A fires off a series of action
potentials. What better way to energetically communicate that it’s all
over than to become majorly silent, thanks to the feedback loop? It’s a
means of sharpening a signal over time.* And note that neuron A can
“determine” how powerful that negative feedback signal will be by how
many of the ten thousand axon terminals it shunts toward neuron C
instead of B.

695

Such temporal sharpening of a signal can be accomplished in another
way:

Neuron A stimulates B and C. Neuron C sends an inhibitory signal
on to neuron B that will arrive sometime after B starts getting stimulated
(since the A/C/B loop is two synaptic steps, versus one for A/B). Result?
Sharpening a signal with “feed-forward inhibition.”
Now for another type of sharpening of a signal, of increasing the
signal to noise ratio. Consider this six-neuron circuit, where neuron A
stimulates B, C stimulates D, and E stimulates F:

696

So neuron C sends an excitatory projection on to neuron D. But in
addition, neuron C’s axon sends collateral inhibitory projections on to
neurons A and E.* Thus, if neuron C is stimulated, it both stimulates
neuron D and silences neurons A and E. With such “lateral inhibition,” C
screams its head off while A and E become especially silent. It’s a means
of sharpening a spatial signal (and note that the diagram is simplified, in
that I’ve omitted something obvious—neurons A and E also send
inhibitory collateral projection on to neuron C, as well as to the neurons
on the other sides of them in this imaginary network).
Lateral inhibition like this is ubiquitous in sensory systems. Shine a
tiny dot of light onto an eye. Wait, was that photoreceptor neuron A, C,
or E that just got stimulated? Thanks to lateral inhibition, it is clearer that
it was C. Ditto in tactile systems, allowing you to tell that it was this
smidgen of skin that was just touched, not a little this way or that. Or the
ears telling you it was definitely an A, not an A-sharp or A-flat.*
Thus what we’ve seen is another example of contrast enhancement in
the nervous system. What is the significance of the fact that the silent
state of a neuron is negatively charged, rather than a neutral 0 mV? It’s a
way of sharpening a signal within a neuron. Feedback, feed-forward, and
lateral inhibition? A way of sharpening a signal within a circuit.

Two Different Types of Pain

697

This next circuit encompasses some of the elements just introduced
and explains why there are, broadly, two different types of pain. I love
this circuit because it is just so elegant:

Neuron A’s dendrites sit just below the surface of the skin, and the
neuron has an action potential in response to a painful stimulus. Neuron
A then stimulates neuron B, which projects up the spinal cord, letting
you know that something painful just happened. But neuron A also
stimulates neuron C, which inhibits B. This is one of our feed-forward
inhibitory circuits. Result? Neuron B fires for a while and then is
silenced, and you perceive this as a sharp pain—you’ve been poked with
a needle.
Meanwhile, there’s neuron D, whose dendrites are in the same
general area of the skin and respond to a different type of painful
stimulus. As before, neuron D excites neuron B, and the message is sent
up to the brain. But it also sends projections to neuron C, where it
inhibits it. Result? When neuron D is activated by a pain signal, it
inhibits the ability of neuron C to inhibit neuron B. And you perceive it
as a throbbing, continuous pain, like a burn or abrasion. Importantly, this
is reinforced further by the fact that action potentials travel down the
axon of neuron D much slower than in neuron A (having to do with that
myelin that I mentioned earlier—details aren’t important). So the pain in
neuron A’s world is not only transient but also fast. Pain in the neuron D
branch not only is long-lasting but also has a slower onset.
The two classes of fibers can interact, and we often intentionally
force them to. Suppose that you have some sort of continuous, throbbing

698

pain—say, an insect bite. How can you stop the throbbing? Briefly
stimulate the fast fiber. This adds to the pain for an instant, but by
stimulating neuron C, you shut the system down for a while. And that is
precisely what we often do in such circumstances. An insect bite throbs
unbearably, we scratch hard right around it to dull the pain, and the slow,
chronic pain pathway is shut down for up to a few minutes.
The fact that pain works this way has important clinical implications.
For one thing, it has allowed scientists to design treatments for people
with severe chronic pain syndromes (for example, someone with a severe
back injury). Implanting a little electrode into the fast pain pathway and
attaching it to a stimulator on the person’s hip enables the patient to buzz
that pathway now and then to turn off the chronic pain; it works wonders
in many cases.
Thus we have a circuit that encompasses a temporal sharpening
mechanism, introduces the double negative of inhibiting inhibitors, and
is just all-around cool. And one of the biggest reasons why I love it is
that it was first proposed in 1965 by the great neurobiologists Ronald
Melzack and Patrick Wall. It was merely proposed as a theoretical model
—“No one has ever seen this sort of wiring, but we propose that it’s got
to look something like this, given how pain works.” And subsequent
work showed that’s exactly how this part of the nervous system is wired.

Which Guy Is It?
One final, completely hypothetical circuit.
Suppose we have a circuit made of two layers of neurons:

699

Neuron A projects to neurons 1, 2, and 3; neuron B projects to 2, 3,
and 4, etc. Now let’s show how hypothetical this circuit is by giving
neurons A, B, and C completely imaginary functions. Neuron A
responds to the picture of the guy on the left, B to the guy in the middle,
C to the one on the right:

700

What can neuron 1 learn? How to recognize that particular guy.
Neuron 5 is equally specialized. But what can neuron 3 learn? How
Victorian gentlemen dressed. It’s the neuron that will help you identify
the Victorian in the quartet below:

Neuron 3’s knowledge is general and comes from the overlap of the
first layer’s projections. Neurons 2 and 4 are also generalist neurons, but

701

they’re less accurate because they have only two exemplars each.
So neuron 3 is at the convergent center of this network. And the
fanciest parts of the brain are wired up in a way that resembles this fairytale circuit, writ large—at the same time, neuron 3 is a more peripheral
element in some other circuit sending projections to it (say, a circuitry
that would be drawn perpendicular to this page), neuron 1 is at the very
center of some other network in the fourth dimension, and so on. All of
these neurons are embedded within multiple networks.
What does this produce? The capacity for association, metaphor,
analogy, parable, symbol. To link two disparate things, even from
different sensory modalities. To Homerically associate the color of wine
with the color of the sea, that both “tomato” and “potato” can be
pronounced in two different ways in a song, that a bright red tongue
sticking out can remind you of music by the Stones. It’s why I associate
Stravinsky and Picasso, given that albums (remember those?) of
Stravinsky’s music always seemed to have a Picasso painting on the
cover. And it’s why a rectangular piece of cloth with a distinctive pattern
of colors on it can stand for an entire nation or people or ideology.
A final point. We differ as to the nature and spread of our associative
networks. And extremes of them can produce very interesting things at
times. For example, most of us learned early on to associate something
resembling the following with the concept of “face”:

But then someone comes along whose associate networks of
neuronal projections are broader, more idiosyncratic than everyone
else’s. And they teach the world that this can evoke faceness as well:
702

What might we call the consequence of some types of atypically
wide associative nets of neurons? Creativity.

One More Round of Scaling Up
A neuron, two neurons, a neuronal circuit. We’re ready now, as a last
step, to scale up to the level of thousands of neurons at once.
Consider the following slice of tissue viewed under a microscope:

703

It’s a homogeneous field of cells, all organized in roughly the same
way. The top left corner and bottom left corner look exactly the same.
This is a liver in cross-section; if you’ve seen one part, you’ve seen it
all. Boring.
If the brain were this homogeneous and boring, it would be an
undifferentiated mass of tissue, with neuronal cell bodies carpeted evenly
all over the place, sending out their processes every which way. Instead
there’s a huge amount of internal organization:

In other words, the cell bodies of neurons that have related functions
are clumped together in particular regions of the brain, and the axons that
they send to other parts of the brain are organized into projection cables.
What all this means, crucially, is that different parts of the brain do
different things. All the regions of the brain have names (usually
multisyllabic and derived from Greek or Latin), as do the subregions,
and the sub-subregions. Moreover, each talks to a consistent collection of
other regions (i.e., sends axons to them) and is talked to by a consistent
collection (i.e., receives axonal projections from them).
You can go crazy studying all this, as I’ve seen, tragically, in the case
of many a neuroanatomist who relishes all these details. For our purposes
there are some key points:
Each particular region contains millions of neurons.
Some familiar names at this level of analysis:
hypothalamus, cerebellum, cortex, hippocampus.

704

Some regions have very distinct and compact
subregions, and each is referred to as a “nucleus.” (This
is confusing, as the part of every cell that contains the
DNA is also called the nucleus. What can you do?)
Some probably totally unfamiliar names, just as
examples: the basal nucleus of Meynert, the supraoptic
nucleus of the hypothalamus, the charmingly named
inferior olive nucleus.
As described, the cell bodies of neurons with related
functions are clumped together in their particular region
or nucleus and send their axonal projections off in the
same direction, merging together into a cable (a “fiber
tract”). Here’s an example, taken from the hippocampus:

Back to that myelin wrapping around axons that helps
action potentials propagate faster. Myelin tends to be
white, sufficiently so that the fiber tract cables in the
brain look white. Thus they’re generically referred to as
“white matter.”
As can be seen, a lot of the brain is taken up by the fiber
tracts—all sorts of regions are talking to one another,
often distant parts.*

705

Suppose you have someone who has
sustained an injury in one particular
part of the brain, mysterious spot X.
This gives the opportunity to learn
something about the brain by now
seeing what no longer works right in
the person. Neuroscience as a field
really got its starts thanks to studies of soldiers who had
suffered “missile projection wounds.” Viewed in a
detached manner, the endless nineteenth-century
European military bloodbaths were God’s gift to
neuroanatomists. The injured individual now does
something abnormally. Can you conclude that spot X is
the part of the brain responsible for the normal version
of that behavior? Only if it’s where a cluster of neuronal
cell bodies are. If spot X is a fiber tract, you’re actually
learning something about the region of the brain whose
neurons sent axonal projections in that fiber tract, and
that region could be at the other end of the brain. So it’s
important to distinguish between “neuronal nuclei” and
“fibers of passage.”
Finally, back to the reference just now about a part of
the brain being the center for some behavior. The
examples from earlier in the chapter showed how hard it
is to make sense of the function of an individual neuron
without considering the network that it is part of. Same
theme here, writ large. Given that every brain region is
getting projections from and sending projections to a
zillion other places, it is rare that an individual brain
region is “the center for” anything. Instead it’s all
networks where, far more often, a particular region
“plays a key role in,” “helps mediate,” or “influences” a
behavior. The function of a particular brain region is
embedded in the context of its connections.
Thus, this concludes our Brain 101 primer.

706

Appendix 2

The Basics of
Endocrinology

E

ndocrinology is the study of hormones, very different sorts of
messengers from the neurotransmitters of chapter 2. As a recap,
neurotransmitters are released from neurons’ axon terminals in response
to action potentials. Once released, they travel a microscopic distance
across the synapse and bind to receptors on dendrites of the second,
postsynaptic neuron, thereby changing that neuron’s excitability.
In contrast, a hormone is a chemical messenger released from
secretory cells (including neurons) in various glands. Once secreted, it
enters the bloodstream, where it can influence any cells throughout the
body that possess receptors for it.* So right off the bat we have key
differences. First, neurotransmitters directly affect only neurons on the
other side of synapses, while a hormone can potentially affect each of the
trillions of cells in the body. A second difference is the time course;
neurotransmitter signaling across synapses occurs in milliseconds. In
contrast, many hormonal effects emerge over hours to days and can
persist forever (for example, how often does puberty go away after a
while?).
Neurotransmitters and hormones also differ in the scale of their
effects. A neurotransmitter binds to its postsynaptic receptor, resulting in
a local change in the flow of ions across the membrane of that dendritic
spine. But depending on the hormone and the target cell being
considered, hormones can change the activity of particular proteins, turn
707

certain genes on or off, alter the metabolisms of cells, cause them to
grow or atrophy, to divide or to shrivel up and die. Testosterone, for
example, increases muscle mass, and progesterone causes the
proliferation of cells in the uterus, causing it to thicken during the luteal
phase. Conversely, thyroid hormone kills cells in a tadpole’s tail as the
animal is metamorphosing into a frog, and a class of stress hormones can
kill cells in the immune system (helping to explain how stress makes us
vulnerable to getting a cold). Hormones are extremely versatile.
Most hormones are part of a “neuroendocrine axis.” Recall from
chapter 2 how all roads in the limbic system lead to the hypothalamus,
with its pivotal role in regulating the autonomic nervous system and
hormonal systems. Here’s where that second part comes in. Neurons in
the hypothalamus secrete a particular hormone that travels in a tiny, local
circulatory system connecting to the pituitary, just below the base of the
brain. There that hormone stimulates the secretion of a particular
pituitary hormone, which enters the general circulation and stimulates
the secretion of a third hormone from some peripheral gland. Here’s an
example involving my three favorite hormones: during stress,
hypothalamic neurons secrete CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone),
which stimulates pituitary cells to secrete ACTH (adrenocorticotropic
hormone). Once in the general circulation, ACTH gets to the adrenal
glands, where it stimulates secretion of steroid stress hormones called
glucocorticoids (with the human version being cortisol, aka
hydrocortisone). Other hormones (e.g., estrogen, progesterone,
testosterone, and thyroid hormone) are released from peripheral glands
as the final step of their own “hypothalamic/pituitary/peripheral gland
axis.”* As a wonderful complication, the secretion of each particular
pituitary hormone is often not under the control of only a single
hypothalamic releasing hormone. Instead there are multiple types of
hormones serving that function, and other hypothalamic hormones that
inhibit that particular pituitary hormone’s release. For example, an array
of hypothalamic hormones in addition to CRH regulates the release of
ACTH, where different types of stressors produce different combinations
of those hypothalamic hormones.
Not all hormones are regulated in this brain/pituitary/peripheral gland
manner. In some cases there’s a brain/pituitary two-step, where the
pituitary hormone exerts effects throughout the body; growth hormone
generally fits this pattern. In other systems the brain sends projections

708

down the spine and to a particular gland, helping to regulate its hormone
release; the pancreas and its secretion of insulin are an example (where
circulating glucose levels are the main regulator). Then there are weirdo
hormones secreted from unlikely places like the heart or gut, where the
brain regulates secretion only indirectly.
Hormones, like neurotransmitters, are made cheaply. They are
constructed in just a few biosynthetic steps from plentiful precursors—
either simple proteins or cholesterol.* Moreover, the body generates
multiple types of hormones from the same precursor. For example, the
numerous steroid hormones are all generated from cholesterol.
So far we’ve given short shrift to hormone receptors. They do the
same general job as do neurotransmitter receptors; there is a distinctive
receptor molecule for each type of hormone,* with a concave binding
domain whose shape is complementary to the shape of the hormone. To
trot out the same cliché as was used for neurotransmitters, a hormone fits
into its receptor like a key fits into a lock. And as with neurotransmitter
receptors, there’s no free lunch with hormone receptors. The various
steroid hormones are structurally similar. Thus, if you’re cheap at the
production end, you need subtle, fancy receptors that differentiate among
those similar hormones—you do not want receptors that confuse, say,
estrogen and testosterone.
Hormone/neurotransmitter similarities continue. Like
neurotransmitter receptors, a hormone receptor’s “avidity” for its
hormone can change. This means that the shape of the binding site
changes a bit, so that the hormone now fits more or less snugly, thus
increasing or decreasing the duration of the hormone’s effects. The
number of receptors for a particular hormone in a cell can also change,
altering the cell’s sensitivity to that hormone’s effects. The number of
receptors in a target cell can be as important as the levels of the hormone
itself, and there are endocrine diseases where normal levels of a hormone
are secreted but, because of a mutation in the hormone’s receptor, no
signal gets through. Hormone levels are akin to how loudly someone
speaks. Receptor levels are akin to the acuity with which ears detect that
voice.
Finally, receptors for a hormone typically occur in only a subset of
cells and tissues in the body, meaning that only those are responsive to
the hormone. For example, only tail cells contain receptors for thyroid
hormone when tadpoles are turning into frogs. Similarly, only some

709

types of breast cancer involve tumors whose cells are “ER positive”—
i.e., they contain estrogen receptors and are responsive to the growthpromoting effects of the hormone.
This is our overview of how hormones alter the functions of target
cells over the course of hours to days. Hormones were highly pertinent in
chapter 7 when considering the effects of hormones in childhood and
fetal life. Specifically, hormones can have permanent “organizational”
effects during development, shaping how the brain is constructed. In
contrast, “activational” effects persist for hours to days. These two
domains interact, in that organizational hormone effects on a fetal brain
influence what activational effects hormones will have on that brain in
adulthood.
Back to the main text to consider specific hormones.

710

Appendix 3

Protein Basics

P

roteins are a class of organic compounds that are the most
abundant molecules in living systems. They are hugely important,
since numerous hormones, neurotransmitters, and messengers of the
immune system are made of protein; ditto for the receptors that respond
to those messengers, the enzymes that construct or degrade them,* the
scaffolding that shapes a cell, and so on.
A key feature of proteins is their shape, since the shape of a protein
determines its function. Proteins that form the scaffolding of a cell have
the shape of the different crossbars in scaffolding at construction sites
(sort of). A protein hormone will have a distinctive shape that is unique
and distinctively different from the shape of a hormone that has different
effects.* And a protein receptor must have a shape that is complementary
to the shape of the hormone or neurotransmitter that it binds (back to the
time-honored cliché of appendix 1, namely that a messenger like a
hormone fits into its receptor like a key into a lock).
Some proteins change their shape, typically moving between two
conformations. Suppose you have an enzyme (again, a protein) that
synthesizes a molecule of sucrose by linking a molecule of glucose to a
molecule of fructose. The enzyme must have one conformation that
resembles the letter V, where one end binds a glucose molecule at a
particular angle, the other fructose. The binding of both triggers the
enzyme to shift to its other conformation, where the two ends of the V
move close enough for the glucose and fructose to be linked. The sucrose
floats off, and the enzyme flips back to its original conformation.
711

What determines the shape and function of a protein? Any given
protein is made of a string of amino acids. There are about 20 different
types of amino acids—including some familiar ones like tryptophan and
glutamate. Each protein’s string of amino acids is unique—like the string
of letters that composes a word. Your typical protein is about 300 amino
acids long, and with 20 different amino acid types, there are nearly 10400
possible sequences (that’s ten followed by four hundred zeros)—more
atoms than there are in the universe.* The amino acid sequence of a
protein influences the unique shape(s) of that protein. Dogma used to be
that amino acid sequence determines the shape(s) of that protein, but it
turns out that the shape is also subtly altered by things like temperature
and acidity—in other words, environmental influences.
And what determines the sequence of amino acids that are strung
together to form a particular protein? A particular gene.

DNA AS THE BLUEPRINT FOR
CONSTRUCTING PROTEINS
DNA is another class of organic compounds, and just as there are
roughly 20 different types of amino acids, there are 4 different “letters”
(called nucleotides) that make up DNA. A sequence of 3 nucleotides
(called a codon) codes for a single amino acid. If there are 4 different
types of nucleotides, and each codon is 3 nucleotides long, there can be a
total of 64 different codons (4 possibilities in the first place × 4 in the
second × 4 in the third = 64). A few of those 64 are reserved to signal the
end of a gene, and after eliminating those “stop codons,” there are 61
different codons coding for 20 different amino acids. Therefore, there is
“redundancy”—almost all amino acids can be specified by more than
one unique codon (an average of about 3, i.e., 61/20). Typically the
different codons coding for the same amino acid differ by only a single
nucleotide. For example, four different codon sequences code for the
amino acid alanine: GCA, GCC, GCG, and GCT (A, C, G, and T are the
abbreviations for the four types of nucleotides).* Redundancy will be
important for understanding gene evolution.

712

The entire stretch of nucleotides that codes for a single type of
protein is called a gene. The entire collection of DNA is called the
genome, coding for all of the tens of thousands of genes in an organism;
“sequencing” the genome means determining the unique sequence of the
billions of nucleotides that make up that organism’s genome. That stretch
of DNA is so long (containing roughly twenty thousand genes in
humans) that it has to be broken into separate volumes, called
chromosomes.
This produces a spatial problem. The DNA library is found in the
center of the cell, in the nucleus. Proteins, however, occur all over the
cell, are constructed all over it (just think of proteins in the axon
terminals of a spinal neuron in a blue whale, terminals that are lightyears away from that neuron’s nucleus). How do you get the DNA
information out to where the protein is made? There is an intermediary
that completes the picture. The unique nucleotide sequence in DNA that
codes for a particular gene is copied into a string of similar nucleotide
letters in a related compound called RNA. Any given chromosome
contains a staggeringly long stretch of DNA, coding for one gene after
another; in contrast, this stretch of RNA is only as long as the particular
gene. In other words, a more manageable length. That RNA is then
shipped to wherever it is supposed to be in the cell, where it then directs
which amino acids are strung together in which sequence to form a
protein (and there are amino acids floating around in a cell, ready to be
grabbed for the protein-construction project). Think of RNA as a
photocopy of a single page out of this vast twenty-thousand-page-long
DNA encyclopedia. (And multiple copies of the cognate protein can be
made from the instructions in a photocopy page of RNA. This sure helps
in circumstances where copies of the protein must wind up in each of the
thousands of a single neuron’s axon terminals.)
This produces what is termed the “central dogma” of life, a concept
first framed in the early 1960s by Francis Crick, half of the renowned
Watson and Crick, who discovered the “double helix” structure of DNA
(with more than a little purloined help from Rosalind Franklin, but that’s
another story). Crick’s central dogma holds that the nucleotide sequence
of DNA that composes a gene determines how a unique stretch of RNA
is put together . . . which determines how a unique stretch of amino acids
are put together . . . which determines the shape(s) of the resulting
protein . . . which determines that protein’s function. DNA determines

713

RNA determines protein.* And implicit in that central dogma is another
critical point: one type of gene specifies one type of protein.
Just for everyone’s sanity, I’m going to mostly ignore RNA. For our
purposes, what is interesting is what genes, the starting point, have to do
with their end products—proteins and their functions.

MUTATIONS AND POLYMORPHISMS
Genes are inherited from your parents (half the genes from each [not
entirely true, as covered in the main text]). Suppose that when someone’s
DNA genome is being copied for inclusion in their egg or sperm, a
mistake is made in the copying of one single nucleotide; with billions of
nucleotides, that’s bound to happen sometimes. As a result, unless
corrected, the gene, now with its nucleotide sequence erroneously
differing in one spot, is passed on to an offspring. This is a mutation.
In classical genetics there are three types of mutations that can occur.
The first is called a point mutation. One single nucleotide is copied
incorrectly. Will this change the amino acid sequence of the protein
coded for? It depends. Back to redundancy in the DNA code, from a few
paragraphs ago. Suppose there is a codon in a gene with the sequence
GCT, coding for alanine. But there has been a mutation, yielding GCA
instead. No problem—that still codes for alanine. It’s an inconsequential,
“neutral” mutation. But suppose the mutation instead was GAT. This
codes for a completely different amino acid called asparagine. Uh-oh.
In actuality, though, this may not be a big deal, if the new amino acid
looks a lot like the one that was lost. Suppose you have a nucleotide
sequence coding for the following metaphorical amino acid sequence:
“I/am/now/going/to/do/the/following”
Thanks to a subtle mutation, there is a change of one amino acid, but
one without a ton of consequences:
“I/am/now/going/ta/do/the/following”
This would still be comprehensible to most people; the protein would
merely be perceived as coming from New York. Translated into proteinese, the protein has a slightly different shape and does its usual task a bit
differently (maybe a little slower or faster). Not the end of the world.

714

But if the mutation codes for an amino acid that produces a protein
with a dramatically different shape, the consequences can be enormous
(even fatal).
Back to
“I/am/now/going/to/do/the/following”
What if there is a mutation in a nucleotide helping to code for the
first w, a mutation with a big consequence?
“I/am/not/going/to/do/the/following”
Trouble.
The next type of classical mutation is called a deletion mutation. In
this scenario a copying error is made during the inheritance of a gene.
But instead of a nucleotide being miscopied, it is deleted. For example,
in a case where the seventh nucleotide is deleted,
“I/am/now/going/to/do/the/following”
becomes
“I/am/now/oingt/od/ot/hef/ollowing”
This can frameshift everything over to generate gibberish, or even a
different message (e.g., “For dessert I’d like the mousse” mutating to
“For dessert I’d like the mouse”).
Deletion mutations can involve the loss of more than a single
nucleotide. At an extreme, this can involve the deletion of the entire
gene, or even a stretch of genes on a particular chromosome. Definitely
not good.
Finally, there are insertion mutations. During copying of the DNA to
pass on to the next generation, a nucleotide is inadvertently copied twice,
duplicated. Thus:
“I/am/now/going/to/do/the/following”
becomes
“I/am/now/ggoin/gt/od/oth/efollowin”
Gibberish, or perhaps a different message, as in the following case,
where an e has been inserted near the end of the string of letters: “Mary
turned John down for a date because she did not enjoy boweling.” In
some cases an insertion mutation can involve the insertion of more than a
single nucleotide. At an extreme, this can even involve the duplication of
an entire gene.
Point, deletion, and insertion mutations are most of what mutations
are about.* Deletion and insertion mutations often have major

715

consequences, usually deleterious, but sometimes produce a new,
interesting protein.
Back to point mutations. Consider one that results in the substitution
of a single amino acid in the protein, one that works a bit differently
from the correct amino acid. As noted above, as a result, the protein still
does its old job, but maybe does it a bit faster or slower. This could be
the grist for evolutionary change—if the new version is disadvantageous,
reducing the reproductive success of anyone who carries it, it will be
gradually selected against, removing it from a population. If instead the
new version is more advantageous, it will gradually replace the old one
in a population. Or if the new version works better than the original in
some circumstances but worse in others, it may reach equilibrium in the
population with the original version, where a certain percentage of
people have the old version, the remainder the new. In this case the
particular gene would be described as coming in two different forms or
variants, as coming with two different “alleles.” Most genes come with
multiple alleles. And the result is individual variation in the functioning
of genes (this is covered in far more complexity in chapter 8).
Finally, a clarification of the confusion where two sound bites about
genetics collide. The first is that, on the average, full (non–identical
twin) siblings share 50 percent of their genes.* The other is that we share
98 percent of our genes with chimps. So are we more related to chimps
than to our siblings? No. Comparisons between humans and chimps are
about types of traits—we both have genes coding for traits related to
having, for example, eyes, muscle fibers, or dopamine receptors, and
both lack genes related to having, for example, gills, antennae, or flower
petals. So there’s 98 percent overlap at that level of comparison. But
comparison between any two humans is about versions of those traits—
both have a gene that codes for, say, this thing called eye color, but do
they share the version that codes for the same particular color? Same for
blood type, type of dopamine receptor, and so on. We have 50 percent
overlap with siblings at this level of comparison.

716

Glossary of Abbreviations

ACC

anterior cingulate cortex

ACTH

adrenocorticotropic hormone

ADHD

attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder

AIS

androgen insensitivity syndrome

APA

American Psychological Association

ASD

autism spectrum disorders

BDNF

brain-derived neurotrophic factor

BLA

basolateral amygdala

BMI

body mass index

BNST

bed nucleus of the stria terminalis

CAH

congenital adrenal hyperplasia

CBT

cognitive behavioral therapy

COMT

catechol-O-methyltransferase

CRH

corticotropin-releasing hormone

DAT

dopamine transporter

DHEA

dehydroepiandrosterone

dlPFC

dorsolateral PFC

DZ

dizygotic

EEA

equal environment assumption

EEG

electroencephalographic; EEGs electroencephalograms

ERPS

event-related potentials

fMRI

functional magnetic resonance imaging

FTD

frontotemporal dementia

GABA

gamma-aminobutyric acid

GnRH

gonadotropin-releasing hormone

GSR

galvanic skin resistance

GWAS

genomewide association studies

HG

hunter-gatherer

717

HH

high-warmth/high-competence

HL

high warmth/low competence

IAT

Implicit Association Test

LH

low warmth/high competence

LH

luteinizing hormone

LL

low warmth/low competence

LTD

long-term depression

LTP

long-term potentiation

MAO-A

monoamine oxidase-A

MHC

major histocompatibility complex

MZ

monozygotic

NCAM

neural cell adhesion molecule

PAG

periaqueductal gray

PD

Prisoner’s Dilemma

PFC

prefrontal cortex

PMC

premotor cortex

PMDD

premenstrual dysphoric disorder

PMS

premenstrual syndrome

PNS

parasympathetic nervous system

PTSD

post-traumatic stress disorder

PVN

paraventricular nucleus

RNA

ribonucleic acid

RWA

right-wing authoritarianism

SDO

social-dominance orientation

SES

socioeconomic status

SHRP

stress hyporesponsive period

SNPs

single-nucleotide polymorphisms

SNS

sympathetic nervous system

SPE

Stanford Prison Experiment

SSRI

selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor

STG

superior temporal gyrus

TF

transcription factor

TH

tryptophan hydroxylase

ToM

Theory of Mind

TPJ

temporoparietal juncture

TRC

truth and reconciliation commission

718

vlPFC

ventrolateral prefrontal cortex

vmPFC

ventromedial PFC 54

719

Abbreviations in the Notes

In order to save forests’ worth of paper, references cite only the first one or two authors. The
following abbreviations are used for entire journal titles or words within them:
AEL: Applied Economics Letters. AGP: Archives of General Psychiatry. Am: American.
AMFP: American Journal of Forensic Psychology. Ann: Annual. ANYAS: Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences. Arch: Archives of. ARSR: Annual Review of Sex Research. BBR:
Behavioral Brain Research. BBS: Behavioral and Brain Sciences. Behav: Behavior or
Behavioral. Biol: Biology or Biological. Biol Lett: Biology Letters. BP: Biological Psychiatry.
Brit: British. Bull: Bulletin. Clin: Clinical. Cog: Cognitive or Cognition. Comp: Comparative.
Curr: Current. Dir: Directions in. EHB: Evolution and Human Behavior. Endo: Endocrinology.
Evol: Evolution. Eur: European. Exp: Experimental. Front: Frontiers in. Horm Behav: Hormones
and Behavior. Hum: Human. Int: International. J: Journal or Journal of. JAMA: Journal of the
American Medical Association. JCP: Journal of Comparative Psychology. JEP: Journal of
Economic Psychology. JESP: Journal of Experimental and Social Psychology. JPET: Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. JPSP: Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. JSS: Journal of Sports Sciences. Med: Medical or Medicine. Mol: Molecular. Nat:
Nature. NEJM: New England Journal of Medicine. Neurobiol: Neurobiology. Neurol: Neurology.
Nsci: Neuroscience or Neurosciences. Nsci Biobehav Rev: Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews. PLoS: Public Library of Science. PNAS: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, USA. PNE: Psychoneuroendocrinology. Primat: Primatology. Proc: Proceedings of the.
Prog: Progress in. PSPB: Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. PSPR: Personality and
Social Psychology Review. Psych: Psychology or Psychological. Rep: Report or Reports. Res:
Research. Rev: Review or Reviews. SCAN: Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience. Sci:
Science or Sciences. Sci Am: Scientific American. Soc: Society or Social. TICS: Trends in
Cognitive Sciences. TIEE: Trends in Ecology and Evolution. TIGS: Trends in Genetic Sciences.
TINS: Trends in Neuroscience.

720

Notes

Introduction
1. R. Byrne, “Game 21 Adjourned as Thrust and Parry Give Way to Melee,” New York Times,
December 20, 1990.
2. For reviews of these two “easy” topics, see M. Winklhofer, “An Avian Magnetometer,” Sci 336
(2012): 991; and L. Kow and D. Pfaff, “Mapping of Neural and Signal Transduction Pathways
for Lordosis in the Search for Estrogen Actions on the Central Nervous System,” BBR 92
(1998): 169.
3. J. Watson, Behaviorism, 2nd ed. (New York: Norton, 1930).
4. Footnote: J. Todd and E. Morris, eds., Modern Perspectives on John B. Watson and Classical
Behaviorism (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994); H. Link, The New Psych of Selling and
Advertising (New York: Macmillan, 1932).
5. E. Moniz, quoted in T. Szasz, Schizophrenia: The Sacred Symbol of Psychiatry (Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press, 1988).
6. K. Lorenz, quoted in R. Learner, Final Solutions: Biology, Prejudice, and Genocide
(University Park: Penn State Press, 1992).
7. For discussions of Lorenz’s activities during the Nazi era, see B. Sax, “What is a ‘Jewish
Dog’? Konrad Lorenz and the Cult of Wildness,” Soc and Animals 5 (1997): 3; U. Deichman,
Biologists Under Hitler (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1999); and B. Müller-Hill,
Murderous Science: Elimination by Scientific Selection of Jews, Gypsies, and Others, Germany
1933–1945 (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press).
8. The Wellesley effect was first reported by Martha McClintock of the University of Chicago:
M. McClintock, “Menstrual Synchrony and Suppression,” Nat 229 (1971): 244. While a
number of studies have replicated the Wellesley effect, some have not, as summarized in H.
Wilson, “A Critical Review of Menstrual Synchrony Research,” PNE 17 (1992): 565. A
critique of that critique can be found in M. McClintock, “Whither Menstrual Synchrony?”
ARSR 9 (1998): 77.
9. V. S. Naipaul, Among the Believers: An Islamic Journey (New York: Vintage Books, 1992).
And for the definitive book on this entire field of behavioral biology, see M. Konner, The
Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints on the Human Spirit (New York: Henry Holt, 2003).
This is the finest book in existence on the biology of human social behavior—subtle, nuanced,
nondogmatic, and wonderfully written—by the anthropologist/physician Mel Konner. To my
vast good fortune, Konner was my academic adviser and mentor when I was an undergraduate,
and he has had the greatest intellectual impact on me of anyone in my life. Those who know
Mel will recognize his intellectual imprint on every page of this book.
Chapter 1: The Behavior
1. Footnote: F. Gervasi. The Life and Times of Menachem Begin. (New York: Putnam, 2009).
2. For good reviews of these distinctions, see K. Miczek et al., “Neurosteroids, GABAA
Receptors, and Escalated Aggressive Behavior,” Horm Behav 44 (2003): 242; and S. Motta et

721

al., “Dissecting the Brain’s Fear System Reveals That the Hypothalamus Is Critical for
Responding in Subordinate Conspecific Intruders,” PNAS 106 (2009): 4870.
3. A small, disheartening literature concerns ex–child soldiers and participants in genocides who
are able to hold back their symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder through acts of cruelty:
R. Weierstall et al., “When Combat Prevents PTSD Symptoms: Results from a Survey with
Former Child Soldiers in Northern Uganda,” BMC Psychiatry 12 (2012): 41; R. Weierstall et
al., “The Thrill of Being Violent as an Antidote to Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Rwandese
Genocide Perpetrators,” Eur J Psychotraumatology 2 (2011): 6345; V. Nell, “Cruelty’s
Rewards: The Gratifications of Perpetrators and Spectators,” BBS 29 (2006): 211; T. Elbert et
al., “Fascination Violence: On Mind and Brain of Man Hunters,” Eur Arch Psychiatry and Clin
Nsci 260 (2010): S100.
4. B. Oakley et al., Pathological Altruism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011).
5. L. MacFarquhar, “The Kindest Cut,” New Yorker, July 27, 2009, p. 38.
6. Footnote: For a lengthy overview of Munchausen syndrome by proxy, see R. Sapolsky,
“Nursery Crimes,” in Monkeyluv and Other Essays on Our Lives as Animals (New York:
Simon and Schuster/Scribner, 2005).
7. J. King et al., “Doing the Right Thing: A Common Neural Circuit for Appropriate Violent or
Compassion Behavior,” NeuroImage 30 (2006): 1069.
Chapter 2: One Second Before
1. For a summary of MacLean’s findings and thinking, see P. MacLean, The Triune Brain in
Evolution (New York: Springer, 1990).
2. A. Damasio, Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain (New York: Putnam,
1994; Penguin, 2005).
3. W. Nauta, “The Problem of the Frontal Lobe: A Reinterpretation,” J Psychiatric Res 8 (1971):
167; W. Nauta and M. Feirtag, “The Organization of the Brain,” Sci Am 241 (1979): 88.
4. R. Nelson and B. Trainor, “Neural Mechanisms of Aggression,” Nat Rev Nsci 8 (2007): 536.
5. For more on the effects of amygdala damage in humans, see A. Young et al., “Face Processing
Impairments After Amygdalotomy,” Brain 118 (1995): 15; H. Narabayashi et al., “Stereotaxic
Amygdalotomy for Behavior Disorders,” Arch Neurol 9 (1963): 1; V. Balasubramaniam and T.
Kanaka, “Amygdalotomy and Hypothalamotomy: A Comparative Study,” Confinia Neurologia
37 (1975): 195; R. Heimburger et al., “Stereotaxic Amygdalotomy for Epilepsy with
Aggressive Behavior,” JAMA 198 (1966): 741; B. Ramamurthi, “Stereotactic Operation in
Behavior Disorders: Amygdalotomy and Hypothalamotomy,” Acta Neurochirurgica (Wien) 44
(1988): 152; G. Lee et al., “Clinical and Physiological Effects of Stereotaxic Bilateral
Amygdalotomy for Intractable Aggression,” J Neuropsychiatry and Clin Nsci 10 (1998): 413;
E. Hitchcock and V. Cairns, “Amygdalotomy,” Postgraduate Med J 49 (1973): 894; and M.
Mpakopoulou et al., “Stereotactic Amygdalotomy in the Management of Severe Aggressive
Behavioral Disorders,” Neurosurgical Focus 25 (2008): E6.
6. Some papers touching on the political controversies surrounding amygdalotomies: V. Mark et
al., “Role of Brain Disease in Riots and Urban Violence,” JAMA 201 (1967): 217; P. Breggin,
“Psychosurgery for Political Purposes,” Duquesne Law Rev 13 (1975): 841; E. Valenstein,
Great and Desperate Cures: The Rise and Decline of Psychosurgery and Other Radical
Treatments for Mental Illness (New York: Basic Books 2010).
7. C. Holden, “Fuss over a Terrorist’s Brain,” Sci 298 (2002): 1551
8. D. Eagleman, “The Brain on Trial,” Atlantic, June 7, 2011; G. Lavergne, A Sniper in the Tower
(Denton: University of North Texas Press, 1997); H. Hylton, “Texas Sniper’s Brother John
Whitman Shot,” Palm Beach Post, July 5, 1973, p. A1.
9. For a great review of the role of aggression in fear, see the superb J. LeDoux, The Emotional
Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1998).

722

10. N. Kalin et al., “The Role of the Central Nucleus of the Amygdala in Mediating Fear and
Anxiety in the Primate,” J Nsci 24 (2004): 5506; T. Hare et al., “Contributions of Amygdala
and Striatal Activity in Emotion Regulation,” BP 57 (2005): 624; D. Zald, “The Human
Amygdala and the Emotional Evaluation of Sensory Stimuli,” Brain Res Rev 41 (2003): 88.
11. D. Mobbs et al., “When Fear Is Near: Threat Imminence Elicits Prefrontal-Periaqueductal
Gray Shifts in Humans,” Sci 317 (2007): 1079.
12. G. Berns, “Neurobiological Substrates of Dread,” Sci 312 (2006): 754. Additional papers
pertinent to the role of the human amygdala in fear: R. Adolphs et al., “Impaired Recognition
of Emotion in Facial Expressions Following Bilateral Damage to the Human Amygdala,” Nat
372 (1994): 669; A. Young et al., “Face Processing Impairments After Amygdalotomy,” Brain
118 (1995): 15; J. Feinstein et al., “The Human Amygdala and the Induction and Experience of
Fear,” Curr Biol 21 (2011): 34; A. Bechara et al., “Double Dissociation of Conditioning and
Declarative Knowledge Relative to the Amygdala and Hippocampus in Humans,” Sci 269
(1995): 1115.
13. A. Gilboa et al., “Functional Connectivity of the Prefrontal Cortex and the Amygdala in
PTSD,” BP 55 (2004): 263.
14. M. Hsu et al., “Neural Systems Responding to Degrees of Uncertainty in Human DecisionMaking,” Sci 310 (2006): 1680; J. Rilling et al., “The Neural Correlates of Mate Competition
in Dominant Male Rhesus Macaques,” BP 56 (2004): 364.
15. C. Zink et al., “Know Your Place: Neural Processing of Social Hierarchy in Humans,”
Neuron 58 (2008): 273; M. Freitas-Ferrari et al., “Neuroimaging in Social Anxiety Disorder: A
Systematic Review of the Literature,” Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biol Psychiatry
34 (2010): 565.
16. G. Berns et al., “Neurobiological Correlates of Social Conformity and Independence During
Mental Rotation,” BP 58 (2005): 245.
17. K. Tye et al., “Amygdala Circuitry Mediating Reversible and Bidirectional Control of
Anxiety,” Nat 471 (2011): 358; S. Kim et al., “Differing Neural Pathways Assemble a
Behavioural State from Separable Features in Anxiety,” Nat 496 (2013): 219.
18. J. Ipser et al., “Meta-analysis of Functional Brain Imaging in Specific Phobia,” Psychiatry
and Clin Nsci 67 (2013): 311; U. Lueken, “Neural Substrates of Defensive Reactivity in Two
Subtypes of Specific Phobia,” SCAN 9 (2013): 11; A. Del Casale et al., “Functional
Neuroimaging in Specific Phobia,” Psychiatry Res 202 (2012): 181; J. Feinstein et al., “Fear
and Panic in Humans with Bilateral Amygdala Damage,” Nat Nsci 16 (2013): 270.
19. M. Cook and S. Mineka, “Selective Associations in the Observational Conditioning of Fear in
Rhesus Monkeys,” J Exp Psych and Animal Behav Processes 16 (1990): 372; S. Mineka and
M. Cook, “Immunization Against the Observational Conditioning of Snake Fear in Rhesus
Monkeys,” J Abnormal Psych 95 (1986): 307.
20. S. Rodrigues et al., “Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Emotional Learning and Memory in
the Lateral Amygdala,” Neuron 44 (2004): 75; J. Johansen et al., “Optical Activation of Lateral
Amygdala Pyramidal Cells Instructs Associative Fear Learning,” PNAS 107 (2010): 12692; S.
Rodrigues et al., “The Influence of Stress Hormones on Fear Circuitry,” Ann Rev of Nsci, 32
(2009): 289; S. Rumpel et al., “Postsynaptic Receptor Trafficking Underlying a Form of
Associative Learning,” Sci 308 (2005): 83.
Other work in this area: C. Herry et al., “Switching On and Off Fear by Distinct Neuronal
Circuits,” Nat 454 (2008): 600; S. Maren and G. Quirk, “Neuronal Signaling of Fear Memory,”
Nat Rev Nsci 5 (2004): 844; S. Wolff et al., “Amygdala Interneuron Subtypes Control Fear
Learning Through Disinhibition,” Nat 509 (2014): 453; R. LaLumiere, “Optogenetic
Dissection of Amygdala Functioning,” Front Behav Nsci 8 (2014): 1.
21. T. Amano et al., “Synaptic Correlates of Fear Extinction in the Amygdala,” Nat Nsci 13
(2010): 489; M. Milad and G. Quirk, “Neurons in Medial Prefrontal Cortex Signal Memory for
Fear Extinction,” Nat 420 (2002): 70; E. Phelps et al., “Extinction Learning in Humans: Role

723

of the Amygdala and vmPFC,” Neuron 43 (2004): 897; S. Ciocchi et al., “Encoding of
Conditioned Fear in Central Amygdala Inhibitory Circuits,” Nat 468 (2010): 277; W.
Haubensak et al., “Genetic Dissection of an Amygdala Microcircuit That Gates Conditioned
Fear,” Nat 468 (2010): 270.
22. K. Gospic et al., “Limbic Justice: Amygdala Involvement in Immediate Rejections in the
Ultimatum Game,” PLoS ONE 9 (2011): e1001054; B. De Martino et al., “Frames, Biases, and
Rational Decision-Making in the Human Brain,” Sci 313 (2006): 684; A. Bechara et al., “Role
of the Amygdala in Decision-Making,” ANYAS 985 (2003): 356; B. De Martino et al.,
“Amygdala Damage Eliminates Monetary Loss Aversion,” PNAS 107 (2010): 3788; J. Van
Honk et al., “Generous Economic Investments After Basolateral Amygdala Damage,” PNAS
110 (2013): 2506.
23. R. Adolphs et al., “The Human Amygdala in Social Judgment,” Nat 393 (1998): 470
24. D. Zald, “The Human Amygdala and the Emotional Evaluation of Sensory Stimuli,” Brain
Res Rev 41 (2003): 88; C. Saper, “Animal Behavior: The Nexus of Sex and Violence,” Nat 470
(2011): 179; D. Lin et al., “Functional Identification of an Aggression Locus in Mouse
Hypothalamus,” Nat 470 (2011): 221; M. Baxter and E. Murray, “The Amygdala and Reward,”
Nat Rev Nsci 3 (2002): 563.
Some other realms where positive stimuli activate the amygdala: S. Aalto et al.,
“Neuroanatomical Substrate of amusement and Sadness: A PET Activation Study Using Film
Stimuli,” Neuroreport 13 (2002): 67–73; T. Uwano et al., “Neuronal Responsiveness to
Various Sensory Stimuli, and Associative Learning in the Rat Amygdala,” Nsci 68 (1995):
339; K. Tye and P. Janak, “Amygdala Neurons Differentially Encode Motivation and
Reinforcement,” J Nsci 27 (2007): 3937; G. Schoenbaum et al., “Orbitofrontal Cortex and
Basolateral Amygdala Encode Expected Outcomes During Learning,” Nat Nsci 1 (1998): 155;
I. Aharon et al., “Beautiful Faces Have Variable Reward Value: fMRI and Behavioral
Evidence,” Neuron 32 (2001): 537.
25. P. Janak and K. Tye, “From Circuits to Behavior in the Amygdala,” Nat 517 (2015): 284.
26. J. LeDoux, “Coming to Terms with Fear,” PNAS 111 (2014): 2871; J. LeDoux, “The
Amygdala,” Curr Biol 17 (2007): R868; K. Tully et al., “Norepinephrine Enables the Induction
of Associative LTP at Thalamo-Amygdala Synapses,” PNAS 104 (2007): 14146.
27. T. Rizvi et al., “Connections Between the Central Nucleus of the Amygdala and the Midbrain
Periaqueductal Gray: Topography and Reciprocity,” J Comp Neurol 303 (1991): 121; E. Kim et
al., “Dorsal Periaqueductal Gray-Amygdala Pathway Conveys Both Innate and Learned Fear
Responses in Rats,” PNAS 110 (2013): 14795; C. Del-Ben and F. Graeff, “Panic Disorder: Is
the PAG Involved?” Neural Plasticity 2009 (2009): 108135; P. Petrovic et al., “Context
Dependent Amygdala Deactivation During Pain,” Neuroimage 13 (2001): S457; J. Johnson et
al., “Neural Substrates for Expectation-Modulated Fear Learning in the Amygdala and
Periaqueductal Gray,” Nat Nsci 13 (2010): 979; W. Yoshida et al., “Uncertainty Increases Pain:
Evidence for a Novel Mechanism of Pain Modulation Involving the Periaqueductal Gray,” J
Nsci 33 (2013): 5638.
28. T. Heatherton, “Neuroscience of Self and Self-Regulation,” Ann Rev of Psych 62 (2011): 363;
K. Krendl et al., “The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: An fMRI Investigation of the Functional
Anatomic Correlates of Stigma,” Soc Nsci 1 (2006): 5; F. Sambataro et al., “Preferential
Responses in Amygdala and Insula During Presentation of Facial Contempt and Disgust,” Eur
J Nsci 24, (2006): 2355.
29. X. Liu et al., “Optogenetic Stimulation of a Hippocampal Engram Activates Fear Memory
Recall,” Nat 484 (2012): 381; T. Seidenbecher et al., “Amygdalar and Hippocampal Theta
Rhythm Synchronization During Fear Memory Retrieval,” Sci 301 (2003): 846; R. Redondo et
al., “Bidirectional Switch of the Valence Associated with a Hippocampal Contextual Memory
Engram,” Nat 513 (2014): 426; E. Kirby et al., “Basolateral Amygdala Regulation of Adult

724

Hippocampal Neurogenesis and Fear-Related Activation of Newborn Neurons,” Mol
Psychiatry 17 (2012): 527.
30. A. Gozzi, “A Neural Switch for Active and Passive Fear,” Neuron 67 (2010): 656.
31. G. Aston-Jones and J. Cohen, “Adaptive Gain and the Role of the Locus CoeruleusNorepinephrine System in Optimal Performance,” J Comp Neurol 493 (2005): 99; M. Carter et
al., “Tuning Arousal with Optogenetic Modulation of Locus Coeruleus Neurons,”Nat Nsci 13
(2010): 1526.
32. D. Blanchard et al., “Lesions of Structures Showing FOS Expression to Cat Presentation:
Effects on Responsivity to a Cat, Cat Odor, and Nonpredator Threat,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 29
(2005): 1243.
33. G. Holstege, “Brain Activation During Human Male Ejaculation,” J Nsci 23 (2003): 9185; H.
Lee et al., “Scalable Control of Mounting and Attack by Ers1+ Neurons in the Ventromedial
Hypothalamus,” Nat 509 (2014): 627; D. Anderson, “Optogenetics, Sex, and Violence in the
Brain: Implications for Psychiatry,” BP 71 (2012): 1081.
34. K Blair, “Neuroimaging of Psychopathy and Antisocial Behavior: A Targeted Review,” Curr
Psychiatry Rep 12 (2010): 76; K. Kiehl, The Psychopath Whisperer: The Nature of Those
Without Conscience (Woodland Hills, CA: Crown Books, 2014); M. Koenigs et al.,
“Investigating the Neural Correlates of Psychopathy: A Critical Review,” Mol Psychiatry 16
(2011): 792.
35. A particularly nice consideration of impulsivity and the frontal cortex: J. Dalley et al.,
“Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Top-Down Cognitive Control,” Neuron 69 (2011): 680.
36. J. Rilling and T. Insel, “The Primate Neocortex in Comparative Perspective Using MRI,” J
Hum Evol 37 (1999): 191; R. Barton and C. Venditti, “Human Frontal Lobes Are Not
Relatively Large,” PNAS 110 (2013): 9001; Y. Zhang et al., “Accelerated Recruitment of New
Brain Development Genes into the Human Genome,” PLoS Biol 9 (2011): e1001179; G.
Miller, “New Clues About What Makes the Human Brain Special,” Sci 330 (2010): 1167; K.
Semendeferi et al., “Humans and Great Apes Share a Large Frontal Cortex,” Nat Nsci 5
(2002): 272; P. Schoenemann, “Evolution of the Size and Functional Areas of the Human
Brain,” Ann Rev of Anthropology 35 (2006): 379.
37. J. Allman et al., “The von Economo Neurons in the Frontoinsular and Anterior Cingulate
Cortex,” ANYAS 1225 (2011): 59; C. Butti et al., “Von Economo Neurons: Clinical and
Evolutionary Perspectives,” Cortex 49 (2013): 312; H. Evrard et al., “Von Economo Neurons
in the Anterior Insula of the Macaque Monkey,” Neuron 74 (2012): 482.
38. E. Miller and J. Cohen, “An Integrative Theory of Prefrontal Cortex Function,” Ann Rev of
Nsci 24 (2001): 167.
39. V. Mante et al., “Context-Dependent Computation by Recurrent Dynamics in Prefrontal
Cortex,” Nat 503 (2013): 78. Some more examples of frontal cortical involvement in task
switching: S. Bunge, “How We Use Rules to Select Actions: A Review of Evidence from
Cognitive Neuroscience,” SCAN 4 (2004): 564; E. Crone et al., “Evidence for Separable
Neural Processes Underlying Flexible Rule Use,” Cerebral Cortex 16 (2005): 475; R.
Passingham et al., “Specialisation Within the Prefrontal Cortex: The Ventral Prefrontal Cortex
and Associative Learning,” Exp Brain Res 133 (2000): 103; D. Liu et al., “Medial Prefrontal
Activity During Delay Period Contributes to Learning of a Working Memory Task,” Sci 346
(2014): 458; 1983, starring Robert De Niro, Diane Keaton, and the young Brad Pitt in his film
debut, as the sixth frontocortical neuron from the left.
40. J. Baldo et al., “Memory Performance on the California Verbal Learning Test-II: Findings
from Patients with Focal Frontal Lesions,” J the Int Neuropsychological Soc 8 (2002): 539.
41. D. Freedman, “Categorical Representation of Visual Stimuli in the Primate Prefrontal
Cortex,” Sci 291 (2001): 312. More examples of categorical coding: D. McNamee et al.,
“Category-Dependent and Category-Independent Goal-Value Codes in Human Ventromedial

725

Prefrontal Cortex,” Nat Nsci 16 (2013): 479. R. Schmidt et al., “Canceling Actions Involves a
Race Between Basal Ganglia Pathways,” Nat Nsci 16 (2013): 1118.
42. M. Histed et al., “Learning Subtracts in the Primate Prefrontal Cortex and Striatum: Sustained
Activity Related to Successful Actions,” Neuron 63 (2004): 244. For a nice example of the
frontal cortex having to keep track of a rule, see D. Crowe et al., “Prefrontal Neurons Transmit
Signals to Parietal Neurons That Reflect Executive Control of Cognition,” Nat Nsci 16 (2013):
1484.
43. M. Rigotti et al., “The Importance of Mixed Selectivity in Complex Cognitive Tasks,” Nat
497 (2013): 585; J. Cromer et al., “Representation of Multiple, Independent Categories in the
Primate Prefrontal Cortex,” Neuron 66 (2010): 796; M. Cole et al., “Global Connectivity of
Prefrontal Cortex Predicts Cognitive Control and Intelligence,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 8988.
44. L. Grossman et al., “Accelerated Evolution of the Electron Transport Chain in Anthropoid
Primates,” Trends in Genetics 20 (2004): 578.
45. J. W. De Fockert et al., “The Role of Working Memory in Visual Selective Attention,” Sci
291 (2001): 1803; K. Vohs et al., “Making Choices Impairs Subsequent Self-Control: A
Limited-Resource Account of Decision Making, Self-Regulation, and Active Initiative,” JPSP
94 (2008): 883; K. Watanabe and S. Funahashi, “Neural Mechanisms of Dual-Task
Interference and Cognitive Capacity Limitation in the Prefrontal Cortex,” Nat Nsci 17 (2014):
601.
46. N. Meand et al., “Too Tired to Tell the Truth: Self-Control Resource Depletion and
Dishonesty,” JESP 45 (2009): 594; M. Hagger et al., “Ego Depletion and the Strength Model
of Self-Control: A Meta-analysis,” Psych Bull 136 (2010): 495; C. DeWall et al., “Depletion
Makes the Heart Grow Less Helpful: Helping as a Function of Self-Regulatory Energy and
Genetic Relatedness,” PSPB 34 (2008): 1653; W. Hofmann et al., “And Deplete Us Not into
Temptation: Automatic Attitudes, Dietary Restraint, and Self-Regulatory Resources as
Determinants of Eating Behavior,” JESP 43 (2007): 497.
47. Footnote: M. Inzlicht and S. Marcora, “The Central Governor Model of Exercise Regulation
Teaches Us Precious Little About the Nature of Mental Fatigue and Self-Control Failure,”
Front Psych 7 (2016): 656.
48. J. Fuster, “The Prefrontal Cortex—an Update: Time Is of the Essence,” Neuron 30 (2001):
319.
49. K. Yoshida et al., “Social Error Monitoring in Macaque Frontal Cortex,” Nat Nsci 15 (2012):
1307; T. Behrens et al., “Associative Learning of Social Value,” Nat 456 (2008): 245
50. R. Dunbar, “The Social Brain Meets Neuroimaging,” TICS 16 (2011): 101; K. Bickart et al.,
“Intrinsic Amygdala-Cortical Functional Connectivity Predicts Social Network Size in
Humans” J Nsci 32 (2012): 14729; K. Bickart, “Amygdala Volume and Social Network Size in
Humans,” Nat Nsci 14 (2010): 163; R. Kanai et al., “Online Social Network Size Is Reflected
in Human Brain Structure,” Proc Royal Soc B 279 (2012): 1327; F. Amici et al., “FissionFusion Dynamics, Behavioral Flexibility, and Inhibitory Control in Primates,” Curr Biol 18
(2008): 1415. For a similar finding in corvids, see A. Bond et al., “Serial Reversal Learning
and the Evolution of Behavioral Flexibility in Three Species of North American Corvids
(Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus, Nucifraga columbiana, Aphelocoma californica),” JCP 121
(2007): 372.
51. P. Lewis et al., “Ventromedial Prefrontal Volume Predicts Understanding of Others and Social
Network Size,” Neuroimage 57 (2011): 1624; J. Sallet et al., “Social Network Size Affects
Neural Circuits in Macaques,” Sci 334 (2011): 697.
52. J. Harlow, “Recovery from the Passage of an Iron Bar Through the Head,” Publication of the
Massachusetts Med Soc 2 (1868): 327; H. Damasio et al., “The Return of Phineas Gage: Clues
About the Brain from the Skull of a Famous Patient,” Sci 264 (1994): 1102; P. Ratiu and I.
Talos, “The Tale of Phineas Gage, Digitally Remastered,” NEJM 351 (2004): e21; J. Van Horn
et al., “Mapping Connectivity Damage in the Case of Phineas Gage,” PLoS ONE 7 (2012):

726

e37454; M. Macmillan, An Odd Kind of Fame: Stories of Phineas Gage (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2000); J. Jackson, “Frontis. and Nos. 949–51,” in A Descriptive Catalog of the
Warren Anatomical Museum, reproduced in Macmillan, An Odd Kind of Fame. The
photographs of Gage come from J. Wilgus and B. Wilgus, “Face to Face with Phineas Gage,” J
the History of the Nsci 18 (2009): 340.
53. W. Seeley et al., “Early Frontotemporal Dementia Targets Neurons Unique to Apes and
Humans,” Annals of Neurol 60 (2006): 660; R. Levenson and B. Miller, “Loss of Cells, Loss of
Self: Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration and Human Emotion,” Curr Dir Psych Sci 16
(2008): 289.
54. U. Voss et al., “Induction of Self Awareness in Dreams Through Frontal Low Curr
Stimulation of Gamma Activity,” Nat Nsci 17 (2014): 810; J. Georgiadis et al., “Regional
Cerebral Blood Flow Changes Associated with Clitorally Induced Orgasm in Healthy
Women,” Eur J Nsci 24 (2006): 3305.
55. A. Glenn et al., “Antisocial Personality Disorder: A Current Review,” Curr Psychiatry Rep 15
(2013): 427; N. Anderson and K. Kiehl, “The Psychopath Magnetized: Insights from Brain
Imaging,” TICS 16 (2012): 52; L. Mansnerus, “Damaged Brains and the Death Penalty,” New
York Times, July 21, 2001, p. B9; M. Brower and B. Price, “Neuropsychiatry of Frontal Lobe
Dysfunction in Violent and Criminal Behaviour: A Critical Review,” J Neurol, Neurosurgery
& Psychiatry 71 (2001): 720.
56. J. Greene et al., “The Neural Bases of Cognitive Conflict and Control in Moral Judgment,”
Neuron 44 (2004): 389; S. McClure et al., “Separate Neural Systems Value Immediate and
Delayed Monetary Rewards,” Sci 306 (2004): 503.
57. A. Barbey et al., “Dorsolateral Prefrontal Contributions to Human Intelligence,”
Neuropsychologia 51 (2013): 1361.
58. D. Knock et al., “Diminishing Reciprocal Fairness by Disrupting the Right Prefrontal
Cortex,” Sci 314 (2006): 829.
59. D. Mobbs et al., “A Key Role for Similarity in Vicarious Reward,” Sci 324 (2009): 900; P.
Janata et al., “The Cortical Topography of Tonal Structures Underlying Western Music,” Sci
298 (2002): 2167; M. Balter, “Study of Music and the Mind Hits a High Note in Montreal,” Sci
315 (2007): 758.
60. J. Saver and A. Damasio, “Preserved Access and Processing of Social Knowledge in a Patient
with Acquired Sociopathy Due to Ventromedial Frontal Damage,” Neuropsychologia 29
(1991): 1241; M. Donoso et al., “Foundations of Human Reasoning in the Prefrontal Cortex,”
Sci 344 (2014): 1481; T. Hare, “Exploiting and Exploring the Options,” Sci 344 (2014): 1446;
T. Baumgartner et al., “Dorsolateral and Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex Orchestrate
Normative Choice,” Nat Nsci 14 (2011): 1468; A. Bechara, “The Role of Emotion in DecisionMaking: Evidence from Neurological Patients with Orbitofrontal Damage,” Brain and Cog 55
(2004): 30.
61. A. Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of
Consciousness (Boston: Harcourt, 1999).
62. M. Koenigs et al., “Damage to the Prefrontal Cortex Increases Utilitarian Moral Judgments,”
Nat 446 (2007): 865; B. Thomas et al., “Harming Kin to Save Strangers: Further Evidence for
Abnormally Utilitarian Moral Judgments After Ventromedial Prefrontal Damage,” J Cog Nsci
23 (2011): 2186
63. A. Bechara et al., “Deciding Advantageously Before Knowing the Advantageous Strategy,”
Sci 275 (1997): 1293; A. Bechara et al., “Insensitivity to Future Consequences Following
Damage to Human Prefrontal Cortex,” Cog 50 (1994): 7.
64. L. Young et al., “Damage to Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex Impairs Judgment of Harmful
Intent,” Neuron 25 (2010): 845.
65. C. Limb and A. Braun, “Neural Substrates of Spontaneous Musical Performance: An fMRI
Study of Jazz Improvisation,” PLoS ONE 3 (2008): e1679; C. Salzman and S. Fusi, “Emotion,

727

Cognition, and Mental State Representation in Amygdala and Prefrontal Cortex,” Ann Rev of
Nsci 33 (2010): 173.
66. J. Greene et al., “An fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment,” Sci
293 (2001): 2105; J. Greene et al., “The Neural Bases of Cognitive Conflict and Control in
Moral Judgment,” Neuron 44 (2004): 389–400; J. Greene, Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason, and
the Gap Between Us and Them (New York: Penguin, 2013).
67. J. Peters et al., “Induction of Fear Extinction with Hippocampal-Infralimbic BDNF,” Sci 328
(2010): 1288; M. Milad and G. Quirk, “Neurons in Medial Prefrontal Cortex Signal Memory
for Fear Extinction,” Nat 420 (2002): 70; M. Milad and G. Quirk, “Fear Extinction as a Model
for Translational Neuroscience: Ten Years of Progress,” Ann Rev of Psych 63 (2012): 129; C.
Lai et al., “Opposite Effects of Fear Conditioning and Extinction on Dendritic Spine
Remodeling,” Nat 483 (2012): 87. Some recent work suggests involvement of both the ventral
mPFC and the basomedial amygdala in this process: A. Adhikari et al., “Basomedial
Amygdala Mediates Top-Down Control of Anxiety and Fear,” Nat 527 (2016): 179.
68. K. Ochsner et al., “Rethinking Feelings: An fMRI Study of the Cognitive Regulation of
Emotion,” J Cog Nsci 14 (2002): 1215; G. Sheppes and J. Gross, “Is Timing Everything?
Temporal Considerations in Emotion Regulation,” PSPR 15 (2011): 319; G. Sheppes and Z.
Levin, “Emotion Regulation Choice: Selecting Between Cognitive Regulation Strategies to
Control Emotion,” Front Human Neurosci 7 (2013): 179; J. Gross, “Antecedent- and
Response-Focused Emotion Regulation: Divergent Consequences for Experience, Expression,
and Physiology,” JPSP 74 (1998): 224; J. Gross, “Emotion Regulation: Affective, Cognitive,
and Social Consequences,” Psychophysiology 39 (2002): 281; K. Ochsner and J. Gross, “The
Cognitive Control of Emotion,” TICS 9 (2005): 242.
69. M. Lieberman et al., “The Neural Correlates of Placebo Effects: A Disruption Account,”
NeuroImage 22 (2004): 447; P. Petrovic et al., “Placebo and Opioid Analgesia: Imaging a
Shared Neuronal Network,” Sci 295 (2002): 1737.
70. J. Beck, Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 2nd edition (New York: Guilford Press, 2011); P.
Goldin et al., “Cognitive Reappraisal Self-Efficacy Mediates the Effects of Individual
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Social Anxiety Disorder,” J Consulting Clin Psych 80
(2012): 1034.
71. A. Bechara et al., “Failure to Respond Autonomically to Anticipated Future Outcomes
Following Damage to Prefrontal Cortex,” Cerebral Cortex 6 (1996): 215; C. Martin et al.,
“The Effects of Vagus Nerve Stimulation on Decision-Making,” Cortex 40 (2004): 605.
72. G. Bodenhausen et al., “Negative Affect and Social Judgment: The Differential Impact of
Anger and Sadness,” Eur J Soc Psych 24 (1994): 45; A. Sanfey et al., “The Neural Basis of
Economic Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game,” Sci 300 (2003): 1755; K. Gospic et al.,
”Limbic Justice: Amygdala Involvement in Immediate Rejections in the Ultimatum Game,”
PLoS ONE 9 (2011): e1001054.
73. D. Wegner, “How to Think, Say, or Do Precisely the Worst Thing on Any Occasion,” Sci 325
(2009): 58.
74. R. Davidson and S. Begley, The Emotional Life of Your Brain (New York: Hudson Street
Press, 2011); A. Tomarken and R. Davidson, “Frontal Brain Activation in Repressors and
Nonrepressors,” J Abnormal Psych 103 (1994): 339.
75. A. Ito et al., “The Contribution of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex to the Preparation for
Deception and Truth-Telling,” Brain Res 1464 (2012): 43; S. Spence et al., “A Cognitive
Neurobiological Account of Deception: Evidence from Functional Neuroimaging,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soc London Series B 359 (2004): 1755; I. Karton and
T. Bachmann, “Effect of Prefrontal Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation on Spontaneous TruthTelling,” BBR 225 (2011): 209; Y. Yang et al., “Prefrontal White Matter in Pathological Liars,”
Brit J Psychiatry 187 (2005): 320.

728

76. D. Carr and S. Sesack, “Projections from the Rat Prefrontal Cortex to the Ventral Tegmental
Area: Target Specificity in the Synaptic Associations with Mesoaccumbens and Mesocortical
Neurons,” J Nsci 20 (2000): 3864; M. Stefani and B. Moghaddam, “Rule Learning and Reward
Contingency Are Associated with Dissociable Patterns of Dopamine Activation in the Rat
Prefrontal Cortex, Nucleus Accumbens, and Dorsal Striatum,” J Nsci 26 (2006): 8810.
77. T. Danjo et al., “Aversive Behavior Induced by Optogenetic Inactivation of Ventral Tegmental
Area Dopamine Neurons Is Mediated by Dopamine D2 Receptors in the Nucleus Accumbens,”
PNAS 111 (2014): 6455; N. Schwartz et al., “Decreased Motivation During Chronic Pain
Requires Long-Term Depression in the Nucleus Accumbens,” Nat 345 (2014): 535.
78. J. Cloutier et al., “Are Attractive People Rewarding? Sex Differences in the Neural Substrates
of Facial Attractiveness,” J Cog Nsci 20 (2008): 941; K. Demos et al., “Dietary Restraint
Violations Influence Reward Responses in Nucleus Accumbens and Amygdala,” J Cog Nsci
23 (2011): 1952.
79. Footnote: R. Deaner et al., “Monkeys Pay per View: Adaptive Valuation of Social Images by
Rhesus Macaques,” Curr Biol 15 (2005): 543.
80. V. Salimpoor et al., “Interactions Between the Nucleus Accumbens and Auditory Cortices
Predicts Music Reward Value,” Sci 340 (2013): 216; G. Berns and S. Moore, “A Neural
Predictor of Cultural Popularity,” J Consumer Psych 22 (2012): 154; S. Erk et al., “Cultural
Objects Modulate Reward Circuitry,” Neuroreport 13 (2002): 2499.
81. A. Sanfey et al., “The Neural Basis of Economic Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game,”
Sci 300 (2003): 1755. Also see J. Moll et al., “Human Front-Mesolimbic Networks Guide
Decisions About Charitable Donation,” PNAS 103 (2006): 15623; W. Harbaugh et al., “Neural
Responses to Taxation and Voluntary Giving Reveal Motives for Charitable Donations,” Sci
316 (2007): 1622.
82. D. De Quervain et al., “The Neural Basis of Altruistic Punishment,” Sci 305 (2004): 1254; B.
Knutson, “Sweet Revenge?” Sci 305 (2004): 1246.
83. M. Delgado et al., “Understanding Overbidding: Using the Neural Circuitry of Reward to
Design Economic Auctions,” Sci 321 (2008): 1849; E. Maskin, “Can Neural Data Improve
Economics?” Sci 321 (2008): 1788.
84. H. Takahasi et al., “When Your Gain Is My Pain and Your Pain Is My Gain: Neural Correlates
of Envy and Schadenfreude,” Sci 323 (2009): 890; K. Fliessbach et al., “Social Comparison
Affects Reward-Related Brain Activity in the Human Ventral Striatum,” Sci 318 (2007): 1305.
85. W. Schultz, “Dopamine Signals for Reward Value and Risk: Basic and Recent Data,” Behav
and Brain Functions 6 (2010): 24.
86. J. Cooper et al., “Available Alternative Incentives Modulate Anticipatory Nucleus
Accumbens Activation,” SCAN 4 (2009): 409; D. Levy and P. Glimcher, “Comparing Apples
and Oranges: Using Reward-Specific and Reward-General Subjective Value Representation in
the Brain,” J Nsci 31 (2011): 14693.
87. P. Tobler et al., “Adaptive Coding of Reward Value by Dopamine Neurons,” Sci 307 (2005):
1642.
88. W. Schultz, “Dopamine Signals for Reward Value and Risk: Basic and Recent Data,” Behav
and Brain Functions 6 (2010): 24; J. Cohen et al., “Neuron-Type-Specific Signals for Reward
and Punishment in the Central Tegmental Area,” Nat 482 (2012): 85; J. Hollerman and W.
Schultz, “Dopamine Neurons Report an Error in the Temporal Prediction of Reward During
Learning,” Nat Nsci 1 (1998): 304; A. Brooks et al., “From Bad to Worse: Striatal Coding of
the Relative Value of Painful Decisions,” Front Nsci 4 (2010): 1.
89. B. Knutson et al., “Neural Predictors of Purchases,” Neuron 53 (2007): 147.
90. P. Sterling, “Principles of Allostasis: Optimal Design, Predictive Regulation, Pathophysiology
and Rational Therapeutics,” in Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Adaptation, ed. J.
Schulkin (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004).

729

91. B. Knutson et al., “Anticipation of Increasing Monetary Reward Selectively Recruits Nucleus
Accumbens,” J Nsci 21 (2001): RC159.
92. G. Stuber et al., “Reward-Predictive Cues Enhance Excitatory Synaptic Strength onto
Midbrain Dopamine Neurons,” Sci 321 (2008): 1690; A. Luo et al., “Linking Context with
Reward: A Functional Circuit from Hippocampal CA3 to Ventral Tegmental Area,” Sci 33
(2011): 353; J. O’Doherty, “Reward Representations and Reward-Related Learning in the
Human Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging,” Curr Opinions in Neurobiol 14 (2004): 769; M.
Cador et al., “Involvement of the Amygdala in Stimulus-Reward Associations: Interaction with
the Ventral Striatum,” Nsci 30 (1989): 77; J. Britt et al., “Synaptic and Behavioral Profile of
Multiple Glutamatergic Inputs to the Nucleus Accumbens,” Neuron 76 (2012): 790; G. Stuber
et al., “Optogenetic Modulation of Neural Circuits That Underlie Reward Seeking,” BP 71
(2012): 1061; F. Ambroggi et al., “Basolateral Amygdala Neurons Facilitate Reward-Seeking
Behavior by Exciting Nucleus Accumbens Neurons,” Neuron 59 (2008): 648.
93. S. Hyman et al., “Neural Mechanisms of Addiction: The Role of Reward-Related Learning
and Memory,” Ann Rev of Nsci 29 (2006): 565; B. Lee et al., “Maturation of Silent Synapses in
Amygdala-Accumbens Projection Contributes to Incubation of Cocaine Craving,” Nat Nsci 16
(2013): 1644. For a consideration of compulsive behaviors as a sort of addiction: S. Rauch and
W. Carlezon, “Illuminating the Neural Circuitry of Compulsive Behaviors,” Sci 340 (2013):
1174; S. Ahmari et al., “Repeated Cortico-Striatal Stimulation Generates Persistent OCD-like
Behavior,” Sci 340 (2013): 1234; E. Burguiere et al., “Optogenetic Stimulation of Lateral
Orbitofronto-Striatal Pathway Suppresses Compulsive Behaviors,” Sci 340 (2013): 1243.
94. S. Flagel et al., “A Selective Role for Dopamine in Stimulus-Reward Learning,” Nat 469
(2011): 53; K. Burke et al., “The Role of the Orbitofrontal Cortex in the Pursuit of Happiness
and More Specific Rewards,” Nat 454 (2008): 340.
95. P. Tobler et al., “Adaptive Coding of Reward Value by Dopamine Neurons,” Sci 307 (2005):
1642; C. Fiorillo et al., “Discrete Coding of Reward Probability and Uncertainty by Dopamine
Neurons,” Sci 299 (2003): 1898.
96. B. Knutson et al., “Distributed Neural Representation of Expected Value,” J Nsci 25 (2005):
4806; M. Stefani and B. Moghaddam, “Rule Learning and Reward Contingency Are
Associated with Dissociable Patterns of Dopamine Activation in the Rat Prefrontal Cortex,
Nucleus Accumbens, and Dorsal Striatum,” J Nsci 26 (2006): 8810.
97. R. Habib and M. Dixon, “Neurobehavioral Evidence for the “Near-Miss” Effect in
Pathological Gamblers,” J the Exp Analysis of Behav 93 (2010): 313; M. Hsu et al., “Neural
Systems Responding to Degrees of Uncertainty in Human Decision-Making,” Sci 310 (2006):
1680.
98. A. Braun et al., “Dorsal Striatal Dopamine Depletion Impairs Both Allocentric and
Egocentric Navigation in Rats,” Neurobiol of Learning and Memory 97 (2012): 402; J.
Salamone, “Dopamine, Effort, and Decision Making,” Behavioral Nsci 123 (2009): 463; I.
Whishaw and S. Dunnett, “Dopamine Depletion, Stimulation or Blockade in the Rat Disrupts
Spatial Navigation and Locomotion Dependent upon Beacon or Distal Cues,” BBR 18 (1985):
11; J. Salamone and M. Correa, “The Mysterious Motivational Functions of Mesolimbic
Dopamine,” Neuron 76 (2012): 470; H. Tsai et al., “Phasic Firing in Dopaminergic Neurons Is
Sufficient for Behavioral Conditioning,” Sci 324 (2009): 1080; P. Phillips et al., “Sub-second
Dopamine Release Promotes Cocaine Seeking,” Nat 422 (2003): 614; M. Pessiglione et al.,
“Dopamine-Dependent Prediction Errors Underpin Reward-Seeking Behavior in Humans,”
Nat 442 (2008): 1042.
99. Footnote: M. Numan and D. Stoltzenberg, “Medial Preoptic Area Interactions with Dopamine
Neural systems in the Control of the Onset and Maintenance of Maternal Behavior in Rats,”
Front Neuroendo 30 (2009): 46.
100. S. McClue et al., “Separate Neural Systems Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary
Rewards,” Sci 306 (2004): 503; J. Jennings et al., “Distinct Extended Amygdala Circuits for

730

Divergent Motivational States,” Nat 496 (2013): 224.
101. M. Howe et al., “Prolonged Dopamine Signaling in Striatum Signals Proximity and Value of
Distant Rewards,” Nat 500 (2013): 575; Y. Niv, “Dopamine Ramps Up,” Nat 500 (2013): 533.
102. W. Schultz, “Subjective Neuronal Coding of Reward: Temporal Value Discounting and
Risk,” Eur J Nsci 31 (2010): 2124; S. Kobayashi and W. Schultz, “Influence of Reward Delays
on Responses of Dopamine Neurons,” J Nsci 28 (2008): 7837; S. Kim et al., “Prefrontal
Coding of Temporally Discounted Values During Intertemporal Choice,” Neuron 59 (2008):
161; M. Roesch and C. Olson, “Neuronal Activity in Orbitofrontal Cortex Reflects the Value
of Time,” J Neurophysiology 94 (2005): 2457; M. Bermudez and W. Schultz, “Timing in
Reward and Decision Processes,” Philosophical Trans of the Royal Soc of London B 369
(2014): 20120468; B. Figner et al., “Lateral Prefrontal Cortex and Self-Control in
Intertemporal Choice,” Nat Nsci 13 (2010): 538; K. Jimura et al., “Impulsivity and SelfControl During Intertemporal Decision Making Linked to the Neural Dynamics of Reward
Value Representation,” J Nsci 33 (2013): 344; S. McClure et al., “Time Discounting for
Primary Rewards,” J Nsci 27, 5796.
103. K. Ballard and B. Knutson, “Dissociable Neural Representations of Future Reward
Magnitude and Delay During Temporal Discounting,” Neuroimage 45 (2009): 143.
104. A. Lak et al., “Dopamine Prediction Error Responses Integrate Subjective Value from
Different Reward Dimensions,” PNAS 111 (2014): 2343.
105. V. Noreika et al., “Timing Deficits in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD):
Evidence from Neurocognitive and Neuroimaging Studies,” Neuropsychologia 51 (2013): 235;
A. Pine et al., “Dopamine, Time, and Impulsivity in Humans,” J Nsci 30 (2010): 8888; W.
Schultz, “Potential Vulnerabilities of Neuronal Reward, Risk, and Decision Mechanisms to
Addictive Drugs,” Neuron 69 (2011): 603.
106. G. Brown et al., “Aggression in Humans Correlates with Cerebrospinal Fluid Amine
Metabolites,” Psychiatry Res 1 (1979): 131; M. Linnoila et al., “Low Cerebrospinal Fluid 5Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid Concentration Differentiates Impulsive from Nonimpulsive Violent
Behavior,” Life Sci 33 (1983): 2609; P. Stevenson and K. Schildberger, “Mechanisms of
Experience Dependent Control of Aggression in Crickets,” Curr Opinion in Neurobiol 23
(2013): 318; P. Fong and A. Ford, “The Biological Effects of Antidepressants on the Molluscs
and Crustaceans: A Review,” Aquatic Toxicology 151 (2014): 4.
107. M. Linnoila et al., “Low Cerebrospinal Fluid 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid Concentration
Differentiates Impulsive from Nonimpulsive Violent Behavior,” Life Sci 33 (1983): 2609; J.
Higley et al., “Excessive Mortality in Young Free-Ranging Male Nonhuman Primates with
Low Cerebrospinal Fluid 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid Concentrations,” AGP 53 (1996): 537;
M. Åsberg et al., “5-HIAA in the Cerebrospinal Fluid: A Biochemical Suicide Predictor?”
AGP 33 (1976): 1193; M. Bortolato et al., “The Role of the Serotonergic System at the
Interface of Aggression and Suicide,” Nsci 236 (2013): 160.
108. H. Clarke et al., “Cognitive Inflexibility After Prefrontal Serotonin Depletion,” Sci 304
(2004): 878; R. Wood et al., “Effects of Tryptophan Depletion on the Performance of an
Iterated PD Game in Healthy Adults,” Neuropsychopharmacology 1 (2006): 1075.
109. J. Dalley and J. Roiser, “Dopamine, Serotonin and Impulsivity,” Nsci 215 (2012): 42; P.
Redgrave and R. Horrell, “Potentiation of Central Reward by Localized Perfusion of
Acetylcholine and 5-Hydroxytryptamine,” Nat 262 (1976): 305; A. Harrison and A. Markou,
“Serotonergic Manipulations Both Potentiate and Reduce Brain Stimulation Reward in Rats:
Involvement of Serotonin-1A Receptors,” JPET 297 (2001): 316.
110. A. Duke, “Revisiting the Serotonin-Aggression Relation in Humans: A Meta-analysis,”
Psych Bull 139 (2013): 1148.
111. A. Gopnik, “The New Neuro-Skeptics,” New Yorker, September 9, 2013.
112. C. Bukach et al., “Beyond Faces and Modularity: The Power of an Expertise Framework,”
TICS 10 (2006): 159.

731

Chapter 3: Seconds to Minutes Before
1. Abusive mothering and antibehaviorist results: D. Maestripieri et al., “Neurobiological
Characteristics of Rhesus Macaque Abusive Mothers and Their Relation to Social and
Maternal Behavior,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 29 (2005): 51; R. Sullivan et al., “Ontogeny of Infant
Fear Learning and the Amygdala,” in Cognitive Neuroscience IV, ed. M. Gazzaniga
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009), 889.
2. Pandas’ voices: B. Charlton et al., “Vocal Discrimination of Potential Mates by Female Giant
Pandas (Ailuropoda melanoleuca),” Biol Lett 5 (2009): 597. Women’s voices: G. Bryant and
M. Haselton, “Vocal Cues of Ovulation in Human Females,” Biol Lett 5 (2009): 12; Footnote:
J. Knight, “When Robots Go Wild,” Nat 434 (2005): 954.
3. Footnote: H. Herzog, Some We Love, Some We Hate, Some We Eat: Why It’s So Hard to Think
Straight About Animals (New York: Harper, 2010).
4. Vibrational communication: P. Hill, Vibrational Communication in Animals (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2008). Jamming bats: A. Corcoran and W. Conner, “Bats Jamming
Bats: Food Competition Through Sonar Interference,” Sci 346 (2014): 745. Tickling rats: J.
Panksepp, “Beyond a Joke: From Animal Laughter to Human Joy?” Sci 308 (2005): 62.
5. A review concerning how there is a continuum between subliminal sensory information and
information that is sensed but considered to be irrelevant: T. Marteau et al., “Changing Human
Behavior to Prevent Disease: The Importance of Targeting Automatic Processes,” Sci 337
(2012): 1492.
6. Potato chips: M. Zampini and C. Spence, “Assessing the Role of Sound in the Perception of
Food and Drink,” Chemical Senses 3 (2010): 57. K. Edwards, “The Interplay of Affect and
Cognition in Attitude Formation and Change,” JPSP 59 (1990): 212.
7. An excellent review on the subject: J. Kubota et al. “The Neuroscience of Race,” Nat Nsci 15
(2012): 940; for a good review of the entire subject, see: D. Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The
Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions (New York HarperCollins, 2008).
8. T. Ito and G. J. Urland, “Race and Gender on the Brain: Electrocortical Measures of Attention
to the Race and Gender of Multiply Categorizable Individuals,” JPSP 85 (2003): 616. For a
good review of how implicit attitudes are studied, see B. Nosek et al., “Implicit Social
Cognition: From Measures to Mechanisms,” TICS 15 (2011): 152.
9. A. Olsson et al., “The Role of Social Groups in the Persistence of Learned Fear,” Sci 309
(2005): 785.
10. J. Richeson et al., “An fMRI Investigation of the Impact of Interracial Contact on Executive
Function,” Nat Nsci 6 (2003): 1323; K. Knutson et al., “Why Do Interracial Interactions Impair
Executive Function? A Resource Depletion Account,” TICS 10 (2007): 915; K. Knutson et al.,
“Neural Correlates of Automatic Beliefs About Gender and Race,” Human Brain Mapping 28
(2007): 915.
11. N. Kanwisher et al., “The Fusiform Face Area: A Module in Human Extrastriate Cortex
Specialized for Face Perception,” J Nsci 17 (1997): 4302; J. Sergent et al., “Functional
Neuroanatomy of Face and Object Processing: A Positron Emission Tomography Study,”
Brain 115 (1992): 15; A. Golby et al., “Differential Responses in the Fusiform Region to
Same-Race and Other-Race Faces,” Nat Nsci 4 (2001): 845; A. J. Hart et al., “Differential
Response in the Human Amygdala to Racial Outgroup Versus Ingroup Face Stimuli,”
Neuroreport 11 (2000): 2351.
12. K. Shutts and K. Kinzler, “An Ambiguous-Race Illusion in Children’s Face Memory,” Psych
Sci 18 (2007): 763; D. Maner et al., “Functional Projection: How Fundamental Social Motives
Can Bias Interpersonal Perception,” JPSP 88 (2005): 63; K. Hugenberg and G. Bodenhausen,
“Facing Prejudice: Implicit Prejudice and the Perception of Facial Threat,” Psych Sci (2003):
640; J. Van Bavel et al., “The Neural Substrates of In-group Bias: A Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging Investigation,” Psych Sci 19 (2008): 1131; J. Van Bavel and W.

732

Cunningham, “Self-Categorization with a Novel Mixed-Race Group Moderates Automatic
Social and Racial Biases,” PSPB 35 (2009): 321.
13. A. Avenanti et al., “Racial Bias Reduces Empathic Sensorimotor Resonance with Other-Race
Pain,” Curr Biol 20 (2010): 1018; V. Mathur et al., “Neural Basis of Extraordinary Empathy
and Altruistic Motivation,” Neuroimage 51 (2010): 1468–75.
14. J. Correll et al., “Event-Related Potentials and the Decision to Shoot: The Role of Threat
Perception and Cognitive Control,” JESP 42 (2006): 120.
15. J. Eberhardt et al., “See Black: Race, Crime, and Visual Processing,” JPSP 87 (2004): 876; I.
Blair et al., “The Influence of Afrocentric Facial Features in Criminal Sentencing,” Psych Sci
15 (2004): 674; M. Brown et al., “The Effects of Eyeglasses and Race on Juror Decisions
Involving a Violent Crime,” AMFP 26 (2008): 25.
16. J. LeDoux, “Emotion: Clues from the Brain,” Ann Rev of Psych 46 (1995): 209.
17. T. Ito and G. Urland, “Race and Gender on the Brain: Electrocortical Measures of Attention
to the Race and Gender of Multiply Categorizable Individuals,” JPSP 85 (2003): 616; N. Rule
et al., “Perceptions of Dominance Following Glimpses of Faces and Bodies,” Perception 41
(2012): 687; C. Zink et al., “Know Your Place: Neural Processing of Social Hierarchy in
Humans,” Neuron 58 (2008): 273.
18. T. Tsukiura and R. Cabeza, “Shared Brain Activity for Aesthetic and Moral Judgments:
Implications for the Beauty-Is-Good Stereotype,” SCAN 6 (2011): 138.
19. H. Aviezer et al., “Body Cues, Not Facial Expressions, Discriminate Between Intense Positive
and Negative Emotions,” Sci 338 (2012); 1225; C. Bobst and J. Lobmaier, “Men’s Preference
for the Ovulating Female Is Triggered by Subtle Face Shape Differences,” Horm Behav 62
(2012): 413; N. Rule and N. Ambady, “Democrats and Republicans Can Be Differentiated
from Their Faces,” PLoS ONE 5 (2010): e8733; N. Rule et al., “Flustered and Faithful:
Embarrassment as a Signal of Prosociality,” JPSP 102 (2012): 81; N. Rule et al., “On the
Perception of Religious Group Membership from Faces,” PLoS ONE 5 (2010): e14241.
20. P. Whalen et al., “Human Amygdala Responsivity to Masked Fearful Eye Whites,” Sci 306
(2004): 2061.
21. Footnote: R. Hill and R. Barton, “Red Enhances Human Performance in Contests,” Nat 435
(2005): 293; M. Attrill et al., “Red Shirt Colour Is Associated with Long-Term Team Success
in English Football,” JSS 26 (2008): 577; M. Platti et al., “The Red Mist? Red Shirts, Success
and Team Sports,” JSS 15 (2012): 1209; A. Ilie et al., “Better to Be Red Than Blue in Virtual
Competition,” CyberPsychology & Behav 11 (2008): 375; M. Garcia-Rubio et al., “Does a Red
Shirt Improve Sporting Performance? Evidence from Spanish Football,” AEL 18 (2011): 1001;
C. Rowe et al., “Sporting Contests: Seeing Red? Putting Sportswear in Context,” Nat 437
(2005): E10.
22. D. Francey and R. Bergmuller, “Images of Eyes Enhance Investments in a Real-Life Public
Good,” PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e37397; M. Bateson et al., “Cues of Being Watched Enhance
Cooperation in a Real-World Setting,” Biol Lett 2 (2006): 412; K. Haley and D. Fessler,
“Nobody’s Watching? Subtle Cues Affect Generosity in an Anonymous Economic Game,”
EHB 3 (2005): 245; T. Burnham and B. Hare, “Engineering Human Cooperation,” Hum Nat 18
(2007): 88; M. Rigdon et al., “Minimal Social Cues in the Dictator Game,” JEP 30 (2009):
358.
23. C. Forbes et al., “Negative Stereotype Activation Alters Interaction Between Neural
Correlates of Arousal, Inhibition and Cognitive Control,” SCAN 7 (2011): 771.
24. C. Steele, Whistling Vivaldi and Other Clues to How Stereotypes Affect Us (New York:
Norton, 2010).
25. L. Mujica-Parodi et al., “Chemosensory Cues to Conspecific Emotional Stress Activate
Amygdala in Humans,” PLoS ONE 4 (2009): e6415; W. Zhou and D. Chen, “Fear-Related
Chemosignals Modulate Recognition of Fear in Ambiguous Facial Expressions,” Psych Sci 20

733

(2009): 177; A. Prehn et al., “Chemosensory Anxiety Signals Augment the Startle Reflex in
Humans,” Nsci Letters 394 (2006): 127.
26. H. Critchley and N. Harrison, “Visceral Influences on Brain and Behavior,” Neuron 77
(2013): 624; D. Carney et al., “Power Posing Brief Nonverbal Displays Affect Neuroendocrine
Levels and Risk Tolerance,” Psych Sci 21 (2010): 1363. Some related findings: A.
Hennenlotter et al., “The Link Between Facial Feedback and Neural Activity Within Central
Circuitries of Emotion: New Insights from Botulinum Toxin–Induced Denervation of Frown
Muscles,” Cerebral Cortex 19 (2009): 357; J. Davis, “The Effects of BOTOX Injections on
Emotional Experience,” Emotion 10 (2010): 433.
27. L. Berkowitz, “Pain and Aggression: Some Findings and Implications,” Motivation and
Emotion 17 (1993): 277.
28. M. Gailliot et al., “Self-Control Relies on Glucose as a Limited Energy Source: Willpower Is
More Than a Metaphor,” JPSP 92 (2007): 325–36; N. Mead et al., “Too Tired to Tell the Truth:
Self-Control Resource Depletion and Dishonesty,” JESP 45 (2009): 594; C. DeWall et al.,
“Depletion Makes the Heart Grow Less Helpful: Helping as a Function of Self-Regulatory
Energy and Genetic Relatedness,” PSPB 34 (2008): 1653; B. Briers et al., “Hungry for Money:
The Desire for Caloric Resources Increases the Desire for Financial Resources and Vice
Versa,” Psych Sci 17 (2006): 939; C. DeWall et al., “Sweetened Blood Cools Hot Tempers:
Physiological Self-Control and Aggression,” Aggressive Behav 37 (2011): 73; D. Benton,
“Hypoglycemia and Aggression: A Review,” Int J Nsci 41 (1988): 163; B. Bushman et al.,
“Low Glucose Relates to Greater Aggression in Married Couples,” PNAS USA 111 (2014):
6254. For a reinterpretation of this literature as being about motivation for self-control rather
than capacity for it, see M. Inzlicht et al., “Why Self-Control Seems (But May Not Be)
Limited,” TICS 18 (2014): 127.
29. V. Liberman et al., “The Name of the Game: Predictive Power of Reputations Versus
Situational Labels in Determining Prisoner’s Dilemma Game Moves,” PSPB 30 (2004): 1175;
A. Kay and L. Ross, “The Perceptual Push: The Interplay of Implicit Cues and Explicit
Situational Construals on Behavioral Intensions in the Prisoner’s Dilemma,” JESP 39 (2003):
634.
30. Footnote: E. Hall et al., “A Rose by Any Other Name? The Consequences of Subtyping
‘African-Americans’ from ‘Blacks,’” JESP 56 (2015): 183.
31. Footnote: K. Jung et al., “Female Hurricanes Are Deadlier Than Male Hurricanes. PNAS 111
(2014): 8782.
32. A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Rationale Choice and the Framing of Decisions,” J Business
59 (1986): S251; also see: J. Bargh et al., “Priming In-group Favoritism: The Impact of
Normative Scripts in the Minimal Group Paradigm,” JESP 37 (2001): 316; C. Zogmaister et
al., “The Impact of Loyalty and Equality on Implicit Ingroup Favoritism,” Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations 11 (2008): 493.
33. J. Christensen and A. Gomila, “Moral Dilemmas in Cognitive Neuroscience of Moral
Decision-Making: A Principled Review,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 36 (2012): 1249; L. Petrinovich
and P. O’Neill, “Influence of Wording and Framing Effects on Moral Intuitions,” Ethology and
Sociobiology 17 (1996): 145; R. O’Hara et al., “Wording Effects in Moral Judgments,”
Judgment and Decision Making 5 (2010): 547; R. Zahn et al., “The Neural Basis of Human
Social Values: Evidence from Functional MRI,” Cerebral Cortex 19 (2009): 276.
34. D. Butz et al., “Liberty and Justice for All? Implications of Exposure to the U.S. Flag for
Intergroup Relations,” PSPB 33 (2007): 396; M. Levine et al., “Identity and Emergency
Intervention: How Social Group Membership and Inclusiveness of Group Boundaries Shape
Helping Behavior,” PSPB 31 (2005): 443; R. Enos, “Causal Effect of Intergroup Contact on
Exclusionary Attitudes,” PNAS 111 (2014): 3699.
35. M. Shih et al., “Stereotype Susceptibility: Identity Salience and Shifts in Quantitative
Performance,” Psych Sci 10 (1999): 80.

734

36. P. Fischer et al., “The Bystander-Effect: A Meta-analytic Review on Bystander Intervention
in Dangerous and Non-dangerous Emergencies,” Psych Bull 137 (2011): 517.
37. B. Pawlowski et al., “Sex Differences in Everyday Risk-Taking Behavior in Humans,”
Evolutionary Psych 6 (2008): 29; B. Knutson et al., “Nucleus Accumbens Activation Mediates
the Influence of Reward Cues on Financial Risk Taking,” Neuroreport 26 (2008): 509; V.
Griskevicius et al., “Blatant Benevolence and Conspicuous Consumption: When Romantic
Motives Elicit Strategic Costly Signals,” JPSP 93 (2007): 85; L. Chang et al., “The Face That
Launched a Thousand Ships: The Mating-Warring Association in Men,” PSPB 37 (2011): 976;
S. Ainsworth and J. Maner, “Sex Begets Violence: Mating Motives, Social Dominance, and
Physical Aggression in Men,” JPSP 103 (2012): 819; W. Iredale et al., “Showing Off in
Humans: Male Generosity as a Mating Signal,” Evolutionary Psych 6 (2008): 386; M. Van
Vugt and W. Iredale, “Men Behaving Nicely: Public Goods as Peacock Tails,” Brit J Psych 104
(2013): 3.
38. J. Q. Wilson and G. Kelling, “Broken Windows,” Atlantic Monthly, March 1982, p. 29.
39. K. Keizer et al., “The Spreading of Disorder,” Sci 322 (2008): 1681.
40. For some nice examples of how the frontal cortex can direct the nature and focus of sensory
processing, see G. Gregoriou et al., “Lesions of Prefrontal Cortex Reduce Attentional
Modulation of Neuronal Responses and Synchrony in V4,” Nat Nsci 17 (2014): 1003; S.
Zhang et al., “Long-Range and Local Circuits for Top-Down Modulation of Visual Cortex
Processing,” Sci 345 (2014): 660; and T. Zanto et al., “Causal Role of the Prefrontal Cortex in
Top-Down Modulation of Visual Processing and Working Memory,” Nat Nsci 14 (2011): 656.
41. R. Adolphs et al., “A Mechanism for Impaired Fear Recognition After Amygdala Damage,”
Nat 433 (2005): 68.
42. M. Dadds et al., “Reduced Eye Gaze Explains Fear Blindness in Childhood Psychopathic
Traits,” J the Am Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 47 (2008): 4; M. Dadds et al.,
“Attention to the Eyes and Fear-Recognition Deficits in Child Psychopathy,” Brit J Psychiatry
189 (2006): 280.
43. For an introduction to this cross-cultural literature, see R. Nisbett et al., “Culture and Systems
of Thought: Holistic Versus Analytic Cognition,” Psych Rev 108 (2001): 291; T. Hedden et al.,
“Cultural Influences on Neural Substrates of Attentional Control,” Psych Sci 19 (2008): 12; J.
Chiao, “Cultural Neuroscience: A Once and Future Discipline,” Prog in Brain Res 178 (2009):
287; and H. Chua et al., “Cultural Variation in Eye Movements During Scene Perception,”
PNAS 102 (2005): 12629.
Chapter 4: Hours to Days Before
1. Chemical castration as generally effective for obsessive paraphiliacs: F. Berlin, “‘Chemical
Castration’ for Sex Offenders,” NEJM 336 (1997): 1030. Lack of effectiveness in “hostile”
rapists: K. Peters, “Chemical Castration: An Alternative to Incarceration,” Duquesne
University Law Rev 31 (1992): 307. Broad conclusion that it doesn’t work particularly well: P.
Fagan, “Pedophilia,” JAMA 288 (2002): 2458. I thank Arielle Lasky for excellent assistance
with this research subject.
2. For examples of the lack of correlation in a primate species, see M. Arlet et al., “Social Factors
Increase Fecal Testosterone Levels in Wild Male Gray-Cheeked Mangabeys (Lophocebus
albigena),” Horm Behav 59 (2011): 605; J. Archer, “Testosterone and Human Aggression: An
Evaluation of the Challenge Hypothesis,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 30 (2006): 319; the quote is here.
3. J. Oberlander and L. Henderson, “The Sturm und Drang of Anabolic Steroid Use: Angst,
Anxiety, and Aggression,” TINS 35 (2012): 382; R. Agis-Balboa et al., “Enhanced Fear
Responses in Mice Treated with Anabolic Androgenic Steroids,” Neuroreport 22 (2009); 617.
4. E. Hermans, et al., “Testosterone Administration Reduces Empathetic Behavior: A Facial
Mimicry Study,” PNE 31 (2006): 859; J. Honk et al., “Testosterone Administration Impairs
Cognitive Empathy in Women Depending on Second-to-Fourth Digit Ratio,” PNAS 108

735

(2011): 3448; P. Bos et al., “Testosterone Decreases Trust in Socially Naive Humans,” PNAS
107 (2010): 9991; P. Bos et al., “The Neural Mechanisms by Which Testosterone Acts on
Interpersonal Trust,” Neuroimage 2 (2012): 730; P. Mehta and J. Beer, “Neural Mechanisms of
the Testosterone-Aggression Relation: The Role of the Orbitofrontal Cortex,” J Cog Nsci 22
(2009): 2357.
5. L. Tsai and R. Sapolsky, “Rapid Stimulatory Effects of Testosterone upon Myotubule
Metabolism and Hexose Transport, as Assessed by Silicon Microphysiometry,” Aggressive
Behav 22 (1996): 357; C. Rutte et al., “What Sets the Odds of Winning and Losing?” TIEE 21
(2006) 16.
Confidence and persistence: A. Boissy and M. Bouissou, “Effects of Androgen Treatment
on Behavioral and Physiological Responses of Heifers to Fear-Eliciting Situations,” Horm
Behav 28 (1994): 66; R. Andrew and L. Rogers, “Testosterone, Search Behaviour and
Persistence,” Nat 237 (1972): 343; J. Archer, “Testosterone and Persistence in Mice,” Animal
Behav 25 (1977): 479; M. Fuxjager et al., “Winning Territorial Disputes Selectively Enhances
Androgen Sensitivity in Neural Pathways Related to Motivation and Social Aggression,”
PNAS 107 (2010): 12393.
Human sports: M. Elias, “Serum Cortisol, Testosterone, and Testosterone‐Binding Globulin
Responses to Competitive Fighting in Human Males,” Aggressive Behav 7 (1981): 215; A.
Booth et al., “Testosterone, and Winning and Losing in Human Competition,” Horm Behav 23
(1989): 556; J. Carré and S. Putnam, “Watching a Previous Victory Produces an Increase in
Testosterone Among Elite Hockey Players,” PNE 35 (2010): 475; A. Mazur et al.,
“Testosterone and Chess Competition,” Soc Psych Quarterly 55 (1992): 70; J. Coates and J.
Herbert, “Endogenous Steroids and Financial Risk Taking on a London Trading Floor,” PNAS
105 (2008): 616.
6. N. Wright et al., “Testosterone Disrupts Human Collaboration by Increasing Egocentric
Choices,” Proc Royal Soc B (2012): 2275.
7. P. Mehta and J. Beer, “Neural Mechanisms of the Testosterone-Aggression Relation: The Role
of Orbitofrontal Cortex,” J Cog Nsci 22 (2010): 2357; G. van Wingen et al., “Testosterone
Reduces Amygdala–Orbitofrontal Cortex Coupling,” PNE 35 (2010): 105; P. Bos and E.
Hermans et al., “The Neural Mechanisms by Which Testosterone Acts on Interpersonal Trust,”
Neuroimage 2 (2012): 730.
8. Testosterone decreasing fear and anxiety in rodents: C. Eisenegger et al., “The Role of
Testosterone in Social Interaction,” TICS 15 (2011): 263. Testosterone lessens the stress
response: V. Viau, “Functional Cross-Talk Between the Hypothalamic- Pituitary-Gonadal and Adrenal Axes,” J Neuroendocrinology 14 (2002): 506. Testosterone reduces the startle
response in humans: J. van Honk et al., “Testosterone Reduces Unconscious Fear But Not
Consciously Experienced Anxiety: Implications for the Disorders of Fear and Anxiety,” BP 58
(2005): 218; E. J. Hermans et al., “A Single Administration of Testosterone Reduces FearPotentiated Startle in Humans,” BP 59 (2006): 872.
9. General reviews: R. Woods, “Reinforcing Aspects of Androgens,” Physiology & Behav 83
(2004): 279; A. DiMeo and R. Wood, “Circulating Androgens Enhance Sensitivity to
Testosterone Self-Administration in Male Hamsters,” Pharmacology, Biochemistry & Behav
79 (2004): 383; M. Packard et al., “Rewarding Affective Properties of Intra–Nucleus
Accumbens Injections of Testosterone,” Behav Nsci 111 (1997): 219.
10. A. N. Dimeo and R. I. Wood, “ICV Testosterone Induces Fos in Male Syrian Hamster Brain,”
PNE 31 (2006): 237; M. Packard et al., “Rewarding Affective Properties of Intra–Nucleus
Accumbens Injections of Testosterone,” Behav Nsci 111 (1997): 219; M. Packard et al.,
“Expression of Testosterone Conditioned Place Preference Is Blocked by Peripheral or Intraaccumbens Injection of Alpha-flupenthixol,” Horm Behav 34 (1998) 39; M. Fuxjager et al.,
“Winning Territorial Disputes Selectively Enhances Androgen Sensitivity in Neural Pathways
Related to Motivation and Social Aggression,” PNAS 107 (2010): 12393; A. Lacreuse et al.,

736

“Testosterone May Increase Selective Attention to Threat in Young Male Macaques,” Horm
Behav 58 (2010): 854.
11. A. Dixson and J. Herbert, “Testosterone, Aggressive Behavior and Dominance Rank in
Captive Adult Male Talapoin Monkeys (Miopithecus talapoin),” Physiology & Behav 18
(1977): 539.
12. E. Hermans et al., “Exogenous Testosterone Enhances Responsiveness to Social Threat in the
Neural Circuitry of Social Aggression in Humans,” BP 63 (2008): 263; J. van Honk et al., “A
Single Administration of Testosterone Induces Cardiac Accelerative Responses to Angry Faces
in Healthy Young Women,” Behav Nsci 115 (2001): 238; R. Ronay and A. Galinsky, “Lex
Talionis: Testosterone and the Law of Retaliation,” JESP 47 (2011): 702; P. Mehta and J. Beer,
“Neural Mechanisms of the Testosterone-Aggression Relation: The Role of Orbitofrontal
Cortex,” J Cog Nsci 22 (2010): 2357; P. Bos et al., “Testosterone Decreases Trust in Socially
Naive Humans,” PNAS 107 (2010): 9991.
13. K. Kendrick and R. Drewett, “Testosterone Reduces Refractory Period of Stria Terminalis
Neurons in the Rat Brain,” Sci 204 (1979): 877; K. Kendrick, “Inputs to Testosterone-Sensitive
Stria Terminalis Neurones in the Rat Brain and the Effects of Castration,” J Physiology 323
(1982): 437; K. Kendrick, “The Effect of Castration on Stria Terminalis Neurone Absolute
Refractory Periods Using Different Antidromic Stimulation Loci,” Brain Res 248 (1982): 174;
K. Kendrick, “Electrophysiological Effects of Testosterone on the Medial Preoptic-Anterior
Hypothalamus of the Rat,” J Endo 96 (1983): 35; E. Hermans et al., “Exogenous Testosterone
Enhances Responsiveness to Social Threat in the Neural Circuitry of Social Aggression in
Humans,” BP 63 (2008): 263.
14. J. Wingfield et al., “The ‘Challenge Hypothesis’: Theoretical Implications for Patterns of
Testosterone Secretion, Mating Systems, and Breeding Strategies,” Am Naturalist 136 (1990):
829.
15. J. Archer, “Sex Differences in Aggression in Real-World Settings: A Meta-analytic Review,”
Rev of General Psych 8 (2004): 291.
16. J. Wingfield, et al., “Avoiding the ‘Costs’ of Testosterone: Ecological Bases of HormoneBehavior Interactions,” Brain, Behav and Evolution 57 (2001): 239; M. Sobolewski et al.,
“Female Parity, Male Aggression, and the Challenge Hypothesis in Wild Chimpanzees,”
Primates 54 (2013): 81; R. Sapolsky, “The Physiology of Dominance in Stable Versus
Unstable Social Hierarchies,” in Primate Social Conflict, ed. W. Mason and S. Mendoza (New
York: SUNY Press, 1993), p. 171. P. Bernhardt et al., “Testosterone Changes During Vicarious
Experiences of Winning and Losing Among Fans at Sporting Events,” Physiology & Behav 65
(1998): 59.
17. M. Muller and R. Wrangham, “Dominance, Aggression and Testosterone in Wild
Chimpanzees: A Test of the ‘Challenge’ Hypothesis,” Animal Behav 67 (2004): 113; J. Archer,
“Testosterone and Human Aggression: An Evaluation of the Challenge Hypothesis,” Nsci
Biobehav Rev 30 (2006): 319.
18. Footnote: L. Gettler et al., “Longitudinal Evidence That Fatherhood Decreases Testosterone
in Human Males,” PNAS 108 (2011): 16194. S. Van Anders et al., “Baby Cries and Nurturance
Affect Testosterone in Men,” Horm Behav 61 (2012): 31. J. Mascaro et al., “Testicular Volume
is Inversely Correlated with Nurturing-Related Brain Activity in Human Fathers,” PNAS 110
(2013): 15746. In some primates, timing is such that males are doing some degree of paternal
care of offspring at the same time as doing the male-male competition thing to enhance their
future reproductive success. Things get complicated here in that the paternalism and the
competition should have opposite effects on testosterone levels. In the one study of this, groin
trumped paternalism—testosterone levels were elevated. P. Onyango et al., “Testosterone
Positively Associated with Both Male Mating Effort and Paternal Behavior in Savanna
Baboons (Papio cynocephalus),” Horm Behav 63 (2012): 430.

737

19. J. Higley et al., “CSF Testosterone and 5-HIAA Correlate with Different Types of Aggressive
Behaviors,” BP 40 (1996): 1067.
20. C. Eisenegger et al., “Prejudice and Truth About the Effect of Testosterone on Human
Bargaining Behaviour,” Nat 463 (2010): 356.
21. M. Wibral et al., “Testosterone Administration Reduces Lying in Men,” PLoS ONE 7 (2012):
e46774. Also see: J. Van Honk et al., “New Evidence on Testosterone and Cooperation,” Nat
485 (2012): E4.
22. Some reviews: O. Bosch and I. Neumann, “Both Oxytocin and Vasopressin Are Mediators of
Maternal Care and Aggression in Rodents: From Central Release to Sites of Action,” Horm
Behav 61 (2012): 293; R. Feldman, “Oxytocin and Social Affiliation in Humans,” Horm Behav
61 (2012): 380; A. Marsh et al., “The Influence of Oxytocin Administration on Responses to
Infant Faces and Potential Moderation by OXTR Genotype,” Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 24
(2012): 469; M. J. Bakermans-Kranenburg and M. H. van Ijzendoorn, “Oxytocin Receptor
(OXTR) and Serotonin Transporter (5-HTT) Genes Associated with Observed Parenting,”
SCAN 3 (2008): 128. The hypothalamic pathway that differs by sex: N. Scott et al., “A
Sexually Dimorphic Hypothalamic Circuit Controls Maternal Care and Oxytocin Secretion,”
Nat 525 (2016): 519.
23. Footnote: D. Huber et al., “Vasopressin and Oxytocin Excite Distinct Neuronal Populations in
the Central Amygdala,” Sci 308 (2005): 245; D. Viviani and R. Stoop, “Opposite Effects of
Oxytocin and Vasopressin on the Emotional Expression of the Fear Response,” Prog Brain Res
170 (2008): 207.
24. Y. Kozorovitskiy et al., “Fatherhood Affects Dendritic Spines and Vasopressin V1a Receptors
in the Primate Prefrontal Cortex,” Nat Nsci 9 (2006): 1094; Z. Wang et al., “Role of Septal
Vasopressin Innervation in Paternal Behavior in Prairie Voles,” PNAS 91 (1994): 400.
25. A. Smith et al., “Manipulation of the Oxytocin System Alters Social Behavior and Attraction
in Pair-Bonding Primates, Callithrix penicillata,” Horm Behav 57 (2010): 255; M. Jarcho et
al., “Intransal VP Affects Pair Bonding and Peripheral Gene Expression in Male Callicebus
cupreus,” Genes, Brain and Behav 10 (2011): 375; C. Snowdon, “Variation in Oxytocin Is
Related to Variation in Affiliative Behavior in Monogamous, Pairbonded Tamarins,” Horm
Behav 58 (2010); 614.
26. Z. Donaldson and L. Young, “Oxytocin, Vasopressin, and the Neurogenetics of Sociality,” Sci
322 (2008): 900; E. Hammock and L. Young, “Microsatellite Instability Generates Diversity in
Brain and Sociobehavioral Traits,” Sci 308 (2005): 1630; L. Young et al., “Increased
Affiliative Response to Vasopressin in Mice Expressing the V1a Receptor from a
Monogamous Vole,” Nat 400 (1999): 766; M. Lim et al., “Enhanced Partner Preference in a
Promiscuous Species by Manipulating the Expression of a Single Gene,” Nat 429 (2004): 754.
27. E. Hammock and L. Young, “Microsatellite Instability Generates Diversity in Brain and
Sociobehavioral Traits,” Sci 308 (2005): 1630.
28. I. Schneiderman et al., “Oxytocin at the First Stages of Romantic Attachment: Relations to
Couples’ Interactive Reciprocity,” PNE 37 (2012): 1277.
29. B. Ditzen, et al., “Intranasal Oxytocin Increases Positive Communication and Reduces
Cortisol Levels During Couple Conflict,” BP 65 (2009): 728; D. Scheele et al., “Oxytocin
Modulates Social Distance Between Males and Females,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 16074; H. Walum
et al., “Genetic Variation in the Vasopressin Receptor 1a Gene Associates with Pair-Bonding
Behavior in Humans,” PNAS 105 (2008): 14153; H. Walum et al., “Variation in the Oxytocin
Receptor Gene Is Associated with Pair-Bonding and Social Behavior,” BP 71 (2012): 419.
30. M. Nagasawa et al., “Oxytocin-Gaze Positive Loop and the Coevolution of Human-Dog
Bonds,” Sci 348 (2015): 333.
31. M. Yoshida, et al., “Evidence That Oxytocin Exerts Anxiolytic Effects via Oxytocin Receptor
Expressed in Serotonergic Neurons in Mice,” J Nsci 29 (2009): 2259. Oxytocin working in the
amygdala: D. Viviani et al., “Oxytocin Selectively Gates Fear Responses Through Distinct

738

Outputs from the Central Nucleus,” Sci 333 (2011): 104; H. Knobloch et al., “Evoked Axonal
Oxytocin Release in the Central Amygdala Attenuates Fear Response,” Neuron 73 (2012):
553; S. Rodrigues et al., “Oxytocin Receptor Genetic Variation Relates to Empathy and Stress
Reactivity in Humans,” PNAS 106 (2009): 21437; M. Bakermans-Kranenburg and M. van
Ijzendoorn, “Oxytocin Receptor (OXTR) and Serotonin Transporter (5-HTT) Genes
Associated with Observed Parenting,” SCAN 3 (2008): 128; G. Domes et al., “Oxytocin
Attenuates Amygdala Responses to Emotional Faces Regardless of Valence,” BP 62
(2007):1187; P. Kirsch, “Oxytocin Modulates Neural Circuitry for Social Cognition and Fear in
Humans,” J Nsci 25 (2005): 11489; I. Labuschagne et al., “Oxytocin Attenuates Amygdala
Reactivity to Fear in Generalized Social Anxiety Disorder,” Neuropsychopharmacology 35
(2010): 2403; M. Heinrichs et al., “Social Support and Oxytocin Interact to Suppress Cortisol
and Subjective Responses to Psychosocial Stress,” BP 54 (2003): 1389; K. Uvnas-Moberg,
“Oxytocin May Mediate the Benefits of Positive Social Interaction and Emotions,” PNE 23
(1998): 819. Carter quoted in P. S. Churchland and P. Winkielman, “Modulating Social
Behavior with Oxytocin: How Does It Work? What Does It Mean?” Horm Behav 61 (2012):
392.
Oxytocin effects on aggression: M. Dhakar et al., “Heightened Aggressive Behavior in
Mice with Lifelong Versus Postweaning Knockout of the Oxytocin Receptor,” Horm Behav 62
(2012): 86; J. Winslow et al., “Infant Vocalization, Adult Aggression, and Fear Behavior of an
Oxytocin Null Mutant Mouse,” Horm Behav 37 (2005): 145.
32. M. Kosfeld et al., “Oxytocin Increases Trust in Humans,” Nat 435 (2005): 673; A. Damasio,
“Brain Trust,” Nat 435 (2005): 571; S. Israel et al., “The Oxytocin Receptor (OXTR)
Contributes to Prosocial Fund Allocations in the Dictator Game and the Social Value
Orientations Task,” PLoS ONE 4 (2009): e5535; P. Zak et al., “Oxytocin Is Associated with
Human Trustworthiness,” Horm Behav 48 (2005): 522; T. Baumgartner et al., “Oxytocin
Shapes the Neural Circuitry of Trust and Trust Adaptation in Humans,” Neuron 58 (2008):
639; A. Theodoridou et al., “Oxytocin and Social Perception: Oxytocin Increases Perceived
Facial Trustworthiness and Attractiveness,” Horm Behav 56 (2009): 128. A failure of
replication: C. Apicella et al., “No Association Between Oxytocin Receptor (OXTR) Gene
Polymorphisms and Experimentally Elicited Social Preferences,” PLoS ONE 5 (2010): e11153.
Turning the other cheek: J. Filling et al., “Effects of Intranasal Oxytocin and Vasopressin on
Cooperative Behavior and Associated Brain Activity in Men,” PNE 37 (2012): 447.
33. A. Marsh et al., “Oxytocin Improves Specific Recognition of Positive Facial Expressions,”
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 209 (2010): 225; C. Unkelbach, et al., “Oxytocin Selectively
Facilitates Recognition of Positive Sex and Relationship Words,” Psych Sci 19 (2008): 102; J.
Barraza et al., “Oxytocin Infusion Increases Charitable Donations Regardless of Monetary
Resources,” Horm Behav 60 (2011): 148; A. Kogan et al., “Thin-Slice Study of the Oxytocin
Receptor Gene and the Evaluation and Expression of the Prosocial Disposition,” PNAS 108
(2011): 19189; H. Tost et al., “A Common Allele in the Oxytocin Receptor Gene (OXTR)
Impacts Prosocial Temperament and Human Hypothalamic-Limbic Structure and Function,”
PNAS 107 (2010): 13936; R. Hurlemann et al., “Oxytocin Enhances Amygdala-Dependent,
Socially Reinforced Learning and Emotional Empathy in Humans,” J Nsci 30 (2010): 4999.
34. P. Zak et al., “Oxytocin Is Associated with Human Trustworthiness,” Horm Behav 48 (2005):
522; J. Holt-Lunstad et al., “Influence of a ‘Warm Touch’ Support Enhancement Intervention
Among Married Couples on Ambulatory Blood Pressure, Oxytocin, Alpha Amylase, and
Cortisol,” Psychosomatic Med 70 (2008): 976; V. Morhenn et al., “Monetary Sacrifice Among
Strangers Is Mediated by Endogenous Oxytocin Release After Physical Contact,” EHB 29
(2008): 375; C. Crockford et al., “Urinary Oxytocin and Social Bonding in Related and
Unrelated Wild Chimpanzees,” Proc Royal Soc B 280 (2013): 20122765.
35. Z. Donaldson and L. Young, “Oxytocin, Vasopressin, and the Neurogenetics of Sociality,” Sci
322 (2008): 900; A. Guastella et al., “Oxytocin Increases Gaze to the Eye Region of Human

739

Faces,” BP 63 (2008): 3; M. Gamer et al., “Different Amygdala Subregions Mediate ValenceRelated and Attentional Effects of Oxytocin in Humans,” PNAS 107 (2010): 9400; C. Zink et
al., “Vasopressin Modulates Social Recognition–Related Activity in the Left Temporoparietal
Junction in Humans,” Translational Psychiatry 1 (2011): e3; G. Domes et al., “Oxytocin
Improves ‘Mind-Reading’ in Humans,” BP 61 (2007): 731–33; U. Rimmele et al., “Oxytocin
Makes a Face in Memory More Familiar,” J Nsci 29 (2009): 38; M. Fischer-Shofty et al.,
“Oxytocin Facilitates Accurate Perception of Competition in Men and Kinship in Women,”
SCAN (2012).
36. C. Sauer et al., “Effects of a Common Variant in the CD38 Gene on Social Processing in an
Oxytocin Challenge Study: Possible Links to Autism,” Neuropsychopharmacology 37 (2012):
1474.
37. E. Hammock and L. Young, “Oxytocin, Vasopressin and Pair Bonding: Implications for
Autism,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soc of London B 361 (2006): 2187; A.
Meyer-Lindenberg et al., “Oxytocin and Vasopressin in the Human Brain: Social
Neuropeptides for Translational Medicine,” Nat Rev Nsci 12 (2011): 524; H. Yamasue et al.,
“Integrative Approaches Utilizing Oxytocin to Enhance Prosocial Behavior: From Animal and
Human Social Behavior to Autistic Social Dysfunction,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 14109.
38. Reviewed in A. Graustella and C. MacLeod, “A Critical Review of the Influence of Oxytocin
Nasal Spray on Social Cognition in Humans: Evidence and Future Directions,” Horm Behav
61 (2012): 410.
39. J. Bartz et al., “Social Effects of Oxytocin in Humans: Context and Person Matter,” TICS 15
(2011): 301
40. G. Domes et al., “Effects of Intranasal Oxytocin on Emotional Face Processing in Women,”
PNE 35 (2010): 83; G. De Vries, “Sex Differences in Vasopressin and Oxytocin Innervation in
the Brain,” Prog Brain Res 170 (2008): 17; J. Bartz et al., “Effects of Oxytocin on
Recollections of Maternal Care and Closeness,” PNAS 14 (2010): 107.
41. M. Mikolajczak et al., “Oxytocin Not Only Increases Trust When Money Is at Stake, but Also
When Confidential Information Is in the Balance,” BP 85 (2010): 182.
42. H. Kim et al., “Culture, Distress, and Oxytocin Receptor Polymorphism (OXTR) Interact to
Influence Emotional Support Seeking,” PNAS 107 (2010): 15717.
43. O. Bosch and I. Neumann, “Both Oxytocin and Vasopressin Are Mediators of Maternal Care
and Aggression in Rodents: From Central Release to Sites of Action,” Horm Behav 61 (2012):
293.
44. C. Ferris and M. Potegal, “Vasopressin Receptor Blockade in the Anterior Hypothalamus
Suppresses Aggression in Hamsters,” Physiology & Behav 44 (1988): 235; H. Albers, “The
Regulation of Social Recognition, Social Communication and Aggression: Vasopressin in the
Social Behavior Neural Network,” Horm Behav 61 (2012): 283; A. Johansson et al., “Alcohol
and Aggressive Behavior in Men: Moderating Effects of Oxytocin Receptor Gene (OXTR)
Polymorphisms,” Genes, Brain and Behav 11 (2012): 214; J. Winslow and T. Insel, “Social
Status in Pairs of Male Squirrel Monkeys Determines the Behavioral Response to Central
Oxytocin Administration,” J Nsci 11 (1991): 2032; J. Winslow et al., “A Role for Central
Vasopressin in Pair Bonding in Monogamous Prairie Voles,” Nat 365 (1993): 545.
45. T. Baumgartner et al., “Oxytocin Shapes the Neural Circuitry of Trust and Trust Adaptation in
Humans,” Neuron 58 (2008): 639; C. Declerk et al., “Oxytocin and Cooperation Under
Conditions of Uncertainty: The Modulating Role of Incentives and Social Information,” Horm
Behav 57 (2010): 368; S. Shamay-Tsoory et al., “Intranasal Administration of Oxytocin
Increases Envy and Schadenfreude (Gloating),” BP 66 (2009): 864.
46. C. de Dreu, “Oxytocin Modulates Cooperation Within and Competition Between Groups: An
Integrative Review and Research Agenda,” Horm Behav 61 (2012): 419; C. de Dreu et al.,
“The Neuropeptide Oxytocin Regulates Parochial Altruism in Intergroup Conflict Among
Humans,” Sci 328 (2011): 1408.

740

47. C. de Dreu et al., “Oxytocin Promotes Human Ethnocentrism,” PNAS 108 (2011): 1262.
48. Footnote: S. Motta et al., “Ventral Premammillary Nucleus as a Critical Sensory Relay to the
Maternal Aggression Network,” PNAS 110 (2013): 14438.
49. J. Lonstein and S. Gammie, “Sensory, Hormonal, and Neural Control of Maternal Aggression
in Laboratory Rodents,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 26 (2002): 869; S. Parmigiani et al., “Selection,
Evolution of Behavior and Animal Models in Behavioral Neuroscience,” Nsci Biobehav Rev
23 (1999): 957.
50. R. Gandelman and N. Simon, “Postpartum Fighting in the Rat: Nipple Development and the
Presence of Young,” Behav and Neural Biol 29 (1980): 350; M. Erskine et al., “Intraspecific
Fighting During Late Pregnancy and Lactation in Rats and Effects of Litter Removal,” Behav
Biol 23 (1978): 206; K. Flannelly and E. Kemble, “The Effect of Pup Presence and Intruder
Behavior on Maternal Aggression in Rats,” Bull of the Psychonomic Soc 25 (1988): 133.
51. B. Derntl et al., “Association of Menstrual Cycle Phase with the Core Components of
Empathy,” Horm Behav 63 (2013): 97.
For a good review see C. Bodo and E. Rissman, “New Roles for Estrogen Receptor Beta in
Behavior and Neuroendocrinology,” Front Neuroendocrinology 27 (2006): 217.
52. D. Reddy, “Neurosteroids: Endogenous Role in the Human Brain and Therapeutic
Potentials,” Prog Brain Res 186 (2010): 113; F. De Sousa et al., “Progesterone and Maternal
Aggressive Behavior in Rats,” Behavioural Brain Res 212 (2010): 84; G. Pinna et al.,
“Neurosteroid Biosynthesis Regulates Sexually Dimorphic Fear and Aggressive Behavior in
Mice,” Neurochemical Res 33 (2008): 1990; K. Miczek et al., “Neurosteroids, GABAA
Receptors, and Escalated Aggressive Behavior,” Horm Behav 44 (2003): 242.
53. S. Hrdy, “The ‘One Animal in All Creation About Which Man Knows the Least,’”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soc B 368 (2013): 20130072.
54. The spillover idea is aired in E. Ketterson et al., “Testosterone in Females: Mediator of
Adaptive Traits, Constraint on Sexual Dimorphism, or Both?” Am Naturalist 166 (2005): 585.
55. C. Voigt and W. Goymann, “Sex-Role Reversal Is Reflected in the Brain of African Black
Coucals (Centropus grillii),” Developmental Neurobiol 67 (2007): 1560; M. Peterson et al.,
“Testosterone Affects Neural Gene Expression Differently in Male and Female Juncos: A Role
for Hormones in Mediating Sexual Dimorphism and Conflict,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): e61784.
56. A. Pusey and K. Schroepfer-Walker, “Female Competition in Chimpanzees,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Soc B 368 (2013): 20130077.
57. J. French et al., “The Influence of Androgenic Steroid Hormones on Female Aggression in
‘Atypical’ Mammals,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soc B 368 (2013): 20130084;
L. Frank et al., “Fatal Sibling Aggression, Precocial Development, and Androgens in Neonatal
Spotted Hyenas,” Sci 252 (1991): 702; S. Glickman et al., “Androstenedione May Organize or
Activate Sex-Reversed Traits in Female Spotted Hyenas,” PNAS 84 (1987): 3444.
58. W. Goymann et al., “Androgens and the Role of Female ‘Hyperaggressiveness’ in Spotted
Hyenas,” Horm Behav 39 (2001): 83; S. Fenstemaker et al., “A Sex Difference in the
Hypothalamus of the Spotted Hyena,” Nat Nsci 2 (1999): 943; G. Rosen et al., “Distribution of
Vasopressin in the Forebrain of Spotted Hyenas,” J Comp Neurol 498 (2006): 80.
59. P. Chambers and J. Hearn, “Peripheral Plasma Levels of Progesterone, Oestradiol-17β,
Oestrone, Testosterone, Androstenedione and Chorionic Gonadotrophin During Pregnancy in
the Marmoset Monkey, Callithrix jacchus,” J Reproduction Fertility 56 (1979): 23; C. Drea,
“Endocrine Correlates of Pregnancy in the Ring-Tailed Lemur (Lemur catta): Implications for
the Masculinization of Daughters,” Horm Behav 59 (2011): 417; M. Holmes et al., “Social
Status and Sex Independently Influence Androgen Receptor Expression in the Eusocial Naked
Mole-Rat Brain,” Horm Behav 54 (2008): 278; L. Koren et al., “Elevated Testosterone Levels
and Social Ranks in Female Rock Hyrax,” Horm Behav 49 (2006): 470; C. Kraus et al., “High
Maternal Androstenedione Levels During Pregnancy in a Small Precocial Mammal with
Female Genital Masculinisation” (Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research Working

741

Paper WP 2008-017, April 2008); C. Kraus et al., “Spacing Behaviour and Its Implications for
the Mating System of a Precocial Small Mammal: An Almost Asocial Cavy Cavia magna,”
Animal Behav 66 (2003): 225; L. Koren and E. Geffen, “Androgens and Social Status in
Female Rock Hyraxes,” Animal Behav 77 (2009): 233.
60. Footnote: DHEA and local generation of steroids within neurons: K. Soma et al., “Novel
Mechanisms for Neuroendocrine Regulation of Aggression,” Front Neuroendocrinology 29
(2008): 476; K. Schmidt et al., “Neurosteroids, Immunosteroids, and the Balkanization of
Endo,” General and Comp Endo 157 (2008): 266; D. Pradhan et al., “Aggressive Interactions
Rapidly Increase Androgen Synthesis in the Brain During the Non-breeding Season,” Horm
Behav 57 (2010): 381.
61. T. Johnson, “Premenstrual Syndrome as a Western Culture-Specific Disorder,” Culture, Med
and Psychiatry 11 (1987): 337; L. Cosgrove and B. Riddle, “Constructions of Femininity and
Experiences of Menstrual Distress,” Women & Health 38 (2003): 37.
62. For the quote in the text, see M. Rodin, “The Social Construction of Premenstrual
Syndrome,” Soc Sci & Med 35 (1992); 49. For the quote in the footnote, see: A. Kleinman,
“Depression, Somaticization, and the New ‘Cross-Cultural Psychiatry,’” Social Science Med
11 (1977): 3.
63. H. Rupp et al., “Neural Activation in the Orbitofrontal Cortex in Response to Male Faces
Increases During Follicular Phase,” Horm Behav 56 (2009): 66. Mareckova K. et al.
“Hormonal Contraceptives, Menstrual Cycle and Brain Response to Faces. SCAN 9 (2012):
191.
64. A. Rapkin et al., “Menstrual Cycle and Social Behavior in Vervet Monkeys,” PNE 20 (1995):
289; E. García-Castells et al., “Changes in Social Dynamics Associated to the Menstrual Cycle
in the Vervet Monkey (Cercopithecus aethiops),” Boletín de Estudios Médicos y Biológicos 37
(1989): 11; G. Mallow, “The Relationship Between Aggressive Behavior and Menstrual Cycle
Stage in Female Rhesus Monkeys (Macaca mulatta),” Horm Behav 15 (1981): 259; G.
Hausfater and B. Skoblic, “Perimenstrual Behavior Changes Among Female Yellow Baboons:
Some Similarities to Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) in Women,” Animal Behav 9 (1985): 165.
65. K. Dalton, “School Girls’ Behavior and Menstruation,” Brit Med J 2 (1960): 1647; K. Dalton,
“Menstruation and Crime,” Brit Med J 2 (1961): 1752; K. Dalton, “Cyclical Criminal Acts in
Premenstrual Syndrome,” Lancet 2 (1980): 1070.
66. P. Easteal, “Women and Crime: Premenstrual Issues,” Trends and Issues in Crime and
Criminal Justice 31 (1991): 1–8; J. Chrisler and P. Caplan, “The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and
Ms. Hyde: How PMS Became a Cultural Phenomenon and a Psychiatric Disorder,” Ann Rev of
Sex Res 13 (2002): 274.
67. For a general review, see R. Sapolsky, Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: A Guide to Stress,
Stress-Related Diseases and Coping, 3rd ed. (New York: Henry Holt, 2004).
68. R. Sapolsky “Stress and the Brain: Individual Variability and the Inverted-U,” Nat Nsci 25
(2015): 1344.
69. K. Roelofs et al., “The Effects of Social Stress and Cortisol Responses on the Preconscious
Selective Attention to Social Threat,” BP 75 (2007): 1; K. Tully et al., “Norepinephrine
Enables the Induction of Associative Long-Term Potentiation at Thalamo-Amygdala
Synapses,” PNAS 104 (2007): 14146; P. Putman et al., “Cortisol Administration Acutely
Reduces Threat-Selective Spatial Attention in Healthy Young Men,” Physiology & Behav 99
(2010): 294; K. Bertsch et al., “Exogenous Cortisol Facilitates Responses to Social Threat
Under High Provocation,” Horm Behav 59 (2011): 428.
70. J. Rosenkranz et al., “Chronic Stress Causes Amygdala Hyperexcitability in Rodents,” BP 67
(2010): 1128; S. Duvarci and D. Pare, “Glucocorticoids Enhance the Excitability of Principle
Basolateral Amygdala Neurons,” J Nsci 27 (2007): 4482; A. Kavushansky and G. RichterLevin, “Effects of Stress and Corticosterone on Activity and Plasticity in the Amygdala,” J
Nsci Res 84 (2006): 1580; A. Kavushansky et al., “Activity and Plasticity in the CA1, the

742

Dentate Gyrus, and the Amygdala Following Controllable Versus Uncontrollable Water
Stress,” Hippocampus 16 (2006): 35; P. Rodríguez Manzanares et al., “Previous Stress
Facilitates Fear Memory, Attenuates GABAergic Inhibition, and Increases Synaptic Plasticity
in the Rat Basolateral Amygdala,” J Nsci 25 (2005): 8725; H. Lakshminarasimhan and S.
Chattarji, “Stress Leads to Contrasting Effects on the Levels of Brain Derived Neurotrophic
Factor in the Hippocampus and Amygdala,” PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e30481; S. Ghosh et al.,
“Functional Connectivity from the Amygdala to the Hippocampus Grows Stronger After
Stress,” J Nsci 33 (2013): 7234.
71. B. Kolber et al., “Central Amygdala Glucocorticoid Receptor Action Promotes FearAssociated CRH Activation and Conditioning,” PNAS 105 (2008): 12004; S. Rodrigues et al.,
“The Influence of Stress Hormones on Fear Circuitry,” Ann Rev Nsci 32 (2009): 289; L. Shin
and I. Liberzon, “The Neurocircuitry of Fear, Stress, and Anxiety Disorders,”
Neuropsychopharmacology 35, no. 1 (January 2010): 169.
72. M. Milad and G. Quirk, “Neurons in Medial Prefrontal Cortex Signal Memory for Fear
Extinction,” Nat 420 (2002): 70; E. Phelps et al., “Extinction Learning in Humans: Role of the
Amygdala and vmPFC,” Neuron 43 (2004): 897; J. Bremner et al., “Neural Correlates of
Exposure to Traumatic Pictures and Sound in Vietnam Combat Veterans With and Without
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Positron Emission Tomography Study,” BP 45 (1999) 806; D.
Knox et al., “Single Prolonged Stress Disrupts Retention of Extinguished Fear in Rats,”
Learning & Memory 19 (2012): 43; M. Schmidt et al., “Stress-Induced Metaplasticity: From
Synapses to Behavior,” Nsci 250 (2013): 112; J. Pruessner et al., “Deactivation of the Limbic
System During Acute Psychosocial Stress: Evidence from Positron Emission Tomography and
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Studies,” BP 63 (2008): 234.
73. A. Young et al., “The Effects of Chronic Administration of Hydrocortisone on Cognitive
Function in Normal Male Volunteers,” Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 145 (1999): 260; A.
Barsegyan et al., “Glucocorticoids in the Prefrontal Cortex Enhance Memory Consolidation
and Impair Working Memory by a Common Neural Mechanism,” PNAS 107 (2010): 16655; A.
Arnsten et al., “Neuromodulation of Thought: Flexibilities and Vulnerabilities in Prefrontal
Cortical Network Synapses,” Neuron 76 (2012): 223; B. Roozendaal et al., “The Basolateral
Amygdala Interacts with the Medial Prefrontal Cortex in Regulating Glucocorticoid Effects on
Working Memory Impairment,” J Nsci 24 (2004): 1385; C. Liston et al., “Psychosocial Stress
Reversibly Disrupts Prefrontal Processing and Attentional Control,” PNAS 106 (2008): 912.
74. E. Dias-Ferreira et al., “Chronic Stress Causes Frontostriatal Reorganization and Affects
Decision-Making,” Sci 325 (2009): 621; D. Lyons et al., “Stress-Level Cortisol Treatment
Impairs Inhibitory Control of Behavior in Monkeys,” J Nsci 20 (2000): 7816; J. Kim et al.,
“Amygdala Is Critical for Stress-Induced Modulation of Hippocampal Long-Term Potentiation
and Learning,” J Nsci 21 (2001): 5222; L. Schwabe and O. Wolf, “Stress Prompts Habit
Behavior in Humans,” J Nsci 29 (2009): 7191; L. Schwabe and O. Wolf, “Socially Evaluated
Cold Pressor Stress After Instrumental Learning Favors Habits over Goal-Directed Action,”
PNE 35 (2010): 977; L. Schwabe and O. Wolf, “Stress-Induced Modulation of Instrumental
Behavior: From Goal-Directed to Habitual Control of Action,” BBR 219 (2011): 321; L.
Schwabe and O. Wolf, “Stress Modulates the Engagement of Multiple Memory Systems in
Classification Learning,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 11042; L. Schwabe et al., “Simultaneous
Glucocorticoid and Noradrenergic Activity Disrupts the Neural Basis of Goal-Directed Action
in the Human Brain,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 10146.
75. V. Venkatraman et al., “Sleep Deprivation Biases the Neural Mechanisms Underlying
Economic Preferences,” J Nsci 31 (2011): 3712; M. Brand et al., “Decision-Making Deficits of
Korsakoff Patients in a New Gambling Task with Explicit Rules: Associations with Executive
Functions,” Neuropsychology 19 (2005): 267; E. Masicampo and R. Baumeister, “Toward a
Physiology of Dual-Process Reasoning and Judgment: Lemonade, Willpower, and Expensive
Rule-Based Analysis,” Psych Sci 19 (2008): 255.

743

76. S. Preston et al., “Effects of Anticipatory Stress on Decision-Making in a Gambling Task,”
Behav Nsci 121 (2007): 257; R. van den Bos et al., “Stress and Decision-Making in Humans:
Performance Is Related to Cortisol Reactivity, Albeit Differently in Men and Women,” PNE 34
(2009): 1449; N. Lighthall et al., “Acute Stress Increases Sex Differences in Risk Seeking in
the Balloon Analogue Risk Task,” PLoS ONE 4 (2009): e6002; N. Lighthall et al., “Gender
Differences in Reward-Related Decision Processing Under Stress,” SCAN 7, no. 4 (April
2012): 476–84; P. Putman et al., “Exogenous Cortisol Acutely Influences Motivated Decision
Making in Healthy Young Men,” Psychopharmacology 208 (2010): 257; P. Putman et al.,
“Cortisol Administration Acutely Reduces Threat-Selective Spatial Attention in Healthy
Young Men,” Physiology & Behav 99 (2010): 294; K. Starcke et al., “Anticipatory Stress
Influences Decision Making Under Explicit Risk Conditions,” Behav Nsci 122 (2008): 1352.
77. E. Mikics et al., “Genomic and Non-genomic Effects of Glucocorticoids on Aggressive
Behavior in Male Rats,” PNE 29 (2004): 618; D. Hayden-Hixson and C. Ferris, “SteroidSpecific Regulation of Agonistic Responding in the Anterior Hypothalamus of Male
Hamsters,” Physiology & Behav 50 (1991): 793; A. Poole and P. Brain, “Effects of
Adrenalectomy and Treatments with ACTH and Glucocorticoids on Isolation-Induced
Aggressive Behavior in Male Albino Mice,” Prog Brain Res 41 (1974): 465; E. Mikics et al.,
“The Effect of Glucocorticoids on Aggressiveness in Established Colonies of Rats,” PNE 32
(2007): 160; R. Böhnke et al., “Exogenous Cortisol Enhances Aggressive Behavior in Females,
but Not in Males,” PNE 35 (2010): 1034; K. Bertsch et al., “Exogenous Cortisol Facilitates
Responses to Social Threat Under High Provocation,” Horm Behav 59 (2011): 428.
78. S. Levine et al., “The PNE of Stress: A Psychobiological Perspective,” in
Psychoneuroendocrinology, ed. S. Levine and R. Brush (New York: Academic Press, 1988), p.
181; R. Sapolsky and J. Ray, “Styles of Dominance and Their Physiological Correlates Among
Wild Baboons,” Am J Primat l8 (1989): l; J. C. Ray and R. Sapolsky, “Styles of Male Social
Behavior and Their Endocrine Correlates Among High-Ranking Baboons,” Am J Primat 28
(1992): 231; C. E. Virgin and R. Sapolsky, “Styles of Male Social Behavior and Their
Endocrine Correlates Among Low-Ranking Baboons,” Am J Primat 42 (1997): 25.
79. D. Card and G. Dahl, “Family Violence and Football: The Effect of Unexpected Emotional
Cues on Violent Behavior,” Quarterly J Economics 126 (2011): 103.
80. Footnote: For a study concerning the neurobiology of how stress makes healthy habits harder
to maintain, see C. Cifani et al., “Medial Prefrontal Cortex Neuronal Activation and Synaptic
Alterations After Stress-Induced Reinstatement of Palatable Food Seeking: A Study Using cfos-GFP Transgenic Female Rats,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 8480.
81. K. Starcke et al., “Does Everyday Stress Alter Moral Decision-Making?” PNE 36 (2011):
210; F. Youssef et al., “Stress Alters Personal Moral Decision Making,” PNE 37 (2012): 491.

744

82. D. Langford et al., “Social Modulation of Pain as Evidence for Empathy in Mice,” Sci 312
(2006): 1967.
83. S. Taylor et al., “Biobehavioral Responses to Stress in Females: Tend-and-Befriend, Not
Fight-or-Flight,” Psych Rev 107 (2000): 411.
84. B. Bushman, “Human Aggression While Under the Influence of Alcohol and Other Drugs:
An Integrative Research Review,” Curr Dir Psych Sci 2 (1993): 148; L. Zhang et al., “The
Nexus Between Alcohol and Violent Crime,” Alcoholism: Clin and Exp Res 21 (1997): 1264;
K. Graham and P. West, “Alcohol and Crime: Examining the Link,” in International Handbook
of Alcohol Dependence and Problems, ed. N. Heather, T. J. Peters, and T. Stockwell (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001); I. Quadros et al., “Individual Vulnerability to Escalated
Aggressive Behavior by a Low Dose of Alcohol: Decreased Serotonin Receptor mRNA in the
Prefrontal Cortex of Male Mice,” Genes, Brain and Behav 9 (2010): 110; A. Johansson et al.,
“Alcohol and Aggressive Behavior in Men: Moderating Effects of Oxytocin Receptor Gene
(OXTR) Polymorphisms,” Genes, Brain and Behav 11 (2012): 214.
Chapter 5: Days to Months Before
1. D. O. Hebb, The Organization of Behaviour (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 1949).
2. General reviews: R. Nicoll and K. Roche, “Long-Term Potentiation: Peeling the Onion,”
Neuropharmacology 74 (2013): 18; J. MacDonald et al., “Hippocampal Long-Term Synaptic
Plasticity and Signal Amplification of NMDA Receptors,” Critical Rev in Neurobiol 18
(2006): 71.
3. T. Sigurdsson et al., “Long-Term Potentiation in the Amygdala: A Cellular Mechanism of Fear
Learning and Memory,” Neuropharmacology 52 (2007): 215; J. Kim and M. Jung, “Neural
Circuits and Mechanisms Involved in Pavlovian Fear Conditioning: A Critical Review,” Nsci
Biobehav Rev 30 (2006): 188; M. Wolf, “LTP May Trigger Addiction,” Mol Interventions 3
(2003): 248; M. Wolf et al., “Psychomotor Stimulants and Neuronal Plasticity,”
Neuropharmacology 47, supp. 1 (2004): 61.
4. M. Foy et al., “17beta-estradiol Enhances NMDA Receptor-Mediated EPSPs and Long-Term
Potentiation,” J Neurophysiology 81 (1999): 925; Y. Lin et al., “Oxytocin Promotes Long-Term
Potentiation by Enhancing Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-Mediated Local Translation of
Protein Kinase Mζ,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 15476; K. Tomizawa et al., “Oxytocin Improves LongLasting Spatial Memory During Motherhood Through MAP Kinase Cascade,” Nat Nsci 6
(2003): 384; V. Skucas et al., “Testosterone Depletion in Adult Male Rats Increases Mossy
Fiber Transmission, LTP, and Sprouting in Area CA3 of Hippocampus,” J Nsci 33 (2013):
2338; W. Timmermans et al., “Stress and Excitatory Synapses: From Health to Disease,” Nsci
248 (2013): 626.
5. S. Rodrigues et al., “The Influence of Stress Hormones on Fear Circuitry,” Ann Rev Nsci 32
(2009): 289; X. Xu and Z. Zhang, “Effects of Estradiol Benzoate on Learning-Memory
Behavior and Synaptic Structure in Ovariectomized Mice,” Life Sci 79 (2006): 1553; C.
Rocher et al., “Acute Stress-Induced Changes in Hippocampal/Prefrontal Circuits in Rats:
Effects of Antidepressants,” Cerebral Cortex 14 (2004): 224.
6. A. Holtmaat and K. Svoboda, “Experience-Dependent Structural Synaptic Plasticity in the
Mammalian Brain,” Nat Rev Nsci 10 (2009): 647; C. Woolley et al., “Naturally Occurring
Fluctuation in Dendritic Spine Density on Adult Hippocampal Pyramidal Neurons,” J Nsci 10
(1990): 4035; W. Kelsch et al., “Watching Synaptogenesis in the Adult Brain,” Ann Rev of Nsci
33 (2010): 131.
7. B. Leuner and T. Shors, “Stress, Anxiety, and Dendritic Spines: What Are the Connections?”
Nsci 251 (2013): 108; Y. Chen et al., “Correlated Memory Defects and Hippocampal Dendritic
Spine Loss After Acute Stress Involve Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone Signaling,” PNAS
107 (2010): 13123.

745

8. J. Cerqueira et al., “Morphological Correlates of Corticosteroid-Induced Changes in Prefrontal
Cortex Dependent Behaviours,” J Nsci 25 (2005): 7792; A. Izquierdo et al., “Brief
Uncontrollable Stress Causes Dendritic Retraction in Infralimbic Cortex and Resistance to
Fear Extinction in Mice,” J Nsci 26 (2006): 5733; C. Liston et al., “Stress-Induced Alterations
in Prefrontal Cortical Dendritic Morphology Predict Selective Impairments in Perceptual
Attentional Set Shifting,” J Nsci 26 (2006): 7870; J. Radley, “Repeated Stress Induces
Dendritic Spine Loss in the Rat Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” Cerebral Cortex 16 (2006): 313; A.
Arnsten, “Stress Signaling Pathways That Impair Prefrontal Cortex Structure and Function,”
Nat Rev Nsci 10 (2009): 410; C. Sandi and M. Loscertales, “Opposite Effects on NCAM
Expression in the Rat Frontal Cortex Induced by Acute vs. Chronic Corticosterone
Treatments,” Brain Res 828 (1999): 127; C. Wellman, “Dendritic Reorganization in Pyramidal
Neurons in Medial Prefrontal Cortex After Chronic Corticosterone Administration,” J
Neurobiol 49 (2001): 245; D. Knox et al., “Single Prolonged Stress Decreases Glutamate,
Glutamine, and Creatine Concentrations in the Rat Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” Nsci Lett 480
(2010): 16.
9. E. Dias-Ferreira et al., “Chronic Stress Causes Frontostriatal Reorganization and Affects
Decision-Making,” Sci 325 (2009): 621; M. Fuchikiami et al., “Epigenetic Regulation of
BDNF Gene in Response to Stress,” Psychiatry Investigation 7 (2010): 251.
10. R. Mitra and R. Sapolsky, “Acute Corticosterone Treatment Is Sufficient to Induce Anxiety
and Amygdaloid Dendritic Hypertrophy,” PNAS 105 (2008): 5573; A. Vyas et al., “Chronic
Stress Induces Contrasting Patterns of Dendritic Remodeling in Hippocampal and Amygdaloid
Neurons,” J Nsci 22 (2002): 6810; S. Bennur et al., “Stress-Induced Spine Loss in the Medial
Amygdala Is Mediated by Tissue-Plasminogen Activator,” Nsci 144 (2006): 8; A.
Govindarajan et al., “Transgenic Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Expression Causes Both
Anxiogenic and Antidepressant Effects,” PNAS 103 (2006): 13208.
Expansion of the BNST: A. Vyas et al., “Effects of Chronic Stress on Dendritic
Arborization in the Central and Extended Amygdala,” Brain Res 965 (2003): 290; J. Pego et
al., “Dissociation of the Morphological Correlates of Stress-Induced Anxiety and Fear,” Eur J
Nsci 27 (2008): 1503.
11. A. Magarinos and B. McEwen, “Stress-Induced Atrophy of Apical Dendrites of Hippocampal
CA3c Neurons: Involvement of Glucocorticoid Secretion and Excitatory Amino Acid
Receptors,” Nsci 69 (1995): 89; A. Magarinos et al., “Chronic Psychosocial Stress Causes
Apical Dendritic Atrophy of Hippocampal CA3 Pyramidal Neurons in Subordinate Tree
Shrews,” J Nsci 16 (1996): 3534; B. Eadie et al., “Voluntary Exercise Alters the
Cytoarchitecture of the Adult Dentate Gyrus by Increasing Cellular Proliferation, Dendritic
Complexity, and Spine Density,” J Comp Neurol 486 (2005): 39.
12. M. Khan et al., “Estrogen Regulation of Spine Density and Excitatory Synapses in Rat
Prefrontal and Somatosensory Cerebral Cortex,” Steroids 78 (2013): 614; B. McEwen,
“Estrogen Actions Throughout the Brain,” Recent Prog Hormone Res 57 (2002): 357; B.
Leuner and E. Gould, “Structural Plasticity and Hippocampal Function,” Ann Rev Psych 61
(2010): 111.
13. R. Hamilton et al., “Alexia for Braille Following Bilateral Occipital Stroke in an Early Blind
Woman,” Neuroreport 11 (2000): 237; E. Striem-Amit et al., “Reading with Sounds: Sensory
Substitution Selectively Activates the Visual Word Form Area in the Blind,” Neuron 76
(2012): 640.
14. S. Florence et al., “Large-Scale Sprouting of Cortical Connections After Peripheral Injury in
Adult Macaque Monkeys,” Sci 282 (1998): 1117; C. Darian-Smith and C. Gilbert, “Axonal
Sprouting Accompanies Functional Reorganization in Adult Cat Striate Cortex,” Nat 368
(1994): 737; M. Kossut and S. Juliano, “Anatomical Correlates of Representational Map
Reorganization Induced by Partial Vibrissectomy in the Barrel Cortex of Adult Mice,” Nsci 92
(1999): 807; L. Merabet and A. Bascual-Leone, “Neural Reorganization Following Sensory

746

Loss: The Opportunity of Change,” Nat Rev Nsci 11 (2010): 44; A. Pascual-Leone et al., “The
Plastic Human Brain Cortex,” Ann Rev Nsci 28 (2005): 377; B. Becker et al., “Fear Processing
and Social Networking in the Absence of a Functional Amygdala,” BP 72 (2012): 70; L.
Colgin, “Understanding Memory Through Hippocampal Remapping,” TINS 31 (2008): 469; V.
Ramirez-Amaya et al., “Spatial Longterm Memory Is Related to Mossy Fiber Synaptogenesis,”
J Nsci 21 (2001): 7340; M. Holahan et al., “Spatial Learning Induces Presynaptic Structural
Remodeling in the Hippocampal Mossy Fiber System of Two Rat Strains,” Hippocampus 16
(2006): 560; I. Galimberti et al., “Long-Term Rearrangements of Hippocampal Mossy Fiber
Terminal Connectivity in the Adult Regulated by Experience,” Neuron 50 (2006): 749; V. De
Paola et al., “Cell Type–Specific Structural plasticity of Axonal Branches and Boutons in the
Adult Neocortex,” Neuron 49 (2006): 861; H. Nishiyama et al., “Axonal Motility and Its
Modulation by Activity Are Branch-Type Specific in the Intact Adult Cerebellum,” Neuron 56
(2007): 472.
15. C. Pantev and S. Herholz, “Plasticity of the Human Auditory Cortex Related to Musical
Training,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 35 (2011): 2140.
16. A. Pascual-Leone, “Reorganization of Cortical Motor Outputs in the Acquisition of New
Motor Skills,” in Recent Advances in Clin Neurophysiology, ed. J. Kinura and H. Shibasaki
(Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1996), pp. 304–8.
17. C. Xerri et al., “Alterations of the Cortical Representation of the Rat Ventrum Induced by
Nursing Behavior,” J Nsci 14 (1994): 171; B. Draganski et al., “Neuroplasticity: Changes in
Grey Matter Induced by Training,” Nat 427 (2004): 311.
18. J. Altman and G. Das, “Autoradiographic and Histological Evidence of Postnatal
Hippocampal Neurogenesis in Rats,” J Comp Neurol 124 (1965): 319.
19. M. Kaplan, “Environmental Complexity Stimulates Visual Cortex Neurogenesis: Death of a
Dogma and a Research Career,” TINS 24 (2001): 617.
20. S. Goldman and F. Nottebohm, “Neuronal Production, Migration, and Differentiation in a
Vocal Control Nucleus of the Adult Female Canary Brain,” PNAS 80 (1983): 2390; J. Paton
and F. Nottebohm, “Neurons Generated in the Adult Brain Are Recruited into Functional
Circuits,” Sci 225 (1984): 4666; F. Nottebohm, “Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain,”
ANYAS 457 (1985): 143.
For a great history of the entire neurogenesis saga, see M. Specter, “How the Songs of
Canaries Upset a Fundamental Principle of Science,” New Yorker, July 23, 2001.
21. D. Kornack and P. Rakic, “Continuation of Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus of the Adult
Macaque Monkey,” PNAS 96 (1999): 5768.
22. G. Ming and H. Song, “Adult Neurogenesis in the Mammalian Central Nervous System,”
Ann Rev Nsci 28 (2005): 223. Rate of neuron replacement in the hippocampus: G.
Kempermann et al., “More Hippocampal Neurons in Adult Mice Living in an Enriched
Environment,” Nat 386 (1997): 493; H. Cameron and R. McKay, “Adult Neurogenesis
Produces a Large Pool of New Granule Cells in the Dentate Gyrus,” J Comp Neurol 435
(2001): 406. Demonstration in humans: P. Eriksson et al., “Neurogenesis in the Adult Human
Hippocampus,” Nat Med 4 (1998): 1313. Modulators of neurogenesis: C. Mirescu et al., “Sleep
Deprivation Inhibits Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus by Elevating Glucocorticoids,”
PNAS 103 (2006): 19170. The role of new neurons in cognition: W. Deng et al., “New Neurons
and New Memories: How Does Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis Affect Learning and
Memory?” Nat Rev Nsci 11 (2010): 339; T. Shors et al., “Neurogenesis in the Adult Rat Is
Involved in the Formation of Trace Memories,” Nat 410 (2001): 372; T. Shors et al.,
“Neurogenesis May Relate to Some But Not All Types of Hippocampal-Dependent Learning,”
Hippocampus 12 (2002): 578.
23. Footnote regarding running, glucocorticoids and neurogenesis: S. Droste et al., “Effects of
Long-Term Voluntary Exercise on the Mouse Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenocortical Axis,”
Endo 144 (2003): 3012; H. van Praag et al., “Running Enhances Neurogenesis, Learning, and

747

Long-Term Potentiation in Mice,” PNAS 96 (1999): 13427; G. Kempermann, “New Neurons
for ‘Survival of the Fittest,’” Nat Rev Nsci 13 (2012): 727.
24. L. Santarelli et al., “Requirement of Hippocampal Neurogenesis for the Behavioral Effects of
Antidepressants,” Sci 301 (2003): 80.
25. J. Altmann, “The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis,” in Neurogenesis in the
Adult Brain I, ed. T. Seki, K. Sawamoto, J. Parent, and A. Alvarez-Buylla (New York:
Springer-Verlag, 2011).
26. C. Lord et al., “Hippocampal Volumes Are Larger in Postmenopausal Women Using Estrogen
Therapy Compared to Past Users, Never Users and Men: A Possible Window of Opportunity
Effect,” Neurobiol of Aging 29 (2008): 95; R. Sapolsky, “Glucocorticoids and Hippocampal
Atrophy in Neuropsychiatric Disorders,” AGP 57 (2000): 925; A. Mutso et al., “Abnormalities
in Hippocampal Functioning with Persistent Pain,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 5747; J. Pruessner et al.,
“Stress Regulation in the Central Nervous System: Evidence from Structural and Functional
Neuroimaging Studies in Human Populations,” PNE 35 (2010): 179; J. Kuo et al., “Amygdala
Volume in Combat-Exposed Veterans With and Without Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A
Cross-sectional Study,” AGP 69 (2012): 1080.
27. E. Maguire et al., “Navigation-Related Structural Change in the Hippocampi of Taxi
Drivers,” PNAS 97 (2000): 4398; K. Woollett and E. Maguire, “Acquiring “the Knowledge” of
London’s Layout Drives Structural Brain Changes,” Curr Biol 21 (2011): 2109. For an
interesting discussion of why you need a bigger hippocampus to become a cab driver in
London, revolving around the notoriously difficult licensing exam, see J. Rosen, “The
Knowledge, London’s Legendary Taxi-Driver Test, Puts Up a Fight in the Age of GPS,” New
York Times Magazine, November 10, 2014.
28. S. Mangiavacchi et al., “Long-Term Behavioral and Neurochemical Effects of Chronic Stress
Exposure in Rats,” J Neurochemistry 79 (2001): 1113; J. van Honk et al., “Baseline Salivary
Cortisol Levels and Preconscious Selective Attention for Treat: A Pilot Study,” PNE 23
(1998): 741; M. Fuxjager et al., “Winning Territorial Disputes Selectively Enhances Androgen
Sensitivity in Neural Pathways Related to Motivation and Social Aggression,” PNAS 107
(2010): 12393; I. McKenzie et al., “Motor Skill Learning Requires Active Central
Myelination,” Sci 346 (2014): 318; M. Bechler and C. ffrench-Constant, “A New Wrap for
Neuronal Activity?” Sci 344 (2014): 480; E. Gibson et al., “Neuronal Activity Promotes
Oligodendrogenesis and Adaptive Myelination in the Mammalian Brain,” Sci 344 (2014): 487;
J. Radley et al., “Reversibility of Apical Dendritic Retraction in the Rat Medial Prefrontal
Cortex Following Repeated Stress,” Exp Neurol 196 (2005): 199; E. Bloss et al., “Interactive
Effects of Stress and Aging on Structural Plasticity in the Prefrontal Cortex,” J Nsci 30 (2010):
6726.
29. N. Doidge, The Brain That Changes Itself: Stories of Personal Triumph from the Front of
Brain Science (New York: Penguin, 2007); S. Begley, Train Your Mind, Change Your Brain:
How a New Science Reveals Our Extraordinary Potential to Transform Ourselves (New York:
Ballantine Books, 2007); J. Arden, Rewire Your Brain: Think Your Way to a Better Life (New
York: Wiley, 2010).
Chapter 6: Adolescence; or, Dude, Where’s My Frontal Cortex?
1. R. Knickmeyer et al., “A Structural MRI Study of Human Brain Development from Birth to 2
Years,” J Nsci 28 (2008): 12176.
2. M. Bucholtz, “Youth and Cultural Practice,” Ann Rev Anthropology 31 (2002): 525; S.
Choudhury, “Culturing the Adolescent Brain: What Can Neuroscience Learn from
Anthropology?” SCAN 5 (2010): 159. Footnote: T. James, “The Age of Majority,” Am J Legal
History 4 (1960): 22; R. Brett, “Contribution for Children and Political Violence,” in Child
Soldiering: Questions and Challenges for Health Professionals (WHO Global Report on

748

Violence), 2000, p. 1; C. MacMullin and M. Loughry, “Investigating Psychosocial Adjustment
of Former Child Soldiers in Sierra Leone and Uganda,” J Refugee Studies 17 (2004): 472.
3. J. Giedd, “The Teen Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging,” J Adolescent Health 42 (2008): 335.
Demonstration of increased intrinsic connectivity of PFC neurons during adolescence in
monkeys: X. Zhou et al., “Age-Dependent Changes in Prefrontal Intrinsic Connectivity,” PNAS
111 (2014): 3853; T. Singer, “The Neuronal Basis and Ontogeny of Empathy and Mind
Reading: Review of Literature and Implications for Future Research,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 30
(2006): 855; P. Shaw et al., “Intellectual Ability and Cortical Development in Children and
Adolescents,” Nat 440 (2006): 676.
4. D. Yurelun-Todd, “Emotional and Cognitive Changes During Adolescence,” Curr Opinion in
Neurobiol 17 (2007): 251; B. Luna et al., “Maturation of Widely Distributed Brain Function
Subserves Cognitive Development,” Neuroimage 13 (2001): 786; B. Schlaggar et al.,
“Functional Neuroanatomical Differences Between Adults and School-Age Children in the
Processing of Single Words,” Sci 296 (2002): 1476.
5. A. Wang et al., “Developmental Changes in the Neural Basis of Interpreting Communicative
Intent,” SCAN 1 (2006): 107.
6. T. Paus et al., “Maturation of White Matter in the Human Brain: A Review of Magnetic
Resonance Studies,” Brain Res Bull 54 (2001): 255; A. Raznahan et al., “Patterns of
Coordinated Anatomical Change in Human Cortical Development: A Longitudinal
Neuroimaging Study of Maturational Coupling,” Neuron 72 (2011): 873; N. Strang et al.,
“Developmental Changes in Adolescents’ Neural Response to Challenge,” Developmental Cog
Nsci 1 (2011): 560.
7. C. Masten et al., “Neural Correlates of Social Exclusion During Adolescence: Understanding
the Distress of Peer Rejection,” SCAN (2009): 143.
8. J. Perrin et al., “Growth of White Matter in the Adolescent Brain: Role of Testosterone and
Androgen Receptor,” J Nsci 28 (2008): 9519; T. Paus et al., “Sexual Dimorphism in the
Adolescent Brain: Role of Testosterone and Androgen Receptor in Global and Local Volumes
of Grey and White Matter,” Horm Behav 57 (2010): 63; A. Arnsten and R. Shansky,
“Adolescence: Vulnerable Period for Stress-Induced PFC Function?” ANYAS 102 (2006): 143;
W. Moore et al., “Facing Puberty: Associations Between Pubertal Development and Neural
Responses to Affective Facial Displays,” SCAN 7 (2012): 35; R. Dahl, “Adolescent Brain
Development: A Period of Vulnerabilities and Opportunities,” ANYAS 1021 (2004): 1
9. R. Rosenfield, “Clinical Review: Adolescent Anovulation: Maturational Mechanisms and
Implications,” J Clin Endo and Metabolism 98 (2013): 3572.
10. D. Yurelun-Todd, “Emotional and Cognitive Changes During Adolescence,” Curr Opinion in
Neurobiol 17 (2007): 251; B. Schlaggar et al., “Functional Neuroanatomical Differences
Between Adults and School-Age Children in the Processing of Single Words,” Sci 296 (2002):
1476.
11. W. Moore et al., “Facing Puberty: Associations Between Pubertal Development and Neural
Responses to Affective Facial Displays,” SCAN 7 (2012): 35.
12. D. Gee et al., “A Developmental Shift from Positive to Negative Connectivity in Human
Amygdala-Prefrontal Circuitry,” J Nsci 33 (2013): 4584.
13. K. McRae et al., “Association Between Trait Emotional Awareness and Dorsal Anterior
Cingulate Activity During Emotion Is Arousal-Dependent,” Neuroimage 41 (2008): 648; W.
Killgore et al., “Sex-Specific Developmental Changes in Amygdala Responses to Affective
Faces,” Neuroreport 12 (2001): 427; W. Killgore and D. Yurgelun-Todd, “Unconscious
Processing of Facial Affect in Children and Adolescents,” Soc Nsci 2 (2007): 28; T. Hare et al.,
“Biological Substrates of Emotional Reactivity and Regulation in Adolescence During an
Emotional Go-Nogo Task,” BP 63 (2008): 927; T. Wager et al., “Prefrontal-Subcortical
Pathways Mediating Successful Emotion Regulation,” Neuron 25 (2008): 1037; T. Hare et al.,
“Self-Control in Decision-Making Involves Modulation of the vmPFC Valuation System,” Sci

749

324 (2009): 646; C. Masten et al., “Neural Correlates of Social Exclusion During Adolescence:
Understanding the Distress of Peer Rejection,” SCAN 4 (2009): 143.; Footnote: Shulman et al.,
“Sex Differences in the Developmental Trajectories of Impulse Control and Sensation-Seeking
from Early Adolescence to Early Adulthood,” J Youth and Adolescence 44 (2013): 1
14. G. Laviola et al., “Risk-Taking Behavior in Adolescent Mice: Psychobiological Determinants
and Early Epigenetic Influence,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 27 (2003): 19; V. Reyna and F. Farley,
“Risk and Rationality in Adolescent Decision Making: Implications for Theory, Practice, and
Public Policy,” Psych Sci in the Public Interest 7 (2006): 1; L. Steinberg, “Risk Taking in
Adolescence: New Perspectives from Brain and Behavioral Science,” Curr Dir Psych Res 16
(2007): 55; L. Steinberg, Age of Opportunity: Lessons from the New Science of Adolescence
(New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2014); C. Moutsiana et al., “Human Development of the Ability
to Learn from Bad News,” PNAS 110 (2013): 16396.
15. Reviewed in A. R. Smith et al., “The Role of the Anterior Insula in Adolescent Decision
Making,” Developmental Nsci 36 (2014): 196.
16. Footnote: Shulman et al., “Sex Differences in the Developmental Trajectories of Impulse
Control and Sensation-Seeking from Early Adolescence to Early Adulthood,” J Youth and
Adolescence 44 (2013): 1.
17. R. Sapolsky, “Open Season,” New Yorker, March 30, 1998, p. 57.
18. D. Rosenberg and D. Lewis, “Changes in the Dopaminergic Innervation of Monkey
Prefrontal Cortex During Late Postnatal Development: A Tyrosine Hydroxylase
Immunohistochemical Study,” BP 36 (1994): 272.
19. B. Knutson et al., “FMRI Visualization of Brain Activity During a Monetary Incentive Delay
Task,” Neuroimage 12 (2000): 20; E. Barkley-Levenson and A. Galvan, “Neural
Representation of Expected Value in the Adolescent Brain,” PNAS 111 (2014): 1646; S.
Schneider et al., “Risk Taking and the Adolescent Reward System: A Potential Common Link
to Substance Abuse,” Am J Psychiatry 169 (2012): 39; S. Burnett et al., “Development During
Adolescence of the Neural Processing of Social Emotion,” J Cog Nsci 21 (2008): 1; J. Bjork et
al., “Developmental Differences in Posterior Mesofrontal Cortex Recruitment by Risky
Rewards,” J Nsci 27 (2007): 4839; J. Bjork et al., “Incentive-Elicited Brain Activation in
Adolescents: Similarities and Differences from Young Adults,” J Nsci 25 (2004): 1793; S.
Blakemore et al., “Adolescent Development of the Neural Circuitry for Thinking About
Intentions,” SCAN 2 (2007): 130.
20. A. Galvan et al., “Earlier Development of the Accumbens Relative to Orbitofrontal Cortex
Might Underlie Risk-Taking Behavior in Adolescents,” J Nsci 26 (2006): 6885 (this is also the
source of the figure in the text). A demonstration of dopaminergic response to different reward
sizes as more linear and accurate in adults: J. Vaidya et al., “Neural Sensitivity to Absolute and
Relative Anticipated Reward in Adolescents,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): e58708.
21. A. R. Smith et al., “Age Differences in the Impact of Peers on Adolescents’ and Adults’
Neural Response to Reward,” Developmental Cog Nsci 11 (2015): 75; J. Chein et al., “Peers
Increase Adolescent Risk Taking by Enhancing Activity in the Brain’s Reward Circuitry,”
Developmental Sci 14 (2011): F1; M. Gardner and L. Steinberg, “Peer Influence on Risk
Taking, Risk Preference, and Risky Decision Making in Adolescence and Adulthood: An
Experimental Study,” Developmental Psych 41 (2005): 625; L. Steinberg, “A Social
Neuroscience Perspective on Adolescent Risk-Taking,” Developmental Rev 28 (2008): 78; M.
Grosbras et al., “Neural Mechanisms of Resistance to Peer Influence in Early Adolescence,” J
Nsci 27 (2007): 8040; A. Weigard et al., “Effects of Anonymous Peer Observation on
Adolescents’ Preference for Immediate Rewards,” Developmental Science 17 (2014): 71.
22. M. Madden et al., “Teens, Social Media, and Privacy,” Pew Research Center, May 23, 2013,
www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Teens-Social-Media-And-Privacy/Summary-ofFindings.aspx.

750

23. A. Guyer et al., “Amygdala and Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex Function During Anticipated
Peer Evaluation in Pediatric Social Anxiety,” AGP 65 (2008): 1303; A. Guyer et al., “Probing
the Neural Correlates of Anticipated Peer Evaluation in Adolescence,” Child Development 80
(2009): 1000; B. Gunther Moor et al., “Do You Like Me? Neural Correlates of Social
Evaluation and Developmental Trajectories,” Soc Nsci 5 (2010): 461.
24. N. Eisenberger et al., “Does Rejection Hurt? An fMRI Study of Social Exclusion,” Sci 302
(2003): 290; N. Eisenberger, “The Pain of Social Disconnection: Examining the Shared Neural
Underpinnings of Physical and Social Pain,” Nat Rev Nsci 3 (2012): 421.
25. C. Sebastian et al., “Development Influences on the Neural Bases of Responses to Social
Rejection: Implications of Social Neuroscience for Education,” NeuroImage 57 (2011): 686; C.
Masten et al., “Neural Correlates of Social Exclusion During Adolescence: Understanding the
Distress of Peer Rejection,” SCAN 4 (2009): 143; J. Pfeifer and S. Blakemore, “Adolescent
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience: Past, Present, and Future,” SCAN 7 (2012): 1.
26. J. Pfeifer et al., “Entering Adolescence: Resistance to Peer Influence, Risky Behavior, and
Neural Changes in Emotion Reactivity,” Neuron 69 (2011): 1029; L. Steinberg and K.
Monahan, “Age Differences in Resistance to Peer Influence,” Developmental Psych 43 (2007):
1531; M. Grosbras et al., “Neural Mechanisms of Resistance to Peer Influence in Early
Adolescence,” J Nsci 27 (2007): 8040.
27. I. Almas et al., “Fairness and the Development of Inequality Acceptance,” Sci 328 (2010):
1176.
28. J. Decety and K. Michalska, “Neurodevelopmental Changes in the Circuits Underlying
Empathy and Sympathy from Childhood to Adulthood,” Developmental Sci 13 (2010): 886.
29. N. Eisenberg et al., “The Relations of Emotionality and Regulation to Dispositional and
Situational Empathy-Related Responding,” JPSP 66 (1994): 776; J. Decety et al., “The
Developmental Neuroscience of Moral Sensitivity,” Emotion Rev 3 (2011): 305.
30. E. Finger et al., “Disrupted Reinforcement Signaling in the Orbitofrontal Cortex and Caudate
in Youths with Conduct Disorder or Oppositional Defiant Disorder and a High Level of
Psychopathic Traits,” Am J Psychiatry 168 (2011): 152; A. Marsh et al., “Reduced AmygdalaOrbitofrontal Connectivity During Moral Judgments in Youths with Disruptive Behavior
Disorders and Psychopathic Traits,” Psychiatry Res 194 (2011): 279.
31. L. Steinberg, “The Influence of Neuroscience on US Supreme Court Decisions About
Adolescents’ Criminal Culpability,” Nat Rev Nsci 14 (2013): 513.
32. Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005).
33. J. Sallet et al, “Social Network Size Affects Neural Circuits in Macaques,” Sci 334 (2011):
697.
Chapter 7: Back to the Crib, Back to the Womb
1. P. Yakovlev and A. Lecours, “The Myelogenetic Cycles of Regional Maturation of the Brain,”
in Regional Development of the Brain in Early Life, ed. A. Minkowski (Oxford: Blackwell,
1967); H. Kinney et al., “Sequence of Central Nervous System Myelination in Human Infancy:
II. Patterns of Myelination in Autopsied Infants,” J Neuropathology & Exp Neurol 47 (1988):
217; S. Deoni et al., “Mapping Infant Brain Myelination with MRI,” J Nsci 31 (2011): 784; N.
Baumann and D. Pham-Dinh, “Biology of Oligodendrocyte and Myelin in the Mammalian
CNS,” Physiological Rev 81 (2001): 871.
2. Demonstration of the predictive power of degree of connectivity: N. Dosenbach et al.,
“Prediction of Individual Brain Maturity Using fMRI,” Sci 329 (2010): 1358.
3. N. Uesaka et al., “Retrograde Semaphorin Signaling Regulates Synapse Elimination in the
Developing Mouse Brain,” Sci 344 (2014): 1020; R. C. Paolicelli et al., “Synaptic Pruning by
Microglia Is Necessary for Normal Brain Development,” Sci 333 (2011): 1456; R. Buss et al.,
“Adaptive Roles of Programmed Cell Death During Nervous System Development,” Ann Rev
of Nsci 29 (2006): 1; D. Nijhawan et al., “Apoptosis in Neural Development and Disease,” Ann

751

Rev of Nsci 23 (2000): 73; C. Kuan et al., “Mechanisms of Programmed Cell Death in the
Developing Brain,” TINS 23 (2000): 291.
4. J. Piaget, Main Trends in Psychology (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1973); J. Piaget, The
Language and Thought of the Child (New York: Psychology Press, 1979).
5. Other realms of stage development: R. Selman et al., “Interpersonal Awareness in Children:
Toward an Integration of Developmental and Clinical Child Psychology,” Am J
Orthopsychiatry 47 (1977): 264; T. Singer, “The Neuronal Basis and Ontogeny of Empathy
and Mind Reading: Review of Literature and Implications for Future Research,” Nsci
Biobehav Rev 30 (2006): 855.
6. S. Baron-Cohen, “Precursors to a Theory of Mind: Understanding Attention in Others,” in
Natural Theories of Mind: Evolution, Development and Simulation of Everyday Mindreading,
ed. A. Whiten (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991); J. Topal et al., “Differential Sensitivity to
Human Communication in Dogs, Wolves, and Human Infants,” Sci 325 (2009): 1269; G.
Lakatos et al., “A Comparative Approach to Dogs’ (Canis familiaris) and Human Infants’
Comprehension of Various Forms of Pointing Gestures,” Animal Cog 12 (2009): 621 J.
Kaminski et al., “Domestic Dogs are Sensitive to a Human’s Perspective,” Behaviour 146
(2009): 979.
7. S. Baron-Cohen et al., “Does the Autistic Child Have a ‘Theory of Mind’?” Cog 21 (2985): 37.
8. L. Young et al., “Disruption of the Right Temporal Lobe Function with TMS Reduces the Role
of Beliefs in Moral Judgments,” PNAS 107 (2009): 6753; Y. Moriguchi et al., “Changes of
Brain Activity in the Neural Substrates for Theory of Mind During Childhood and
Adolescence,” Psychiatry and Clin Nsci 61 (2007): 355; A. Saitovitch et al., “Social Cognition
and the Superior Temporal Sulcus: Implications in Autism,” Rev of Neurol (Paris) 168 (2012):
762; P. Shaw et al., “The Impact of Early and Late Damage to the Human Amygdala on
‘Theory of Mind’ Reasoning,” Brain 127 (2004): 1535.
9. B. Sodian and S. Kristen, “Theory of Mind During Infancy and Early Childhood Across
Cultures, Development of,” Int Encyclopedia of the Soc & Behav Sci (Amsterdam: Elsevier,
2015), p. 268.
10. S. Nichols, “Experimental Philosophy and the Problem of Free Will,” Sci 331 (2011): 1401.
11. D. Premack and G. Woodruff, “Does the Chimpanzee Have a Theory of Mind?” BBS 1
(1978): 515. Evidence against: D. Povinelli and J. Vonk, “Chimpanzee Minds: Suspiciously
Human?” TICS 7 (2003): 157. Evidence for: B. Hare et al., “Do Chimpanzees Know What
Conspecifics Know and Do Not Know?” Animal Behav 61 (2001): 139. Footnote: L. Santo Let
al., “Rhesus Monkeys (Macaca mulatta) Know What Others Can and Cannot Hear,” Animal
Behav 71 (2006): 1175.
12. J. Decety et al., “The Contribution of Emotion and Cognition to Moral Sensitivity: A
Neurodevelopmental Study,” Cerebral Cortex 22 (2011): 209.
13. J. Decety et al., “Who Caused the Pain? An fMRI Investigation of Empathy and Intentionality
in Children,” Neuropsychologia 46 (2008): 2607; J. Decety et al., “The Contribution of
Emotion and Cognition to Moral Sensitivity: A Neurodevelopmental Study,” Cerebral Cortex
22 (2012): 209; J. Decety and K. Michalska, “Neurodevelopmental Changes in the Circuits
Underlying Empathy and Sympathy from Childhood to Adulthood,” Developmental Sci 13
(2010): 886.
14. J. Decety et al., “The Contribution of Emotion and Cognition to Moral Sensitivity: A
Neurodevelopmental Study,” Cerebral Cortex 22 (2012): 209; N. Eisenberg et al., “The
Relations of Emotionality and Regulation to Dispositional and Situational Empathy-Related
Responding,” JPSP 66 (1994): 776.
15. P. Blake et al., “The Ontogeny of Fairness in Seven Societies,” Nat 528 (2016): 258.
16. I. Almas et al., “Fairness and the Development of Inequality Acceptance,” Sci 328 (2010):
1176; E. Fehr et al., “Egalitarianism in Young Children,” Nat 454 (2008): 1079; K. Olson et
al., “Children’s Responses to Group-Based Inequalities: Perpetuation and Rectification,” Soc

752

Cog 29 (2011): 270; M. Killen, “Children’s Social and Moral Reasoning About Exclusion,”
Curr Dir Psych Sci 16 (2007): 32.
17. D. Garz, Lawrence Kohlberg: An Introduction (Cologne, Germany: Barbara Budrich, 2009).
18. C. Gilligan, In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982).
19. N. Eisenberg, “Emotion, Regulation, and Moral Development,” Ann Rev of Psych 51 (2000):
665; J. Hamlin et al., “Social Evaluation by Preverbal Infants,” Nat 450 (2007): 557; M.
Hoffman, Empathy and Moral Development: Implications for Caring and Justice (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2001).
20. W. Mischel et al., “Cognitive and Attentional Mechanisms in Delay of Gratification,” JPSP
21 (1972): 204; W. Mischel, The Marshmallow Test: Understanding Self-Control and How to
Master It (New York: Bantam Books, 2014); K. McRae et al., “The Development of Emotion
Regulation: An fMRI Study of Cognitive Reappraisal in Children, Adolescents and Young
Adults,” SCAN 7 (2012): 11; H. Palmeri and R. N. Aslin, “Rational Snacking: Young
Children’s Decision-Making on the Marshmallow Task is Moderated by Beliefs About
Environmental Reliability,” Cog 126 (2013): 109.
21. B. J. Casey et al., “From the Cover: Behavioral and Neural Correlates of Delay of
Gratification 40 Years Later,” PNAS 108 (2011): 14998; N. Eisenberg et al.,
“Contemporaneous and Longitudinal Prediction of Children’s Social Functioning from
Regulation and Emotionality,” Child Development 68 (1997): 642; N. Eisenberg et al., “The
Relations of Regulation and Emotionality to Resiliency and Competent Social Functioning in
Elementary School Children,” Child Development 68 (1997): 295.
22. L. Holt, The Care and Feeding of Children (NY: Appleton-Century, 1894). This book went
through fifteen editions between 1894 and 1915.
23. For a history of hospitalism, see R. Sapolsky, “How the Other Half Heals,” Discover, April
1998, p. 46.
24. J. Bowlby Attachment and Loss, vol. 1, Attachment (New York: Basic Books, 1969); J.
Bowlby, Attachment and Loss, vol. 2, Separation (London: Hogarth Press, 1973); J. Bowlby,
Attachment and Loss, vol. 3, Loss: Sadness & Depression (London: Hogarth Press, 1980).
25. D. Blum, Love at Goon Park: Harry Harlow and the Science of Affection (New York:
Perseus, 2002). This is the source of the Harlow quote.
26. R. Rosenfeld, “The Case of the Unsolved Crime Decline,” Sci Am, February 2004, p. 82; J.
Donohue III and S. Levitt, “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime,” Quarterly J
Economics 116 (2001): 379. Raine et al., “Birth Complications Combined with Early Maternal
Rejection at Age 1 Year Predispose to Violent Crime at Age 18 Years,” AGP 51 (1994): 984;
Footnote: J. Bowlby, “Forty-four Juvenile Thieves: Their Characters and Home-Life,” Int J
Psychoanalysis 25 (1944): 107.
27. G. Barr et al., “Transitions in Infant Learning Are Modulated by Dopamine in the
Amygdala,” Nat Nsci 12 (2009): 1367; R. Sullivan et al., “Good Memories of Bad Events,”
Nat 407 (2000): 38; S. Moriceau et al., “Dual Circuitry for Odor-Shock Conditioning During
Infancy: Corticosterone Switches Between Fear and Attraction via Amygdala,” J Nsci 26
(2006): 6737; R. Sapolsky, “Any Kind of Mother in a Storm,” Nat Nsci 12 (2009): 1355.
28. R. Sapolsky and M. Meaney, “Maturation of the Adrenocortical Stress Response:
Neuroendocrine Control Mechanisms and the Stress Hyporesponsive Period,” Brain Res Rev
11 (1986): 65.
29. L. M. Renner and K. S. Slack, “Intimate Partner Violence and Child Maltreatment:
Understanding Intra- and Intergenerational Connections,” Child Abuse & Neglect 30 (2006):
599.
30. D. Maestripieri, “Early Experience Affects the Intergenerational Transmission of Infant
Abuse in Rhesus Monkeys,” PNAS 102 (2005): 9726.

753

31. C. Hammen et al., “Depression and Sensitization to Stressors Among Young Women as a
Function of Childhood Adversity,” J Consulting Clin Psych 68 (2000): 782; E. McCrory et al.,
“The Link Between Child Abuse and Psychopathology: A Review of Neurobiological and
Genetic Research,” J the Royal Soc of Med 105 (2012): 151; K. Lalor and R. McElvaney,
“Child Sexual Abuse, Links to Later Sexual Exploitation/High-Risk Sexual Behavior, and
Prevention/Treatment Programs,” Trauma Violence & Abuse 11 (2010): 159; Y. Dvir et al.,
“Childhood Maltreatment, Emotional Dysregulation, and Psychiatric Comorbidities,” Harvard
Rev of Psychiatry 22 (2014): 149; E. Mezzacappa et al., “Child Abuse and Performance Task
Assessments of Executive Functions in Boys,” J Child Psych and Psychiatry 42 (2001): 1041;
M. Wichers et al., “Transition from Stress Sensitivity to a Depressive State: Longitudinal Twin
Study,” Brit J Psychiatry 195 (2009): 498.
32. C. Heim et al., “Pituitary-Adrenal and Autonomic Responses to Stress in Women After
Sexual and Physical Abuse in Childhood,” JAMA 284 (2000): 592; E. Binder et al.,
“Association of FKBP5 Polymorphisms and Childhood Abuse with Risk of Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder Symptoms in Adults,” JAMA 299 (2008): 1291; C. Heim et al., “The
Dexamethasone/Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Test in Men with Major Depression: Role of
Childhood Trauma,” BP 63 (2008): 398; R. Lee et al., “Childhood Trauma and Personality
Disorder: Positive Correlation with Adult CSF Corticotropin-Releasing Factor
Concentrations,” Am J Psychiatry 162 (2005): 995; R. J. Lee et al., “CSF CorticotropinReleasing Factor in Personality Disorder: Relationship with Self-Reported Parental Care,”
Neuropsychopharmacology 31: (2006): 2289; L. Carpenter et al., “Cerebrospinal Fluid
Corticotropin-Releasing Factor and Perceived Early-Life Stress in Depressed Patients and
Healthy Control Subjects,” Neuropsychopharmacology 29 (2004): 777; T. Rinne et al.,
“Hyperresponsiveness of Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis to Combined
Dexamethasone/Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone Challenge in Female Borderline Personality
Disorder Subjects with a History of Sustained Childhood Abuse,” BP 52 (2002): 1102; P.
McGowan et al., “Epigenetic Regulation of the Glucocorticoid Receptor in Human Brain
Associates with Childhood Abuse,” Nat Nsci 12 (2009): 342; M. Toth et al., “Post-weaning
Social Isolation Induces Abnormal Forms of Aggression in Conjunction with Increased
Glucocorticoid and Autonomic Stress Responses,” Horm Behav 60 (2011): 28.
33. S. Lupien et al., “Effects of Stress Throughout the Lifespan on the Brain, Behaviour and
Cognition,” Nat Rev Nsci 10 (2009): 434; V. Carrion et al., “Stress Predicts Brain Changes in
Children: A Pilot Longitudinal Study on Youth Stress, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and the
Hippocampus,” Pediatrics 119 (2007): 509; F. L. Woon and D. W. Hedges, “Hippocampal and
Amygdala Volumes in Children and Adults with Childhood Maltreatment–Related
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Meta-analysis,” Hippocampus 18 (2008): 729.
34. S. J. Lupien et al., “Effects of Stress Throughout the Lifespan on the Brain, Behaviour and
Cognition,” Nat Rev Nsci 10 (2009): 434; D. Hackman et al., “Socioeconomic Status and the
Brain: Mechanistic Insights from Human and Animal Research,” Nat Rev Nsci 11 (2010): 651;
M. Sheridan et al., “The Impact of Social Disparity on Prefrontal Function in Childhood,”
PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e35744; J. L. Hanson et al., “Structural Variations in Prefrontal Cortex
Mediate the Relationship Between Early Childhood Stress and Spatial Working Memory,” J
Nsci 32 (2012): 7917; M. Sweitzer et al., “Polymorphic Variation in the Dopamine D4
Receptor Predicts Delay Discounting as a Function of Childhood Socioeconomic Status:
Evidence for Differential Susceptibility,” SCAN 8 (2013): 499; E. Tucker-Drob et al.,
“Emergence of a Gene X Socioeconomic Status Interaction on Infant Mental Ability Between
10 Months and 2 Years,” Psych Sci 22 (2011): 125; I. Liberzon et al., “Childhood Poverty
Alters Emotional Regulation in Adulthood,” SCAN 10 (2015): 1596; K. G. Noble et al.,
“Family Income, Parental Education and Brain Structure in Children and Adolescents,” Nat
Nsci 18 (2015): 773.

754

35. Footnote: R. Nevin, “Understanding International Crime Trends: The Legacy of Preschool
Lead Exposure,” Environmental Res 104 (2007): 315.
36. Reviewed in R. Sapolsky, Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: A Guide to Stress, Stress-Related
Diseases and Coping, 3rd ed. (New York: Holt, 2004). Baboon equivalent: P. O. Onyango et
al., “Persistence of Maternal Effects in Baboons: Mother’s Dominance Rank at Son’s
Conception Predicts Stress Hormone Levels in Subadult Males,” Horm Behav 54 (2008): 319.
37. F. L. Woon and D. W. Hedges, “Hippocampal and Amygdala Volumes in Children and Adults
with Childhood Maltreatment–Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Meta-analysis,”
Hippocampus 18 (2008): 729; D. Gee et al., “Early Developmental Emergence of Human
Amygdala-PFC Connectivity After Maternal Deprivation,” PNAS 110 (2013): 15638; A. K.
Olsavsky et al., “Indiscriminate Amygdala Response to Mothers and Strangers After Early
Maternal Deprivation,” BP 74 (2013): 853.
38. L. M. Oswald et al., “History of Childhood Adversity Is Positively Associated with Ventral
Striatal Dopamine Responses to Amphetamine,” Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 23 (2014):
2417; E. Hensleigh and L. M. Pritchard, “Maternal Separation Increases MethamphetamineInduced Damage in the Striatum in Male, But Not Female Rats,” BBS 295 (2014): 3; A. N.
Karkhanis et al., “Social Isolation Rearing Increases Nucleus Accumbens Dopamine and
Norepinephrine Responses to Acute Ethanol in Adulthood,” Alcohol: Clin Exp Res 38 (2014):
2770.
39. C. Anacker et al., “Early Life Adversity and the Epigenetic Programming of HypothalamicPituitary-Adrenal Function,” Dialogues in Clin Nsci 16 (2014): 321.
40. S. L. Buka et al., “Youth Exposure to Violence: Prevalence, Risks, and Consequences,” Am J
Orthopsychiatry 71 (2001): 298; M. B. Selner-O’Hagan et al., “Assessing Exposure to
Violence in Urban Youth,” J Child Psych and Psychiatry 39 (1998): 215; P. T. Sharkey et al.,
“The Effect of Local Violence on Children’s Attention and Impulse Control,” Am J Public
Health 102 (2012): 2287; J. B. Bingenheimer et al., “Firearm Violence Exposure and Serious
Violent Behavior,” Sci 308 (2005): 1323. Footnote: I. Shaley et al., “Exposure to Violence
During Childhood Is Associated with Telomere Erosion from 5 to 10 Years of Age: A
Longitudinal Study,” Mol Psychiatry 18 (2013): 576.
41. For a particularly good review, see L. Huesmann and L. Taylor, “The Role of Media Violence
in Violent Behavior,” Ann Rev of Public Health 27 (2006): 393. See also J. D. Johnson et al.,
“Differential Gender Effects of Exposure to Rap Music on African American Adolescents’
Acceptance of Teen Dating Violence,” Sex Roles 33 (1995): 597; J. Johnson et al., “Television
Viewing and Aggressive Behavior During Adolescence and Adulthood,” Sci 295 (2002): 2468;
J. Savage and C. Yancey, “The Effects of Media Violence Exposure on Criminal Aggression: A
Meta-analysis,” Criminal Justice and Behav 35 (2008): 772; C. Anderson et al., “Violent Video
Game Effects on Aggression, Empathy, and Prosocial Behavior in Eastern and Western
Countries: A Meta-analytic Review,” Psych Bull 136, 151; C. J. Ferguson, “Evidence for
Publication Bias in Video Game Violence Effects Literature: A Meta-analytic Review,”
Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007): 470; C. Ferguson, “The Good, the Bad and the
Ugly: A Meta-analytic Review of Positive and Negative Effects of Violent Video Games,”
Psychiatric Quarterly 78 (2007): 309.
42. W. Copeland et al., “Adult Psychiatric Outcomes of Bullying and Being Bullied by Peers in
Childhood and Adolescence,” JAMA Psychiatry 70 (2013): 419; S. Woods and E. White, “The
Association Between Bullying Behaviour, Arousal Levels and Behaviour Problems,” J
Adolescence 28 (2005): 381; D. Jolliffe and D. P. Farrington, “Examining the Relationship
Between Low Empathy and Bullying,” Aggressive Behav 32 (2006): 540; G. Gini, “Social
Cognition and Moral Cognition in Bullying: What’s Wrong?” Aggressive Behav 32 (2006):
528; S. Shakoor et al., “A Prospective Longitudinal Study of Children’s Theory of Mind and
Adolescent Involvement in Bullying,” J Child Psych and Psychiatry 53 (2012): 254.

755

43. J. D. Unenever, “Bullies, Aggressive Victims, and Victims: Are They Distinct Groups?”
Aggressive Behav 31 (2005): 153; D. P. Farrington and M. M. Tofi, “Bullying as a Predictor of
Offending, Violence and Later Life Outcomes,” Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health 21
(2011): 90; M. Tofi et al., “The Predictive Efficiency of School Bullying Versus Later
Offending: A Systematic/Meta-analytic Review of Longitudinal Studies,” Criminal Behaviour
and Mental Health 21 (2011): 80; T. R. Nansel et al., “Cross-National Consistency in the
Relationship Between Bullying Behaviors and Psychosocial Adjustment,” Arch Pediatrics &
Adolescent Med 158 (2004): 730; J. A. Stein et al., “Adolescent Male Bullies, Victims, and
Bully-Victims: A Comparison of Psychosocial and Behavioral Characteristics,” J Pediatric
Psych 32 (2007): 273; P. W. Jansen et al., “Prevalence of Bullying and Victimization Among
Children in Early Elementary School: Do Family and School Neighbourhood Socioeconomic
Status Matter?” BMC Public Health 12 (2012): 494; A. Sourander et al., “What Is the Early
Adulthood Outcome of Boys Who Bully or Are Bullied in Childhood? The Finnish ‘From a
Boy to a Man’ Study,” Pediatrics 120 (August 2007): 397; A. Sourander et al., “Childhood
Bullies and Victims and Their Risk of Criminality in Late Adolescence,” Arch Pediatrics &
Adolescent Med 161 (2007): 546; C. Winsper et al., “Involvement in Bullying and SuicideRelated Behavior at 11 Years: A Prospective Birth Cohort Study,” J the Am Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry 51 (2012): 271; F. Elgar et al., “Income Inequality and School
Bullying: Multilevel Study of Adolescents in 37 Countries,” J Adolescent Health 45 (2009):
351.
44. G. M. Glew et al., “Bullying, Psychosocial Adjustment, and Academic Performance in
Elementary School,” Arch Pediatrics & Adolescent Med 159 (2005): 1026.
45. K. Appleyard et al., “When More Is Not Better: The Role of Cumulative Risk in Child
Behavior Outcomes,” J Child Psych and Psychiatry 46 (2005): 235.
46. M. Sheridan et al., “Variation in Neural Development as a Result of Exposure to
Institutionalization Early in Childhood,” PNAS 109 (2012): 12927; M. Carlson and F. Earis,
“Psychological and Neuroendocrinological Sequelae of Early Social Deprivation in
Institutionalized Children in Romania,” ANYAS 15 (1997): 419; N. Tottenham, “Human
Amygdala Development in the Absence of Species-Expected Caregiving,” Developmental
Psychobiology 54 (2012): 598; M. A. Mehta et al., “Amygdala, Hippocampal and Corpus
Callosum Size Following Severe Early Institutional Deprivation: The English and Romanian
Adoptees Study Pilot,” J Child Psych and Psychiatry 50 (2009): 943; N. Tottenham et al.,
“Prolonged Institutional Rearing Is Associated with Atypically Large Amygdala Volume and
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation,” Developmental Sci 13 (2010): 46; M. M. Loman et al.,
“The Effect of Early Deprivation on Executive Attention in Middle Childhood,” J Child Psych
and Psychiatry 54 (2012): 37; T. Eluvathingal et al., “Abnormal Brain Connectivity in
Children After Early Severe Socioemotional Deprivation: A Diffusion Tensor Imaging Study,”
Pediatrics 117 (2006): 2093; H. T. Chugani et al., “Local Brain Functional Activity Following
Early Deprivation: A Study of Postinstitutionalized Romanian Orphans,” Neuroimage 14
(2001): 1290.
47. Her idea is nicely summarized in M. Small, Our Babies, Ourselves (New York: Anchor
Books, 1999).
48. H. Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (New York: Harcourt 1951); T. Adorno et al., The
Authoritarian Personality (New York: Harper & Row, 1950).
49. D. Baumrind, “Child Care Practices Anteceding Three Patterns of Preschool Behavior,”
Genetic Psych Monographs 75 (1967): 43.
50. E. E. Maccoby and J. A. Martin, “Socialization in the Context of the Family: Parent-Child
Interaction,” in Handbook of Child Psychology, ed. P. Mussen (New York: Wiley, 1983).
51. J. R. Harris, The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn Out the Way They Do (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1998).

756

52. J. Huizinga, Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1938); A. Berghänel et al., “Locomotor Play Drives Motor Skill Acquisition at the
Expense of Growth: A Life History Trade-off,” Sci Advances 1 (2015): 1; J. Panksepp and W.
W. Beatty, “Social Deprivation and Play in Rats,” Behav and Neural Biol 39 (1980): 197; M.
Bekoff and J. A. Byers, Animal Play: Evolutionary, Comparative, and Ecological Perspectives
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998); M. Spinka et al., “Mammalian Play: Training
for the Unexpected,” Quarterly Rev of Biol 76 (2001): 141.
53. S. M. Pellis, “Sex Differences in Play Fighting Revisited: Traditional and Nontraditional
Mechanisms of Sexual Differentiation in Rats,” Arch Sexual Behav 31 (2002): 17; B. Knutson
et al., “Ultrasonic Vocalizations as Indices of Affective States in Rats,” Psych Bull 128 (2002):
961; Y. Delville et al., “Development of Aggression,” in Biology of Aggression, ed. R. Nelson
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
54. J. Tsai, “Ideal Affect: Cultural Causes and Behavioral Consequences,” Perspectives on Psych
Sci 2 (2007): 242; S. Kitayama and A. Uskul, “Culture, Mind, and the Brain: Current Evidence
and Future Directions,” Ann Rev of Psych 62 (2011): 419.
55. C. Kobayashi et al., “Cultural and Linguistic Influence on Neural Bases of ‘Theory of Mind’:
An fMRI Study with Japanese Bilinguals,” Brain and Language 98 (2006): 210; C. Lewis et
al., “Social Influences on False Belief Access: Specific Sibling Influences or General
Apprenticeship?” Child Development 67 (1996): 2930; J. Perner et al., “Theory of Mind Is
Contagious: You Catch It from Your Sibs,” Child Development 65 (1994): 1228; D. Liu et al.,
“Theory of Mind Development in Chinese Children: A Meta-analysis of False-Belief
Understanding Across Cultures and Languages,” Developmental Psych 44 (2008): 523.
56. C. Anderson et al., “Violent Video Game Effects on Aggression, Empathy, and Prosocial
Behavior in Eastern and Western Countries: A Meta-analytic Review,” Psych Bull 136 (2010):
151.
57. R. E. Nisbett and D. Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996).
58. A. Kusserow, “De-homogenizing American Individualism: Socializing Hard and Soft
Individualism in Manhattan and Queens,” Ethos 27 (1999): 210.
59. S. Ullal-Gupta et al., “Linking Prenatal Experience to the Emerging Musical Mind,” Front
Systems Nsci 3 (2013): 48.
60. A. DeCasper and W. Fifer, “Of Human Bonding: Newborns Prefer Their Mothers’ Voices,”
Sci 6 (1980): 208; A. J. DeCasper and P. A. Prescott, “Human Newborns’ Perception of Male
Voices: Preference, Discrimination, and Reinforcing Value,” Developmental Psychobiology 17
(1984): 481; B. Mampe et al., “Newborns’ Cry Melody Is Shaped by Their Native Language,”
Curr Biol 19 (2009): 1994; A. DeCasper and M. Spence, “Prenatal Maternal Speech Influences
Newborns’ Perception of Speech Sounds,” Infant Behav and Development 9 (1986): 133.
61. J. P. Lecanuet et al., “Fetal Perception and Discrimination of Speech Stimuli: Demonstration
by Cardiac Reactivity: Preliminary Results,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des sciences III
305 (1987): 161; J. P. Lecanuet et al., “Fetal Discrimination of Low-Pitched Musical Notes,”
Developmental Psychobiology 36 (2000): 29; C. Granier-Deferre et al., “A Melodic Contour
Repeatedly Experienced by Human Near-Term Fetuses Elicits a Profound Cardiac Reaction
One Month After Birth,” PLoS ONE 23 (2011): e17304.
62. G. Kolata, “Studying Learning in the Womb,” Sci 225 (1984): 302; A. J. DeCasper and M. J.
Spence, “Prenatal Maternal Speech Influences Newborns’ Perception of Speech Sounds,”
Infant Behav and Development 9 (1986): 133.
63. P. Y. Wang et al., “Müllerian Inhibiting Substance Contributes to Sex-Linked Biases in the
Brain and Behavior,” PNAS 106 (2009): 7203; S. Baron-Cohen et al., “Sex Differences in the
Brain: Implications for Explaining Autism,” Sci 310 (2005): 819.
64. R. Goy and B. McEwen, Sexual Differentiation of the Brain (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1980).

757

65. J. Money, “Sex Hormones and Other Variables in Human Eroticism,” in Sex and Internal
Secretions, ed. W. C. Young, 3rd ed. (Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1963), p. 138.
66. G. M. Alexander and M. Hines, “Sex Differences in Response to Children’s Toys in
Nonhuman Primates (Cercopithecus aethiops sabaeus),” EHB 23 (2002): 467. (This is the
source of the figure in the text). J. M. Hassett et al., “Sex Differences in Rhesus Monkey Toy
Preferences Parallel Those of Children,” Horm Behav 54 (2008): 359.
67. K. Wallen and J. M. Hassett, “Sexual Differentiation of Behavior in Monkeys: Role of
Prenatal Hormones,” J Neuroendocrinology 21 (2009): 421; J. Thornton et al., “Effects of
Prenatal Androgens on Rhesus Monkeys: A Model System to Explore the Organizational
Hypothesis in Primates,” Horm Behav 55 (2009): 633.
68. M. Hines, Brain Gender (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004); G. A. Mathews et al.,
“Personality and Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia: Possible Effects of Prenatal Androgen
Exposure,” Horm Behav 55 (2009): 285; R. W. Dittmann et al., “Congenital Adrenal
Hyperplasia. I: Gender-Related Behavior and Attitudes in Female Patients and Sisters,” PNE
15 (1990): 401; A. Nordenstrom et al., “Sex-Typed Toy Play Correlates with the Degree of
Prenatal Androgen Exposure Assessed by CYP21 Genotype in Girls with Congenital Adrenal
Hyperplasia,” J Clin Endo and Metabolism 87 (2002): 5119; V. L. Pasterski et al., “Increased
Aggression and Activity Level in 3- to 11-Year-Old Girls with Congenital Adrenal
Hyperplasia,” Horm Behav 52 (2007): 368.
69. C. A. Quigley et al., “Androgen Receptor Defects: Historical, Clinical, and Molecular
Perspectives,” Endocrine Rev 16 (1995): 271; N. P. Mongan et al., “Androgen Insensitivity
Syndrome,” Best Practice & Res: Clin Endo & Metabolism 29 (2015): 569.
70. F. Brunner et al., “Body and Gender Experience in Persons with Complete Androgen
Insensitivity Syndrome,” Zeitschrift für Sexualforschung 25 (2012): 26; F. Brunner et al.,
“Gender Role, Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation in CAIS (‘XY-Women’) Compared with
Subfertile and Infertile 46,XX Women,” J Sex Res 2 (2015): 1; D. G. Zuloaga et al., “The Role
of Androgen Receptors in the Masculinization of Brain and Behavior: What We’ve Learned
from the Testicular Feminization Mutation,” Horm Behav 53 (2008): 613; H. F. L. MeyerBahlburg, “Gender Outcome in 46,XY Complete Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome: Comment
on T’Sjoen et al.,” Arch Sexual Behav 39 (2010): 1221; G. T’Sjoen et al., “Male Gender
Identity in Complete Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome,” Arch Sexual Behav 40 (2011): 635.
71. J. Hönekopp et al., “2nd to 4th Digit Length Ratio (2D:4D) and Adult Sex Hormone Levels:
New Data and a Meta-analytic Review,” PNE 32 (2007): 313.
72. Findings from males regarding aggression and assertiveness: C. Joyce et al., “2nd to 4th Digit
Ratio Confirms Aggressive Tendencies in Patients with Boxers Fractures,” Injury 44 (2013):
1636; M. Butovskaya et al., “Digit Ratio (2D:4D), Aggression, and Dominance in the Hadza
and the Datoga of Tanzania,” Am J Human Biology 27 (2015): 620;
ADHD and autism: D. McFadden et al., “Physiological Evidence of Hypermasculination in
Boys with the Inattentive Subtype of ADHD,” Clinical Neurosci Res 5 (2005): 233; M. Martel
et al., “Masculinized Finger-Length Ratios of Boys, but Not Girls, Are Associated with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,” Behavioral Neuroscience 122 (2008): 273; J.
Manning et al., “The 2nd to 4th Digit Ratio and Autism,” Development Medicine Child
Neurology 43 (2001): 160.
Depression and anxiety: A. Bailey et al., “Depression in Men Is Associated with More
Feminine Finger Length Ratios,” Pers Individ Diff 39 (2005): 829; M. Evardone et al.,
“Anxiety, Sex-linked Behavior, and Digit Ratios,” Arch Sex Behav. 38 (2009): 442–55.
Dominance: N. Neave et al., “Second to Fourth Digit Ratio, Testosterone and Perceived
Male Dominance,” Proc Royal Society B 270 (2003): 2167.
Handwriting: J. Beech et al., “Do Differences in Sex Hormones Affect Handwriting Style?
Evidence from Digit Ratio and Sex Role Identity as Determinants of the Sex of Handwriting,”
Pers Individ Diff 39 (2005): 459.

758

Sexual orientation: K. Hirashi et al., “The Second to Fourth Digit Ratio in a Japanese Twin
Sample: Heritability, Prenatal Hormone Transfer, and Association with Sexual Orientation,”
Arch Sex Behav 41 (2012): 711; A. Churchill et al., “The Effects of Sex, Ethnicity, and Sexual
Orientation on Self-Measured Digit Ratio,” Arch Sex Behav 36 (2007): 251.
Findings from females regarding autism: J. Manning et al., “The 2nd to 4th Digit Ratio and
Autism,” Dev Med Child Neurol 43 (2001): 160.
Anorexia: S. Quinton et al., “The 2nd to 4th Digit Ratio and Eating Disorder Diagnosis in
Women,” Pers Individ Diff 51 (2011): 402.
Handedness: B. Fink et al., “2nd to 4th Digit Ratio and Hand Skill in Austrian Children,”
Biol Psychology 67 (2004): 375.
Sexual orientation and sexual behavior: T. Grimbos et al., “Sexual Orientation and the 2nd
to 4th Finger Length Ratio: A Meta-Analysis in Men and Women,” Behav Neurosci 124
(2010): 278; W. Brown et al., “Differences in Finger Length Ratios Between Self-Identified
‘Butch’ and ‘Femme’ Lesbians,” Arch Sex Behav 31 (2002): 123.
73. Footnote: A. Lamminmaki et al., “Testosterone Measured in Infancy Predicts Subsequent
Sex-Typed Behavior in Boys and in Girls,” Horm Behav 61 (2012): 611; G. Alexander and J.
Saenz, “Early Androgens, Activity Levels and Toy Choices of Children in the Second Year of
Life,” Horm Behav 62 (2012): 500.
74. B. Heijmans et al., “Persistent Epigenetic Differences Associated with Prenatal Exposure to
Famine in Humans,” PNAS 105 (2008): 17046.
75. For a great review, see D. Moore, The Developing Genome: An Introduction to Behavioral
Genetics. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
76. Weaver et al., “Epigenetic Programming by Maternal Behavior,” Nature Neurosci 7 (2004):
847; R. Sapolsky, “Mothering Style and Methylation,” Nature Neurosci 7 (2004): 791; D.
Francis et al., “Nongenomic Transmission Across Generations of Maternal Behavior and Stress
Response in the Rat,” Science 286 (2004): 1155.
77. N. Provencal et al., “The Signature of Maternal Rearing in the Methylome in Rhesus
Macaque Prefrontal Cortex and T Cells,” J Neurosci 32 (20120: 15626; T. L. Roth et al.,
“Lasting Epigenetic Influence of Early-Life Adversity on the BDNF Gene,” BP 65 (2009):
760; E. C. Braithwaite et al., “Maternal Prenatal Depressive Symptoms Predict Infant NR3C1
1F and BDNF IV DNA Methylation,” Epigenetics 10 (2015): 408; C. Murgatroyd et al.,
“Dynamic DNA Methylation Programs Persistent Adverse Effects of Early-Life Stress,” Nat
Nsci 12 (2009): 1559; M. J. Meaney and M. Szyf, “Environmental Programming of Stress
Responses Through DNA Methylation: Life at the Interface Between a Dynamic Environment
and a Fixed Genome,” Dialogues in Clin Neuroscience 7 (2005): 103; P. O. McGowan et al.,
“Broad Epigenetic Signature of Maternal Care in the Brain of Adult Rats,” PLoS ONE 6
(2011): e14739; D. Liu et al., “Maternal Care, Hippocampal Glucocorticoid Receptors, and
Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Responses to Stress,” Sci 277 (1997): 1659; T. Oberlander et
al., “Prenatal Exposure to Maternal Depression, Neonatal Methylation of Human
Glucocorticoid Receptor Gene (NR3C1) and Infant Cortisol Stress Responses,” Epigenetics 3
(2008): 97; F. A. Champagne, “Epigenetic Mechanisms and the Transgenerational Effects of
Maternal Care,” Front Neuroendocrinology 29 (2008): 386; J. P. Curley et al.,
“Transgenerational Effects of Impaired Maternal Care on Behaviour of Offspring and
Grandoffspring,” Animal Behav 75 (2008): 1551; J. P. Curley et al., “Social Enrichment During
Postnatal Development Induces Transgenerational Effects on Emotional and Reproductive
Behavior in Mice,” Front Behav Nsci 3 (2009): 1; F. A. Champagne, “Maternal Imprints and
the Origins of Variation,” Horm Behav 60 (2011): 4; F. A. Champagne and J. P. Curley,
“Epigenetic Mechanisms Mediating the Long-Term Effects of Maternal Care on
Development,” Nsci Biobehav Rev 33 (2009): 593; F. A. Champagne et al., “Maternal Care
Associated with Methylation of the Estrogen Receptor-alpha1b Promoter and Estrogen
Receptor-Alpha Expression in the Medial Preoptic Area of Female Offspring,” Endo 147

759

(2006): 2909; F. A. Champagne and J. P. Curley, “How Social Experiences Influence the
Brain,” Curr Opinion in Neurobiol 15 (2005): 704.
Chapter 8: Back to When You Were Just a Fertilized Egg
1. Footnote: E. Suhay and T. Jayaratne, “Does Biology Justify Ideology? The Politics of Genetic
Attribution,” Public Opinion Quarterly (2012): doi:10.1093/poq/nfs049. See also M. Katz,
“The Biological Inferiority of the Undeserving Poor,” Social Work and Soc 11 (2013): 1.
2. E. Uhlmann et al., “Blood Is Thicker: Moral Spillover Effects Based on Kinship,” Cog 124
(2012): 239.
3. E. Pennisi, “ENCODE Project Writes Eulogy for Junk DNA,” Sci 337 (2012): 1159.
4. M. Bastepe, “The GNAS Locus: Quintessential Complex Gene Encoding Gsa, XLas, and
Other Imprinted Transcripts,” Curr Genomics 8 (2007): 398.
5. Y. Gilad et al., “Expression Profiling in Primates Reveals a Rapid Evolution of Human
Transcription Factors,” Nat 440 (2006): 242.
6. D. Moore, The Developing Genome: An Introduction to Behavioral Genetics (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2015); H. Wang et al., “Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors Facilitate Partner
Preference Formation in Female Prairie Voles,” Nat Nsci 16 (2013): 919.
7. I. Weaver et al., “Epigenetic Programming by Maternal Behavior,” Nat Nsci 7 (2004): 847.
8. Y. Wei et al., “Paternally Induced Transgenerational Inheritance of Susceptibility to Diabetes in
Mammals,” PNAS 111 (2014): 1873; M. Anway et al., “Epigenetic Transgenerational Actions
of Endocrine Disruptors and Male Fertility,” Sci 308 (2005): 1466; K. Siklenka et al.,
“Disruption of Histone Methylation in Developing Sperm Impairs Offspring Health
Transgenerationally,” Sci 350 (2016): 651. For the controversy, see J. Kaiser, “The Epigenetics
Heretic,” Sci 343 (2014): 361.
9. E. Jablonka and M. Lamb, Epigenetic Inheritance and Evolution: The Lamarckian Dimension
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
10. E. T. Wang et al., “Alternative Isoform Regulation in Human Tissue Transcriptomes,” Nat
456 (2008): 470; Q. Pan et al., “Deep Surveying of Alternative Splicing Complexity in the
Human Transcriptome by High-Throughput Sequencing,” Nat Gen, 40 (2008): 1413.
11. A. Muotri et al., “Somatic Mosaicism in Neuronal Precursor Cells Mediated by L1
Retrotransposition,” Nat 435 (2005): 903; P. Perrat et al., “Transposition-Driven Genomic
Heterogeneity in the Drosophila Brain,” Sci 340 (2013): 91; G. Vogel, “Do Jumping Genes
Spawn Diversity?” Sci 332 (2011): 300; J. Baillie et al., “Somatic Retrotransposition Alters the
Genetic Landscape of the Human Brain,” Nat 479 (2011): 534.
12. A. Eldar and M. Elowitz, “Functional Roles for Noise in Genetic Circuits,” Nat 467 (2010):
167; C. Finch and T. Kirkwood, Chance, Development, and Aging (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2000).
13. Some of the early, classic adoption studies: L. L. Heston, “Psychiatric Disorders in Foster
Home Reared Children of Schizophrenic Mothers,” Brit J Psychiatry 112 (1966): 819; S. Kety
et al., “Mental Illness in the Biological and Adoptive Families of Adopted Schizophrenics,”
Am J Psychiatry 128 (1971): 302; D. Rosenthal et al., “The Adopted-Away Offspring of
Schizophrenics,” Am J Psychiatry 128 (1971): 307.
14. For an extraordinary example of a mix-up of babies shortly after birth, and the implications,
see S. Dominus, “The Mixed-Up Brothers of Bogotá,” New York Times Magazine, July 9,
2015, www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/magazine/the-mixed-up-brothers-of-bogota.html.
15. R. Ebstein et al., “Genetics of Human Social Behavior,” Neuron 65 (2008): 831; S. Eisen et
al., “Familial Influence on Gambling Behavior: An Analysis of 3359 Twin Pairs,” Addiction 93
(1988): 1375. Footnote: W. Hopkins et al., “Chimpanzee Intelligence Is Heritable,” Curr Biol
24 (2014): 1649.
16. T. Bouchard and M. McGue, “Genetic and Environmental Influences on Human
Psychological Differences,” J Neurobiol 54 (2003): 4; D. Cesarini et al., “Heritability of

760

Cooperative Behavior in the Trust Game,” PNAS 105 (2008): 3721; S. Zhong et al., “The
Heritability of Attitude Toward Economic Risk,” Twin Res and Hum Genetics 12 (2009): 103;
D. Cesarini et al., “Genetic Variation in Financial Decision-Making,” J the Eur Economic
Association 7 (2010): 617.
17. K. Verweij et al., “Shared Aetiology of Risky Sexual Behaviour and Adolescent Misconduct:
Genetic and Environmental Influences,” Genes, Brain and Behav 8 (2009): 107; K. Verweij et
al., “Genetic and Environmental Influences on Individual Differences in Attitudes Toward
Homosexuality: An Australian Twin Study,” Behav Genetics 38 (2008): 257.
18. K. Verweij et al., “Evidence for Genetic Variation in Human Mate Preferences for Sexually
Dimorphic Physical Traits. PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e49294; K. Smith et al., “Biology, Ideology
and Epistemology: How Do We Know Political Attitudes Are Inherited and Why Should We
Care?” Am J Political Sci 56 (2012): 17; K. Arceneaux et al., “The Genetic Basis of Political
Sophistication,” Twin Res and Hum Genetics 15 (2012): 34; J. Fowler and D. Schreiber,
“Biology, Politics, and the Emerging Science of Human Nature,” Sci 322 (2008): 912.
19. J. Ray et al., “Heritability of Dental Fear,” J Dental Res 89 (2010): 297; G. Miller et al., “The
Heritability and Genetic Correlates of Mobile Phone Use: Twin Study of Consumer Behavior,”
Twin Res and Hum Genetics 15 (2012): 97.
20. L. Littvay et al., “Sense of Control and Voting: A Genetically-Driven Relationship,” Soc Sci
Quarterly 92 (2011): 1236; J. Harris, The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn Out the
Way They Do (NY: Free Press, 2009); A. Seroczynski et al., “Etiology of the
Impulsivity/Aggression Relationship: Genes or Environment?” Psychiatry Res 86 (1999): 41;
E. Coccaro et al., “Heritability of Aggression and Irritability: A Twin Study of the BussDurkee Aggression Scales in Adult Male Subjects,” BP 41 (1997): 273.
21. E. Hayden, “Taboo Genetics,” Nat 502 (2013): 26.
22. Some strong criticisms of twin and adoption approaches: R. Rose, “Genes and Human
Behavior,” Ann Rev Psych 467 (1995): 625; J. Joseph, “Twin Studies in Psychiatry and
Psychology: Science or Pseudoscience?” Psychiatric Quarterly 73 (2002): 71; K. Richardson
and S. Norgate, “The Equal Environments Assumption of Classical Twin Studies May Not
Hold,” Brit J Educational Psych 75 (2005): 339; R. Fosse et al., “A Critical Assessment of the
Equal-Environment Assumption of the Twin Method for Schizophrenia,” Front Psychiatry 6
(2015): 62; A. V. Horwitz et al., “Rethinking Twins and Environments: Possible Social Sources
for Assumed Genetic Influences in Twin Research,” J Health and Soc Behav 44 (2003): 111.
23. Work of some of the most prominent defenders of the approaches:
Kenneth Kendler: K. S. Kendler, “Twin Studies of Psychiatric Illness: An Update,” AGP 58
(2001): 1005; K. S. Kendler et al., “A Test of the Equal-Environment Assumption in Twin
Studies of Psychiatric Illness,” Behav Genetics 23 (1993): 21; K. S. Kendler and C. O. Gardner
Jr., “Twin Studies of Adult Psychiatric and Substance Dependence Disorders: Are They Biased
by Differences in the Environmental Experiences of Monozygotic and Dizygotic Twins in
Childhood and Adolescence?” Psych Med 8 (1998): 625; K. S. Kendler et al., “A Novel
Sibling-Based Design to Quantify Genetic and Shared Environmental Effects: Application to
Drug Abuse, Alcohol Use Disorder and Criminal Behavior,” Psych Med 46 (2016): 1639; K. S.
Kendler et al., “Genetic and Familial Environmental Influences on the Risk for Drug Abuse: A
National Swedish Adoption Study,” AGP 69 (2012): 690; K. S. Kendler et al., “Tobacco
Consumption in Swedish Twins Reared Apart and Reared Together,” AGP 57 (2000): 886.
Thomas Bouchard: Y. Hur and T. Bouchard, “Genetic Influences on Perceptions of
Childhood Family Environment: A Reared Apart Twin Study,” Child Development 66 (1995):
330; M. McGue and T. J. Bouchard, “Genetic and Environmental Determinants of Information
Processing and Special Mental Abilities: A Twin Analysis,” in Advances in the Psychology of
Hum Intelligence, ed. R. J. Sternberg, vol. 5 (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1989), pp. 7–45; T. J.
Bouchard et al., “Sources of Human Psychological Differences: The Minnesota Study of Twins
Reared Apart,” Sci 250 (1990): 223.

761

Robert Plomin: R. Plomin et al., Behavioral Genetics, 5th ed. (New York: Worth, 2008); K.
Hardy-Brown et al., “Selective Placement of Adopted Children: Prevalence and Effects,” J
Child Psych and Psychiatry 21 (1980) 143; N. L. Pedersen et al., “Genetic and Environmental
Influences for Type A–Like Measures and Related Traits: A Study of Twins Reared Apart and
Twins Reared Together,” Psychosomatic Med 51 (1989): 428; N. L. Pedersen et al.,
“Neuroticism, Extraversion, and Related Traits in Adult Twins Reared Apart and Reared
Together,” JPSP 55 (1988): 950.
Also: E. Coccaro et al., “Heritability of Aggression and Irritability: A Twin Study of the
Buss-Durkee Aggression Scales in Adult Male Subjects,” BP 41 (1997): 273; A. Bjorklund et
al., “The Origins of Intergenerational Associations: Lessons from Swedish Adoption Data,”
Quarterly J Economics 121 (2006): 999; E. P. Gunderson et al., “Twins of Mistaken Zygosity
(TOMZ): Evidence for Genetic Contributions to Dietary Patterns and Physiologic Traits,” Twin
Res and Hum Genetics 9 (2006): 540; B. N. Sánchez et al., “A Latent Variable Approach to
Study Gene-Environment Interactions in the Presence of Multiple Correlated Exposures,”
Biometrics 68 (2012): 466.
24. Evidence that chorionic status is a meaningful variable: M. Melnick et al., “The Effects of
Chorion Type on Variation in IQ in the NCPP Twin Population,” Am J Hum Genetics 30
(1978): 425; N. Jacobs et al., “Heritability Estimates of Intelligence in Twins: Effect of
Chorion Type,” Behav Genetics 31 (2001): 209; M. Melnick et al., “The Effects of Chorion
Type on Variation in IQ in the NCPP Twin Population,” Am J Hum Genetics 30 (1978): 425; R.
J. Rose et al., “Placentation Effects on Cognitive Resemblance of Adult Monozygotes,” in
Twin Research 3: Epidemiological and Clinical Studies, ed. L. Gedda et al. (New York: Alan
R. Liss, 1981), p. 35; K. Beekmans et al., “Relating Type of Placentation to Later Intellectual
Development in Monozygotic (MZ) Twins (Abstract),” Behav Genetics 23 (1993): 547; M.
Carlier et al., “Manual Performance and Laterality in Twins of Known Chorion Type,” Behav
Genetics 26 (1996): 409.
Mixed findings: L. Gutknecht et al. “Long-Term Effect of Placental Type on
Anthropometrical and Psychological Traits Among Monozygotic Twins: A Follow Up Study,”
Twin Res 2 (1999): 212; D. K. Sokol et al., “Intrapair Differences in Personality and Cognitive
Ability Among Young Monozygotic Twins Distinguished by Chorion Type,” Behav Genetics
25 (1996): 457; A. C. Bogle et al., “Replication of Asymmetry of a-b Ridge Count and
Behavioral Discordance in Monozygotic Twins,” Behav Genetics 24 (1994): 65; J. O. Davis et
al., “Prenatal Development of Monozygotic Twins and Concordance for Schizophrenia,”
Schizophrenia Bull 21 (1995): 357.
Evidence against: Y. M. Hur, “Effects of the Chorion Type on Prosocial Behavior in Young
South Korean Twins,” Twin Res and Hum Genetics 10 (2007): 773; M. C. Wichers et al.,
“Chorion Type and Twin Similarity for Child Psychiatric Symptoms,” AGP 59 (2002): 562; P.
Welch et al., “Placental Type and Bayley Mental Development Scores in 18 Month Old
Twins,” in Twin Research: Psychology and Methodology, ed. L. Gedda et al. (New York: Alan
R Liss, 1978), pp. 34–41.
Quote from: C. A. Prescott et al., “Chorion Type as a Possible Influence on the Results and
Interpretation of Twin Study Data,” Twin Res 2 (1999): 244.
25. R. Simon and H. Alstein, Adoption, Race and Identity: From Infancy to Young Adulthood
(New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002); Child Welfare League of America,
Standards of Excellence: Standards of Excellence for Adoption Services, rev. ed. (Washington,
DC: Child Welfare League of America, 2000); M. Bohman, Adopted Children and Their
Families: A Follow-up Study of Adopted Children, Their Background, Environment and
Adjustment (Stockholm: Proprius, 1970).
26. L. J. Kamin and A. S. Goldberger, “Twin Studies in Behavioral Research: A Skeptical View,”
Theoretical Population Biol 61 (2002): 83.

762

27. M. Stoolmiller, “Correcting Estimates of Shared Environmental Variance for Range
Restriction in Adoption Studies Using a Truncated Multivariate Normal Model,” Behav Gen
28 (1998) 429; M. Stoolmiller, “Implications of Restricted Range of Family Environments for
Estimates of Heritability and Nonshared Environment in Behavior-Genetic Adoption Studies,”
Psych Bull 125 (1999): 392; M. McGue et al., “The Environments of Adopted and Nonadopted Youth: Evidence on Range Restriction from the Sibling Interaction and Behavior
Study (SIBS),” Behav Gen 37 (2007): 449.
28. R. Ebstein et al., “Genetics of Human Social Behavior,” Neuron 65 (2008): 831.
29. This example comes from N. Block, “How Heritability Misleads About Race,” Cog 56
(1995): 99–128.
30. D. Moore, The Dependent Gene: The Fallacy of “Nature Versus Nurture” (NY: Holt, 2001);
M. Ridley, Nature via Nurture (New York: HarperCollins, 2003); A. Tenesa and C. Haley,
“The Heritability of Human Disease: Estimation, Uses and Abuses,” Nat Rev Genetics 14
(2013): 139; P. Schonemann, “On Models and Muddles of Heritability,” Genetica 99 (1997):
97.
31. T. Bouchard and M. McGue, “Genetic and Environmental Influences on Human
Psychological Differences,” J Neurobiol 54 (2003): 4.
32. L. E. Duncan and M. C. Keller, “A Critical Review of the First 10 Years of Candidate Geneby-Environment Interaction Research in Psychiatry,” Am J Psychiatry 168 (2011): 1041; S.
Manuck and J. McCaffery, “Gene-Environment Interaction,” Ann Rev of Psych 65 (2014): 41.
33. A. Caspi et al., “Influence of Life Stress on Depression: Moderation by a Polymorphism in
the 5-HTT Gene,” Sci 297 (2002): 851.
34. A. Caspi et al., “Moderation of Breastfeeding Effects on the IQ by Genetic Variation in Fatty
Acid Metabolism,” PNAS 104 (2007): 18860; B. K. Lipska and D. R. Weinberger, “Genetic
Variation in Vulnerability to the Behavioral Effects of Neonatal Hippocampal Damage in
Rats,” PNAS 92 (1995): 8906.
35. J. Crabbe et al., “Genetics of Mouse Behavior: Interactions with Laboratory Environment,”
Sci 284 (1999): 1670.
36. A nice example of a dual environment hit: N. P. Daskalakis et al., “The Three-Hit Concept of
Vulnerability and Resilience: Toward Understanding Adaptation to Early-Life Adversity
Outcome,” PNE 38 (2013): 1858.
37. E. Turkheimer et al., “Socioeconomic Status Modifies Heritability of IQ in Young Children,”
Psych Sci 14 (2003): 623; E. M. Tucker-Drob et al., “Emergence of a Gene x Socioeconomic
Status Interaction on Infant Mental Ability Between 10 Months and 2 Years,” Psych Sci 22
(2010): 125; M. Rhemtulla and E. M. Tucker-Drob, “Gene-by-Socioeconomic Status
Interaction on School Readiness,” Behav Genetics 42 (2012): 549; D. Reiss et al., “How Genes
and the Social Environment Moderate Each Other,” Am J Public Health 103 (2013): S111; S.
A. Hart et al., “Expanding the Environment: Gene × School-Level SES Interaction on Reading
Comprehension,” J Child Psych and Psychiatry 54 (2013): 1047; J. R. Koopmans et al., “The
Influence of Religion on Alcohol Use Initiation: Evidence for Genotype × Environment
Interaction,” Behav Genetics 29 (1999): 445.
38. S. Nielsen et al., “Prevalence of Alcohol Problems Among Adult Somatic Inpatients of a
Copenhagen Hospital,” Alcohol and Alcoholism 29 (1994): 583; S. Manuck et al., “Aggression
and Anger-Related Traits Associated with a Polymorphism of the Tryptophan Hydroxylase
Gene,” BP 45 (1999): 603; J. Hennig et al., “Two Types of Aggression Are Differentially
Related to Serotonergic Activity and the A779C TPH Polymorphism,” Behav Nsci 119 (2005):
16; A. Strobel et al., “Allelic Variation in 5-HT1A Receptor Expression Is Associated with
Anxiety- and Depression-Related Personality Traits,” J Neural Transmission 110 (2003): 1445;
R. Parsey et al., “Effects of Sex, Age, and Aggressive Traits in Man on Brain Serotonin 5HT1A Receptor Binding Potential Measured by PET Using [C-11]WAY-100635,” Brain Res
954 (2002): 173; A. Benko et al., “Significant Association Between the C(-1019)G Functional

763

Polymorphism of the HTR1A Gene and Impulsivity,” Am J Med Genetics, Part B,
Neuropsychiatric Genetics 153 (2010): 592, M. Soyka et al., “Association of 5-HT1B Receptor
Gene and Antisocial Behavior and Alcoholism,” J Neural Transmission 111 (2004): 101; L.
Bevilacqua et al., “A Population-Specific HTR2B Stop Codon Predisposes to Severe
Impulsivity,” Nat 468 (2010): 1061; C. A. Ficks and I. D. Waldman, “Candidate Genes for
Aggression and Antisocial Behavior: A Meta-analysis of Association Studies of the 5HTTLPR
and MAOA-uVNTR,” Behav Genetics 44 (2014): 427; I. Craig and K. Halton, “Genetics of
Human Aggressive Behavior,” Hum Genetics 126 (2009): 101.
39. H. Brunner et al., “Abnormal Behavior Associated with a Point Mutation in the Structural
Gene for Monoamine Oxidase A,” Sci 262 (1993): 578; H. G. Brunner et al., “X-Linked
Borderline Mental Retardation with Prominent Behavioral Disturbance: Phenotype, Genetic
Localization, and Evidence for Disturbed Monoamine Metabolism,” Am J Hum Genetics 52
(1993): 1032.
40. O. Cases et al., “Aggressive Behavior and Altered Amounts of Brain Serotonin and
Norepinephrine in Mice Lacking MAOA,” Sci 268 (1995): 1763; J. J. Kim et al., “Selective
Enhancement of Emotional, but Not Motor, Learning in Monoamine Oxidase A–Deficient
Mice,” PNAS 94 (1997): 5929.
41. J. Buckholtz and A. Meyer-Lindenberg, “MAOA and the Neurogenetic Architecture of
Human Aggression,” TINS 31 (2008): 120; A. Meyer-Lindenberg et al., “Neural Mechanisms
of Genetic Risk for Impulsivity and Violence in Humans,” PNAS 103 (2006): 6269; J. Fan et
al., “Mapping the Genetic Variation of Executive Attention onto Brain Activity,” PNAS 100
(2003): 7406; L. Passamonti et al., “Monoamine Oxidase-A Genetic Variations Influence Brain
Activity Associated with Inhibitory Control: New Insight into the Neural Correlates of
Impulsivity,” BP 59 (2006): 334; N. Eisenberger et al., “Understanding Genetic Risk for
Aggression: Clues from the Brain’s Response to Social Exclusion,” BP 61 (2007): 1100.
42. O. Cases et al., “Aggressive Behaviour and Altered Amounts of Brain Serotonin and
Norepinephrine in Mice Lacking MAOA,” Sci 268 (1995): 1763; J. S. Fowler et al., “Evidence
That Brain MAO A Activity Does Not Correspond to MAO A Genotype in Healthy Male
Subjects,” BP 62 (2007): 355.
43. The “warrior gene” in the science literature: C. Holden, “Parsing the Genetics of Behavior,”
Sci 322 (2008): 892; D. Eccles et al., “A Unique Demographic History Exists for the MAO-A
Gene in Polynesians,” J Hum Genetics 57 (2012): 294; E. Feresin, “Lighter Sentence for
Murder with ‘Bad Genes,’” Nat News (30 October, 2009); P. Hunter, “The Psycho Gene,”
EMBO Rep 11 (2010): 667.
Criticism of the scientists in the Maori study for overselling the significance of their
finding: D. Wensley and M. King, “Scientific Responsibility for the Dissemination and
Interpretation of Genetic Research: Lessons from the ‘Warrior Gene’ Controversy,” J Med
Ethics 34 (2008): 507; S. Halwani and D. Krupp, “The Genetic Defense: The Impact of
Genetics on the Concept of Criminal Responsibility,” Health Law J 12 (2004): 35.
44. A. Caspi et al., “Influence of Life Stress on Depression: Moderation by a Polymorphism in
the 5-HTT Gene,” Sci 297 (2002): 851.
45. J. Buckholtz and A. Meyer-Lindenberg, “MAOA and the Neurogenetic Architecture of
Human Aggression,” TINS 31 (2008): 120.
46. J. Kim-Cohen et al., “MAOA, Maltreatment, and Gene Environment Interaction Predicting
Children’s Mental Health: New Evidence and a Meta-analysis,” Mol Psychiatry 11 (2006):
903; A. Byrd and S. Manuck, “MAOA, Childhood Maltreatment and Antisocial Behavior:
Meta-analysis of a Gene-Environment Interaction,” BP 75 (2013): 9; G. Frazzetto et al., “Early
Trauma and Increased Risk for Physical Aggression During Adulthood: The Moderating Role
of MAOA Genotype,” PLoS ONE 2 (2007): e486; C. Widom and L. Brzustowicz, “MAOA and
the ‘Cycle of Violence’: Childhood Abuse and Neglect, MAOA Genotype, and Risk for
Violent and Antisocial Behavior,” BP 60 (2006): 684; R. McDermott et al., “MAOA and

764

Aggression: A Gene-Environment Interaction in Two Populations,” J Conflict Resolution 1
(2013): 1043; T. Newman et al., “Monoamine Oxidase A Gene Promoter Variation and
Rearing Experience Influences Aggressive Behavior in Rhesus Monkeys,” BP 57 (2005): 167;
X. Ou et al., “Glucocorticoid and Androgen Activation of Monoamine Oxidase A Is Regulated
Differently by R1 and Sp1,” J Biol Chemistry 281 (2006): 21512.
Replication: D. L. Foley et al., “Childhood Adversity, Monoamine Oxidase A Genotype,
and Risk for Conduct Disorder,” AGP 61 (2004): 738; D. M. Fergusson et al., “MAOA, Abuse
Exposure and Antisocial Behaviour: 30-Year Longitudinal Study,” Brit J Psychiatry 198
(2011): 457.
Weaker effect in girls: E. C. Prom-Wormley et al., “Monoamine Oxidase A and Childhood
Adversity as Risk Factors for Conduct Disorder in Females,” Psych Med 39 (2009): 579.
Replicates for whites but not blacks: C. S. Widom and L. M. Brzustowicz, “MAOA and the
‘Cycle of Violence’: Childhood Abuse and Neglect, MAOA Genotype, and Risk for Violent
and Antisocial Behavior,” BP 60 (2006): 684.
Failure of replication: D. Huizinga et al., “Childhood Maltreatment, Subsequent Antisocial
Behavior, and the Role of Monoamine Oxidase A Genotype,” BP 60 (2006): 677; S. Young et
al., “Interaction Between MAO-A Genotype and Maltreatment in the Risk for Conduct
Disorder: Failure to Confirm in Adolescent Patients,” Am J Psychiatry 163 (2006): 1019.
47. R. Sjoberg et al., “A Non-additive Interaction of a Functional MAO-A VNTR and
Testosterone Predicts Antisocial Behavior,” Neuropsychopharmacology 33 (2008): 425; R.
McDermott et al., “Monoamine Oxidase A Gene (MAOA) Predicts Behavioral Aggression
Following Provocation,” PNAS 106 (2009): 2118; D. Gallardo-Pujol et al., “MAOA Genotype,
Social Exclusion and Aggression: An Experimental Test of a Gene-Environment Interaction,”
Genes, Brain and Behav 12 (2013): 140; A. Reif et al., “Nature and Nurture Predispose to
Violent Behavior: Serotonergic Genes and Adverse Childhood Environment,”
Neuropsychopharmacology 32 (2007): 2375.
48. A. Rivera et al., “Cellular Localization and Distribution of Dopamine D4 Receptors in the Rat
Cerebral Cortex and Their Relationship with the Cortical Dopaminergic and Noradrenergic
Nerve Terminal Networks,” Nsci 155 (2008): 997; O. Schoots and H. Van Tol, “The Human
Dopamine D4 Receptor Repeat Sequences Modulate Expression,” Pharmacogenomics J 3
(2003): 343; C. Broeckhoven and S. Gestel, “Genetics of Personality: Are We Making
Progress? Mol Psychiatry 8 (2003): 840; M. R. Munafò et al., “Association of the Dopamine
D4 Receptor (DRD4) Gene and Approach-Related Personality Traits: Meta-analysis and New
Data,” BP 63 (2007): 197; R. Ebstein et al., “Dopamine D4 Receptor (D4DR) Exon III
Polymorphism Associated with the Human Personality Trait of Novelty Seeking,” Nat
Genetics 12 (1996): 78; J. Carpenter et al., “Dopamine Receptor Genes Predict Risk
Preferences, Time Preferences, and Related Economic Choices,” J Risk and Uncertainty 42
(2011): 233; J. Garcia et al., “Associations Between Dopamine D4 Receptor Gene Variation
with Both Infidelity and Sexual Promiscuity,” PLoS ONE 5 (2010): e14162; D. Li et al.,
“Meta-analysis Shows Significant Association Between Dopamine System Genes and
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD),” Human Mol Genetics 15 (2006): 2276; L.
Ray et al., “The Dopamine D4 Receptor (DRD4) Gene Exon III Polymorphism, Problematic
Alcohol Use and Novelty Seeking: Direct and Mediated Genetic Effects,” Addiction Biol 14
(2008): 238; A. Dreber et al., “The 7R Polymorphism in the Dopamine Receptor D4 Gene
(DRD4) Is Associated with Financial Risk-Taking in Men,” EHB 30 (2009): 85; D. Eisenberg
et al., “Polymorphisms in the Dopamine D4 and D2 Receptor Genes and Reproductive and
Sexual Behaviors,” Evolutionary Psych 5 (2007): 696; A. N. Kluger et al., “A Meta-analysis of
the Association Between DRD4 Polymorphism and Novelty Seeking,” Mol Psychiatry 7
(2002): 712; S. Zhong et al., “Dopamine D4 Receptor Gene Associated with Fairness
Preference in Ultimatum Game,” PLoS ONE 5 (2010): e13765.

765

49. M. Bakermans-Kranenburg and M. van Ijzendoorn, “Differential Susceptibility to Rearing
Environment Depending on Dopamine-Related Genes: New Evidence and a Meta-analysis,”
Development Psychopathology 23 (2011): 39; J. Sasaki et al., “Religion Priming Differentially
Increases Prosocial Behavior Among Variants of the Dopamine D4 Receptor (DRD4) Gene,”
SCAN 8 (2013): 209; M. Sweitzer et al., “Polymorphic Variation in the Dopamine D4 Receptor
Predicts Delay Discounting as a Function of Childhood Socioeconomic Status: Evidence for
Differential Susceptibility,” SCAN 8 (2013): 499.
50. F. Chang et al., “The World-wide Distribution of Allele Frequencies at the Human Dopamine
D4 Receptor Locus,” Hum Genetics 98 (1996): 91; C. Chen et al., “Population Migration and
the Variation of Dopamine D4 Receptor (DRD4) Allele Frequencies Around the Globe,” EHB
20 (1999): 309.
51. M. Reuter and J. Hennig, “Association of the Functional Catechol-O-Methyltransferase
VAL158MET Polymorphism with the Personality Trait of Extraversion,” Neuroreport 16
(2005): 1135; T. Lancaster et al., “COMT val158met Predicts Reward Responsiveness in
Humans,” Genes, Brain and Behav 11 (2012): 986; A. Caspi et al., “A Replicated MolecularGenetic Basis for Subtyping Antisocial Behavior in ADHD,” AGP 65 (2007): 203; N. Perroud
et al., “COMT but Not Serotonin-Related Genes Modulates the Influence of Childhood Abuse
on Anger Traits,” Genes, Brain and Behav 9 (2010): 193.
COMT variants also associated with cognitive end points: F. Papaleo et al., “Genetic
Dissection of the Role of Catechol-O-Methyltransferase in Cognition and Stress Reactivity in
Mice,” J Nsci 28 (2008): 8709; F. Papaleo et al., “Effects of Sex and COMT Genotype on
Environmentally Modulated Cognitive Control in Mice,” PNAS 109 (2012): 20160; F. Papaleo
et al., “Epistatic Interaction of COMT and DTNBP1 Modulates Prefrontal Function in Mice
and in Humans,” Mol Psychiatry 19 (2013): 311.
52. D. Enter et al., “Dopamine Transporter Polymorphisms Affect Social Approach-Avoidance
Tendencies,” Genes, Brain and Behav 11 (2012): 671; G. Guo et al., “Dopamine Transporter,
Gender, and Number of Sexual Partners Among Young Adults,” Eur J Hum Genetics 15
(2007): 279; S. Lee et al., “Association of Maternal Dopamine Transporter Genotype with
Negative Parenting: Evidence for Gene X Environment Interaction with Child Disruptive
Behavior,” Mol Psychiatry 15 (2010): 548 M. van Ijzendoorn et al., “Dopamine System Genes
Associated with Parenting in the Context of Daily Hassles,” Genes, Brain and Behav 7 (2008):
403.
53. D. Gothelf et al., “Biological Effects of Catechol-O-Methyltransferase Haplotypes and
Psychosis Risk in 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome,” BP 75 (2013): 406.
54. M. Dadds et al., “Polymorphisms in the Oxytocin Receptor Gene Are Associated with the
Development of Psychopathy,” Development Psychopathology 26 (2014): 21; A. Malik et al.,
“The Role of Oxytocin and Oxytocin Receptor Gene Variants in Childhood-Onset
Aggression,” Genes, Brain and Behav 11 (2012): 545; H. Walum et al., “Variation in the
Oxytocin Receptor Gene Is Associated with Pair-Bonding and Social Behavior,” BP 71 (2012):
419.
55. S. Rajender et al., “Reduced CAG Repeats Length in Androgen Receptor Gene Is Associated
with Violent Criminal Behavior,” Int J Legal Med 122 (2008): 367; D. Cheng et al.,
“Association Study of Androgen Receptor CAG Repeat Polymorphism and Male Violent
Criminal Activity,” PNE 31 (2006): 548; A. Raznahan et al., “Longitudinally Mapping the
Influence of Sex and Androgen Signaling on the Dynamics of Human Cortical Maturation in
Adolescence,” PNAS 107 (2010): 16988; H. Vermeersch et al., “Testosterone, Androgen
Receptor Gene CAG Repeat Length, Mood and Behaviour in Adolescent Males,” Eur J Endo
163 (2010): 319; S. Manuck et al., “Salivary Testosterone and a Trinucleotide (CAG) Length
Polymorphism in the Androgen Receptor Gene Predict Amygdala Reactivity in Men,” PNE 35
(2010): 94; J. Roney et al., “Androgen Receptor Gene Sequence and Basal Cortisol

766

Concentrations Predict Men’s Hormonal Responses to Potential Mates,” Proc Royal Soc B 277
(2010): 57.
56. D. Comings et al., “Multivariate Analysis of Associations of 42 Genes in ADHD, ODD and
Conduct Disorder,” Clin Genetics 58 (2000): 31; Z. Prichard et al., “Association of
Polymorphisms of the Estrogen Receptor Gene with Anxiety-Related Traits in Children and
Adolescents: A Longitudinal Study,” Am J Med Genetics 114 (2002): 169; H. Tiemeier et al.,
“Estrogen Receptor Alpha Gene Polymorphisms and Anxiety Disorder in an Elderly
Population,” Mol Psychiatry 10 (2005): 806; D. Crews et al., “Litter Environment Affects
Behavior and Brain Metabolic Activity of Adult Knockout Mice,” Front Behav Nsci 3 (2009):
1.
57. R. Bogdan et al., “Mineralocorticoid Receptor Iso/Val (rs5522) Genotype Moderates the
Association Between Previous Childhood Emotional Neglect and Amygdala Reactivity,” Am J
Psychiatry 169 (2012): 515; L. Bevilacqua et al., “Interaction Between FKBP5 and Childhood
Trauma and Risk of Aggressive Behavior,” AGP 69 (2012): 62; E. Binder et al., JAMA 299
(2008): 1291; M. White et al., “FKBP5 and Emotional Neglect Interact to Predict Individual
Differences in Amygdala Reactivity,” Genes, Brain and Behav 11 (2012): 869.
58. L. Schmidt et al., “Evidence for a Gene-Gene Interaction in Predicting Children’s Behavior
Problems: Association of Serotonin Transporter Short and Dopamine Receptor D4 Long
Genotypes with Internalizing and Externalizing Behaviors in Typically Developing 7-YearOlds,” Developmental Psychopathology 19 (2007): 1105; M. Nobile et al., “Socioeconomic
Status Mediates the Genetic Contribution of the Dopamine Receptor D4 and Serotonin
Transporter Linked Promoter Region Repeat Polymorphisms to Externalization in
Preadolescence,” Developmental Psychopathology 19 (2007): 1147.
59. M. J. Arranz et al., “Meta-analysis of Studies on Genetic Variation in 5-HT2A Receptors and
Clozapine Response,” Schizophrenia Res 32 (1998): 93.
60. H. Lango Allen, et al., “Hundreds of Variants Clustered in Genomic Loci and Biological
Pathways Affect Human Height,” Nat 467 (2010): 832.
61. E. Speliotes et al., “Association Analyses of 249,796 Individuals Reveal 18 New Loci
Associated with Body Mass Index,” Nat Genetics 42 (2010): 937; J. Perry et al., “Parent-ofOrigin-Specific Allelic Associations Among 106 Genomic Loci for Age at Menarche,” Nat
514 (2014): 92; S. Ripke et al., “Biological Insights from 108 Schizophrenia-Associated
Genetic Loci,” Nat 511 (2014): 421; F. Flint and M. Munafo, “Genesis of a Complex Disease,”
Nat 511 (2014): 412; J. Tennessen et al., “Evolution and Functional Impact of Rare Coding
Variation from Deep Sequencing of Human Exomes,” Sci 337 (2012): 64; F. Casals and J.
Bertranpetit, “Human Genetic Variation, Shared and Private,” Sci 337 (2012): 39.
62. C. Rietveld et al., “GWAS of 126,559 Individuals Identifies Genetic Variants Associated with
Educational Attainment,” Sci 340 (2013): 1467; J. Flint and M. Munafo, “Herit-Ability,” Sci
340 (2013): 1416.
63. S. Cole et al., “Social Regulation of Gene Expression in Human Leukocytes,” Genome Biol 8
(2007): R189.
64. C. Chabris et al., “The Fourth Law of Behavior Genetics,” Curr Dir Psych Sci 24 (2015):
304; K. Haddley et al., “Behavioral Genetics of the Serotonin Transporter,” Curr Topics in
Behav Nsci 503 (2012): 503; F. S. Neves et al., “Is the Serotonin Transporter Polymorphism
(5-HTTLPR) a Potential Marker for Suicidal Behavior in Bipolar Disorder Patients?” J
Affective Disorders 125 (2010): 98; T. Y. Wang et al., “Bipolar: Gender-Specific Association of
the SLC6A4 and DRD2 Gene Variants in Bipolar Disorder,” Int J Neuropsychopharmacology
17 (2014): 211; P. R. Moya et al., “Common and Rare Alleles of the Serotonin Transporter
Gene, SLC6A4, Associated with Tourette’s Disorder,” Movement Disorders 28 (2013): 1263.
65. E. Turkheimer, “Three Laws of Behavior Genetics and What They Mean,” Curr Dir Psych
Sci 9 (2000): 160.

767

Chapter 9: Centuries to Millennia Before
1. L. Guiso et al., “Culture, Gender, and Math,” Sci 320 (2008): 1164.
2. R. Fisman and E. Miguel, “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement: Evidence from
Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” J Political Economics 115 (2007): 1020; M. Gelfand et al.,
“Differences Between Tight and Loose Cultures: A 33-Nation Study,” Sci 332 (2011): 1100; A.
Alesina et al., “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough,” Quarterly J
Economics 128 (2013): 469.
3. For a good discussion of this, see A. Norenzayan, “Explaining Human Behavioral Diversity,”
Sci 332 (2011): 1041.
4. E. Tylor. Primitive Culture (1871; repr. New York: J. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1920).
5. A. Whitten “Incipient Tradition in Wild Chimpanzees,” Nat 514 (2014): 178; R. O’Malley et
al., “The Cultured Chimpanzee: Nonsense or Breakthrough?” J Curr Anthropology 53 (2012):
650; J. Mercador et al., “4,300-Year-Old Chimpanzee Sites and the Origins of Percussive Stone
Technology,” PNAS 104 (2007): 3043; E. van Leeuwen et al., “A Group-Specific Arbitrary
Tradition in Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes),” Animal Cog 17 (2014): 1421.
6. J. Mann et al., “Why Do Dolphins Carry Sponges?” PLoS ONE 3 (2008): e3868; M. Krutzen et
al., “Cultural Transmission of Tool Use in Bottlenose Dolphins,” PNAS 102 (2005): 8939; M.
Möglich and G. Alpert, “Stone Dropping by Conomyrma bicolor (Hymenoptera: Formicidae):
A New Technique of Interference Competition,” Behav Ecology and Sociobiology 2 (1979):
105.
7. M. Pagel, “Adapted to Culture,” Nat 482 (2012): 297; C. Kluckhohn et al., Culture: A Critical
Review of Concepts and Definitions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952); C. Geertz,
The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic Books, 1973).
8. D. Brown, Human Universals (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991); D. Smail, On Deep History
and the Brain (Oakland: University of California Press, 2008).
9. U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, “Life Expectancy at Birth,” in The World Factbook,
https://cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2102rank.html; W. Lutz and
S. Scherbov, Global Age-Specific Literacy Projections Model (GALP): Rationale,
Methodology and Software (Montreal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics Adult Education and
Literacy Statistics Programme, 2006),
www.uis.unesco.org/Library/Documents/GALP2006_en.pdf; U.S. Central Intelligence Agency,
“Infant Mortality Rate,” in The World Factbook, https://cia.gov/library/publications/the-worldfactbook/rankorder/2091rank.html; International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook
Database, October 2015.
10. Homicide: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Global Study on Homicide 2013
(April 2014); K. Devries, “The Global Prevalence of Intimate Partner Violence Against
Women,” Sci 340 (2013): 1527.
Rape data: NationMaster, “Rape Rate: Countries Compared,”
www.nationmaster.com/country-info/stats/Crime/Rape-rate; L. Melhado, “Rates of Sexual
Violence are High in Democratic Republic of the Congo,” Int Perspectives on Sexual and
Reproductive Health 36 (2010): 210; K. Johnson et al., “Association of Sexual Violence and
Human Rights Violations with Physical and Mental Health in Territories of the Eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo,” JAMA 304 (2010): 553. Bullying data: F. Elgar et al.,
“Income Inequality and School Bullying: Multilevel Study of Adolescents in 37 Countries,” J
Adolescent Health 45 (2009): 351.
11. B. Snyder, “The Ten Best Countries for Women,” Fortune, October 27, 2014,
http://fortune.com/2014/10/27/best-countries-for-women/. The Global Gender Gap Report was
first published in 2006 by the World Economic Forum. Inter-Parliamentary Union, “Women in
National Parliaments,” IPU.org, August 1, 2016, www.ipu.org/wmn-e/classif.htm; U.S. Central
Intelligence Agency, “Maternal Mortality Rate,” in The World Factbook,
https://cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2223rank.html.

768

12. Gallup Poll International, “Do You Feel Loved?” February 2013; J. Henrich et al., “The
Weirdest People in the World? BBS 33 (2010): 61; M. Morris et al. “Culture, Norms and
Obligations: Cross-National Differences in Patterns of Interpersonal Norms and Felt
Olibgations Toward Coworkers,” The Practice of Social Influence in Multiple Cultures 84107
(2001).
13. H. Markus and S. Kitayama, “Culture and Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and
Motivation,” Psych Rev 98 (1991): 224; S. Kitayama and A. Uskul, “Culture, Mind, and the
Brain: Current Evidence and Future Directions,” Ann Rev of Psych 62 (2011): 419; J. Sui and
S. Han, “Self-Construal Priming Modulates Neural Substrates of Self-Awareness,” Psych Sci
18 (2007): 861; B. Park et al., “Neural Evidence for Cultural Differences in the Valuation of
Positive Facial Expressions,” SCAN 11 (2016): 243.
14. H. Katchadourian, Guilt: The Bite of Conscience (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford General Books,
2011); J. Jacquet, Is Shame Necessary? New Uses for an Old Tool (New York: Pantheon,
2015); B. Cheon et al., “Cultural Influences on Neural Basis of Intergroup Empathy,”
Neuroimage 57 (2011): 642; A. Cuddy et al., “Stereotype Content Model Across Cultures:
Towards Universal Similarities and Some Differences,” Brit J Soc Psych 48 (2009): 1.
15. R. Nisbett, The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently . . . And
Why (New York: Free Press, 2003).
16. T. Hedden et al., “Cultural Influences on Neural Substrates of Attentional Control,” Psych Sci
19 (2008): 12; S. Han and G. Northoff, “Culture-Sensitive Neural Substrates of Human
Cognition: A Transcultural Neuroimaging Approach,” Nat Rev Nsci 9 (2008): 646; T. Masuda
and R. E. Nisbett, “Attending Holistically vs. Analytically: Comparing the Context Sensitivity
of Japanese and Americans,” JPSP 81 (2001): 922.
17. J. Chiao, “Cultural Neuroscience: A Once and Future Discipline,” Prog Brain Res 178
(2009): 287.
18. Nisbett, The Geography of Thought; Y. Ogihara et al., “Are Common Names Becoming Less
Common? The Rise in Uniqueness and Individualism in Japan,” Front Psych 6 (2015): 1490.
19. A. Mesoudi et al., “How Do People Become W.E.I.R.D.? Migration Reveals the Cultural
Transmission Mechanisms Underlying Variation in Psychological Processes,” PLoS ONE 11
(2016): e0147162.
20. A. Terrazas and J. Batalova, Frequently Requested Statistics on Immigrants in the United
States (Migration Policy Institute, 2009); J. DeParle, “Global Migration: A World Ever More
on the Move,” New York Times, June 25, 2010; Pew Research Center, “Second-Generation
Americans: A Portrait of the Adult Children of Immigrants,” February 7, 2013,
www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/02/07/second-generation-americans/.
21. J. Lansing, “Balinese ‘Water temples’ and the Management of Irrigation,” Am Anthropology
89 (1987): 326.
22. T. Talhelm et al., “Large-Scale Psychological Differences Within China Explained by Rice
Versus Wheat Agriculture,” Sci 344 (2014): 603.
23. A. Uskul et al., “Ecocultural Basis of Cognition: Farmers and Fishermen Are More Holistic
than Herders,” PNAS 105 (2008): 8552.
24. Z. Dershowitz, “Jewish Subcultural Patterns and Psychological Differentiation,” Int J Psych 6
(1971): 223.
25. H. Harpending and G. Cochran, “In Our Genes,” PNAS 99 (2002): 10; F. Chang et al., “The
World-wide Distribution of Allele Frequencies at the Human Dopamine D4 Receptor Locus,”
Hum Genetics 98 (1996): 891; K. Kidd et al., “An Historical Perspective on ‘The World-wide
Distribution of Allele Frequencies at the Human Dopamine D4 Receptor Locus,’” Hum
Genetics 133 (2014): 431; C. Chen et al., “Population Migration and the Variation of
Dopamine D4 Receptor (DRD4) Allele Frequencies Around the Globe,” EHB 20 (1999): 309.
26. C. Ember and M. Ember, “Warfare, Aggression, and Resource Problems: Cross-Cultural
Codes,” Behav Sci Res 26 (1992): 169; R. Textor, “Cross Cultural Summary: Human Relations

769

Area Files” (1967); H. People and F. Marlowe, “Subsistence and the Evolution of Religion,”
Hum Nat 23 (2012): 253.

770

27. R. McMahon, Homicide in Pre-famine and Famine Ireland (Liverpool, UK: Liverpool
University Press, 2013).
28. R. Nisbett and D. Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996).
29. W. Borneman, Polk: The Man Who Transformed the Presidency and America (New York:
Random House, 2008); B. Wyatt-Brown, Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old
South (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982).
30. F. Stewart, Honor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994).
31. D. Fischer, Albion’s Seed (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989).
32. P. Chesler, “Are Honor Killings Simply Domestic Violence?” Middle East Quarterly, Spring
2009, pp. 61–69, www.meforum.org/2067/are-honor-killings-simply-domestic-violence.
33. M. Borgerhoff Mulder et al., “Intergenerational Wealth Transmission and the Dynamics of
Inequality in Small-Scale Societies,” Sci 326 (2009): 682.
34. P. Turchin, War and Peace and War: The Rise and Fall of Empires (NY: Penguin Press,
2006); D. Rogers et al., “The Spread of Inequality,” PLoS ONE 6 (2011): e24683.
35. R. Wilkinson, Mind the Gap: Hierarchies, Health and Human Evolution (London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2000).
36. F. Elgar et al., “Income Inequality, Trust and Homicide in 33 Countries,” Eur J Public Health
21, 241; F. Elgar et al., “Income Inequality and School Bullying: Multilevel Study of
Adolescents in 37 Countries,” J Adolescent Health 45 (2009): 351; B. Herrmann et al.,
“Antisocial Punishment Across Societies,” Sci 319 (2008): 1362.
37. F. Durante et al., “Nations’ Income Inequality Predicts Ambivalence in Stereotype Content:
How Societies Mind the Gap,” Brit J Soc Psych 52 (2012): 726.
38. N. Adler et al., “Relationship of Subjective and Objective Social Status with Psychological
and Physiological Functioning: Preliminary Data in Healthy White Women,” Health Psych 19
(2000): 586; N. Adler and J. Ostrove, “SES and Health: What We Know and What We Don’t,”
ANYAS 896 (1999): 3; I. Kawachi et al., “Crime: Social Disorganization and Relative
Deprivation,” Soc Sci and Med 48 (1999): 719; I. Kawachi and B. Kennedy, The Health of
Nations: Why Inequality Is Harmful to Your Health (New York: New Press, 2002); J. Lynch et
al., “Income Inequality, the Psychosocial Environment, and Health: Comparisons of Wealthy
Nations,” Lancet 358 (2001): 194; G. A. Kaplan et al., “Inequality in Income and Mortality in
the United States: Analysis of Mortality and Potential Pathways,” Brit Med J 312 (1996): 999;
J. R. Dunn et al., “Income Distribution, Public Services Expenditures, and All Cause Mortality
in US States,” J Epidemiology and Community Health 59 (2005): 768; C. R. Ronzio et al.,
“The Politics of Preventable Deaths: Local Spending, Income Inequality, and Premature
Mortality in US Cities,” J Epidemiology and Community Health 58 (2004): 175.
39. R. Evans et al., Why Are Some People Healthy and Others Not? The Determinants of Health
of Populations (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1994).
40. D. Chon, “The Impact of Population Heterogeneity and Income Inequality on Homicide
Rates: A Cross-National Assessment,” Int J Offender Therapy and Comp Criminology 56
(2012): 730; F. J. Elgar and N. Aitken, “Income Inequality, Trust and Homicide in 33
Countries,” Eur J Public Health 21 (2010): 241; C. Hsieh and M. Pugh, “Poverty, Income
Inequality, and Violent Crime: A Meta-analysis of Recent Aggregate Data Studies,” Criminal
Justice Rev 18 (1993): 182; M. Daly et al., “Income Inequality and Homicide Rates in Canada
and the United States,” Canadian J Criminology 32 (2001): 219.
41. K. A. DeCellesa and M. I. Norton, “Physical and Situational Inequality on Airplanes Predicts
Air Rage,” PNAS 113 (2016): 5588.
42. M. Balter, “Why Settle Down? The Mystery of Communities,” Sci 282 (1998): 1442; P.
Richerson, “Group Size Determines Cultural Complexity,” Nat 503 (2013): 351; M. Derex et
al., “Experimental Evidence for the Influence of Group Size on Cultural Complexity,” Nat 503

771

(2013): 389; A. Gibbons, “How We Tamed Ourselves—and Became Modern,” Sci 346 (2014):
405.
43. F. Lederbogen et al., “City Living and Urban Upbringing Affect Neural Social Stress
Processing in Humans,” Nat 474 (2011): 498; D. P. Kennedy and R. Adolphs, “Stress and the
City,” Nat 474 (2011): 452; A. Abbott, “City Living Marks the Brain,” Nat 474 (2011): 429.
44. J. Henrich et al., “Markets, Religion, Community Size, and the Evolution of Fairness and
Punishment,” Sci 327 (2010): 1480; Footnote: B. Maheer, “Good Gaming,” Nat 531 (2016):
568.
45. A. Norenzayan, Big Gods: How Religions Transformed Cooperation and Conflict (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015).
46. L. R. Florizno et al., “Differences Between Tight and Loose Cultures: A 33-Nation Study,”
Sci 332 (2011): 1100.
47. J. B. Calhoun, “Population Density and Social Pathology,” Sci Am 306 (1962): 139; E.
Ramsden, “From Rodent Utopia to Urban Hell: Population, Pathology, and the Crowded Rats
of NIMH,” Isis 102 (2011): 659; J. L. Freedman et al., “Environmental Determinants of
Behavioral Contagion,” Basic and Applied Soc Psych 1 (1980): 155; O. Galle et al.,
“Population Density and Pathology: What Are the Relations for Man?” Sci 176 (1972): 23.
48. A. Parkes, “The Future of Fertility Control,” in J. Meade, ed., Biological Aspects of Social
Problems (NY: Springer, 1965).
49. M. Lim et al., “Global Pattern Formation and Ethnic/Cultural Violence,” Sci 317 (2007):
1540; A. Rutherford et al., “Good Fences: The Importance of Setting Boundaries for Peaceful
Coexistence,” PLoS ONE 9 (2014): e95660.
50. Florizno et al., “Differences Between Tight and Loose.”
51. The following papers examine the effects of normal weather fluctuations, extremes of
weather, and global warming on a variety of social end points: J. Brashares et al., “Wildlife
Decline and Social Conflict,” Sci 345 (2014): 376; S. M. Hsiang et al., “Civil Conflicts Are
Associated with the Global Climate,” Nat 476 (2011): 438; A. Solow, “Climate for Conflict,”
Nat 476 (2011): 406; S. Schiermeier, “Climate Cycles Drive Civil War,” Nat 476 (2011): 406;
E. Miguel et al., “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach,”
J Political Economy 112 (2004): 725; M. Burke et al., “Warming Increases Risk of Civil War
in Africa,” PNAS 106 (2009): 20670; J. P. Sandholt and K. S. Gleditsch, “Rain, Growth, and
Civil War: The Importance of Location,” Defence and Peace Economics 20 (2009): 359; H.
Buhaug, “Climate Not to Blame for African Civil Wars,” PNAS 107 (2010): 16477; D. D.
Zhang et al., “Global Climate Change, War and Population Decline in Recent Human History,”
PNAS 104 (2007): 19214; R. S. J. Tol and S. Wagner, “Climate Change and Violent Conflict in
Europe over the Last Millennium,” Climatic Change 99 (2009): 65; A. Solow, “A Call for
Peace on Climate and Conflict,” Nat 497 (2013): 179; J. Bohannon, “Study Links Climate
Change and Violence, Battle Ensues,” Sci 341 (2013): 444; S. M. Hsiang et al., “Quantifying
the Influence of Climate on Human Conflict,” Sci 341 (2013): 1212.
52. R. Sapolsky, “Endocrine and Behavioral Correlates of Drought in the Wild Baboon,” Am J
Primat 11 (1986): 217.
53. J. Bohannon, “Study Links Climate Change and Violence, Battle Ensues,” Sci 341 (2013):
444.
54. E. Culotta, “On the Origins of Religion,” Sci 326 (2009): 784 (this is the source of the quote);
C. A. Botero et al., “The Ecology of Religious Beliefs,” PNAS 111 (2014): 16784; A. Shariff
and A. Norenzayan, “God Is Watching You: Priming God Concepts Increases Prosocial
Behavior in an Anonymous Economic Game,” Psych Science 18 (2007): 803; R. Wright, The
Evolution of God (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 2009).
55. L. Keeley, War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1996).

772

56. S. Pinker, The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined (New York: Penguin,
2011).
57. G. Milner, “Nineteenth-Century Arrow Wounds and Perceptions of Prehistoric Warfare,” Am
Antiquity 70 (2005): 144.
58. See this entire volume: D. Fry, War, Peace, and Human Nature: The Convergence of
Evolutionary and Cultural Views (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015). In particular, see
these chapters in it: R. Ferguson, “Pinker’s List: Exaggerating Prehistoric War Mortality,” p.
112; R. Sussman “Why the Legend of the Killer Ape Never Dies: The Enduring Power of
Cultural Beliefs to Distort Our View of Human Nature,” p. 92; and R. Kelly, “From the
Peaceful to the Warlike: Ethnographic and Archeological Insights into Hunter-Gatherer
Warfare and Homicide,” p. 151.
59. F. Wendorf, The Prehistory of Nubia (Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press, 1968).
60. R. A. Marlar et al., “Biochemical Evidence of Cannibalism at a Prehistoric Puebloan Site in
Southwestern Colorado,” Nat 407 (2000): 74; M. Balter, “Did Neandertals Dine In?” Sci 326
(2009): 1057.
61. N. Chagnon, Yanomamo: The Fierce People (NY: Holt McDougal, 1984); N. A. Chagnon,
“Life Histories, Blood Revenge, and Warfare in a Tribal Population,” Sci 239 (1988): 985.
62. A. Lawler, “The Battle over Violence,” Sci 336 (2012): 829.
63. G. Benjamin et al., “Violence: Finding Peace,” Sci 338 (2012): 327; S. Pinker, “Violence:
Clarified,” Sci 338 (2012): 327.
64. A. R. Ramos, “Reflecting on the Yanomami: Ethnographic Images and the Pursuit of the
Exotic,” Cultural Anthropology 2 (1987): 284; R. Ferguson, Yanomami Warfare: A Political
History, a School for Advanced Research Resident Scholar Book (1995); E. Eakin, “How
Napoleon Chagnon Became Our Most Controversial Anthropologist,” New York Times
Magazine, 2013, p. 13; D. Fry, Beyond War: The Human Potential for Peace (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2009).
65. L. Glowacki and R. Wrangham, “Warfare and Reproductive Success in a Tribal Population,”
PNAS 112 (2015): 348. For related findings, see: J. Moore, “The Reproductive Success of
Cheyenne War Chiefs: A Contrary Case to Chagnon’s Yanomamo,” Curr Anthropology 31
(1990): 322; S. Beckerman et al., “Life Histories, Blood Revenge and Reproductive Success
Among the Waorani of Ecuador,” PNAS 106 (2009): 8134.
66. The original research cited by Pinker and Fry: K. Hill and A. Hurtado, Ache Life History: The
Ecology and Demography of a Foraging People (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1996).
67. S. Corry, “The Case of the ‘Brutal Savage’: Poirot or Clouseau? Why Steven Pinker, Like
Jared Diamond, Is Wrong,” London: Survival International website, 2013.
68. K. Lorenz, On Aggression (MFJ Books, 1997); R. Ardrey, The Territorial Imperative: A
Personal Inquiry into the Animal Origins of Property and Nations (Delta Books, 1966); R.
Wrangham and D. Peterson, Demonic Males: Apes and the Origin of Human Violence (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1996).
69. C. H. Boehm, Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1999); K. Hawkes et al., “Hunting Income Patterns Among the
Hadza: Big Game, Common Goods, Foraging Goals, and the Evolution of the Human Diet,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soc of London B 334 (1991): 243; B. Chapais, “The
Deep Social Structure of Humankind,” Sci 331 (2011): 1276; K. Hill et al., “Co-residence
Patterns in Hunter-Gatherer Societies Show Unique Human Social Structure,” Sci 331 (2011):
1286; K. Endicott, “Peace Foragers: The Significance of the Batek and Moriori for the
Question of Innate Human Violence,” in Fry, War, Peace, and Human Nature, p. 243; M.
Butovskaya, “Aggression and Conflict Resolution Among the Nomadic Hadza of Tanzania as
Compared with Their Pastoralist Neighbors,” in Fry, War, Peace, and Human Nature, p. 278.
70. C. Apicella et al., “Social Networks and Cooperation in Hunter-Gatherers,” Nat 481 (2012):
497; J. Henrich, “Hunter-Gatherer Cooperation,” Nat 481 (2012): 449.

773

71. E. Thomas, The Harmless People (New York: Vintage Books, 1959); M. Shostak Nisa: The
Life and Words of a !Kung Woman (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006); R. Lee,
The !Kung San: Men, Women and Work in a Foraging Society (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1979).
72. C. Ember, “Myths About Hunter-Gatherers,” Ethnology 17 (1978): 439.
73. Ferguson 1995, op cit; Fry 2009, op cit; R. B. Lee, “Hunter-Gatherers on the Best-Seller List:
Steven Pinker and the ‘Bellicose School’s’ Treatment of Forager Violence,” J Aggression,
Conflict and Peace Res 6 (2014): 216; M. Guenther, “War and Peace Among Kalahari San,” J
Aggression, Conflict and Peace Res 6 (2014): 229; D. P. Fry and P. Soderberg, “Myths About
Hunter-Gatherers Redux: Nomadic Forager War and Peace,” J Aggression, Conflict and Peace
Res 6 (2014): 255; R. Kelley, Warless Societies and the Evolution of War (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 2000).
74. M. M. Lahr et al., “Inter-group Violence Among Early Holocene Hunter-Gatherers of West
Turkana, Kenya,” Nat 529 (2016): 394.
75. C. Boehm, Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism, and Shame (New York: Basic
Books, 2012).
76. M. C. Stiner et al., “Cooperative Hunting and Meat Sharing 400–200 kya at Qesem Cave,
Israel,” PNAS 106 (2009): 13207.
77. P. Wiessner, “The Embers of Society: Firelight Talk Among the Ju/’hoansi Bushmen,” PNAS
111 (2014): 14013; P. Wiessner, “Norm Enforcement Among the Ju/’hoansi Bushmen: A Case
of Strong Reciprocity?” Hum Nat 16 (2004): 115.
Chapter 10: The Evolution of Behavior
1. T. Dobzhansky, “Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution,” Am Biol
Teacher 35 (1973): 125.
2. A. J. Carter and A. Q. Nguyen, “Antagonistic Pleiotropy as a Widespread Mechanism for the
Maintenance of Polymorphic Disease Alleles,” BMC Med Genetics 12 (2011): 160.
3. J. Gratten et al., “Life History Trade-offs at a Single Locus Maintain Sexually Selected Genetic
Variation,” Nat 502 (2013): 93.
4. A. Brown, The Darwin Wars: The Scientific Battle for the Soul of Man (New York:
Touchstone/Simon and Schuster, 1999).
5. V. C. Wynne-Edwards, Evolution Through Group Selection (London: Blackwell Science,
1986).
6. W. D. Hamilton, “The Genetical Evolution of Social Behavior,” J Theoretical Biol 7 (1964): 1;
G. C. Williams, Adaptation and Natural Selection (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1966). See also: E. O. Wilson, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1975); and R. Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1976).
7. S. B. Hrdy, The Langurs of Abu: Female and Male Strategies of Reproduction (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1977).
8. Pathology argument: P. Dolhinow, “Normal Monkeys?” Am Scientist 65 (1977): 266. Just
overflow of male aggression: R. Sussman et al., “Infant Killing as an Evolutionary Strategy:
Reality or Myth?” Evolutionary Anthropology 3 (1995): 149.
9. Primates: G. Hausfater and S. Hrdy, Infanticide: Comparative and Evolutionary Perspectives
(New York: Aldine, 1984); M. Hiraiwa-Hasegawa, “Infanticide in Primates and a Possible
Case of Male-Biased Infanticide in Chimpanzees,” in Animal Societies: Theories and Facts,
ed. J. L. Brown and J. Kikkawa (Tokyo: Japan Scientific Societies Press, 1988), pp. 125–39; S.
Hrdy, “Infanticide Among Mammals: A Review, Classification, and Examination of the
Implications for the Reproductive Strategies of Females,” Ethology and Sociobiology 1 (1979):
13. Rodents, lions: G. Perrigo et al., “Social Inhibition of Infanticide in Male House Mice,”
Ecology Ethology and Evolution 5 (1993): 181; A. Pusey and C. Packer, 1984, “Infanticide in

774

Carnivores,” in Hausfater and Hrdy, Infanticide; S. Gursky-Doyen, “Infanticide by a Male
Spectral Tarsier (Tarsius spectrum),” Primates 52 (2011): 385. See also: D. Lukas and E.
Huchard, “The Evolution of Infanticide by Males in Mammalian Societies,” Sci 346 (2014):
841.
10. J. Berger, “Induced Abortion and Social Factors in Wild Horses,” Nat 303 (1983): 59; E.
Roberts et al., “A Bruce Effect in Wild Geladas,” Sci 335 (2012): 1222; H. Bruce, “An
Exteroceptive Block to Pregnancy in the Mouse,” Nat 184 (1959): 105.
11. A. Pusey and K. Schroepfer-Walker, “Female Competition in Chimpanzees,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Soc of London B 368 (2013): 1471.
12. D. Fossey, “Infanticide in Mountain Gorillas (Gorilla gorilla beringei) with Comparative
Notes on Chimpanzees,” in Hausfater and Hrdy, Infanticide.
13. L. Fairbanks, “Reciprocal Benefits of Allomothering for Female Vervet Monkeys,” Animal
Behav 40 (1990): 553.
14. V. Baglione et al., “Kin Selection in Cooperative Alliances of Carrion Crows,” Sci 300
(2003): 1947.
15. J. Buchan et al., “True Paternal Care in a Multi-male Primate Society,” Nat 425 (2003): 179.
16. D. Cheney and R. Seyfarth, How Monkeys See the World: Inside the Mind of Another Species
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992).
17. D. Cheney and R. Seyfarth, “Recognition of Other Individuals’ Social Relationships by
Female Baboons,” Animal Behav 58 (1999): 67; R. Wittig et al., “Kin-Mediated Reconciliation
Substitutes for Direct Reconciliation in Female Baboons,” Proc Royal Soc B 274 (2007): 1109.
18. T. Bergman et al., “Hierarchical Classification by Rank and Kinship in Baboons,” Sci 203
(2003): 1234.
19. H. Fisher and H. Hoekstra, “Competition Drives Cooperation Among Closely Related Sperm
of Deer Mice,” Nat 463 (2010): 801.
20. J. Hoogland, “Nepotism and Alarm Calling in the Black-Tailed Prairie Dog (Cynomys
ludovicianus),” Animal Behav 31 (1983): 472; G. Schaller, The Serengeti Lion: A Study of
Predator-Prey Relations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972); P. Sherman,
“Recognition Systems,” in Behavioural Ecology, ed. J. R. Krebs and N. B. Davies (Oxford:
Blackwell Scientific, 1997); C. Packer et al., “A Molecular Genetic Analysis of Kinship and
Cooperation in African Lions,” Nat 351 (1991): 6327; A. Pusey and C. Packer, “Non-offspring
Nursing in Social Carnivores: Minimizing the Costs,” Behav Ecology 5 (1994): 362.
21. Footnote: G. Alvarez et al., “The Role of Inbreeding in the Extinction of a Europrean Royal
Dynasty,” PLoS ONE 4 (2009): e5174.
22. Theoretical model: B. Bengtsson, “Avoiding Inbreeding: At What Cost?” J Theoretical Biol
73 (1978): 439.
23. Insects: S. Robinson et al., “Preference for Related Mates in the Fruit Fly, Drosophila
melanogaster,” Animal Behav 84 (2012): 1169. Lizards: M. Richard et al., “Optimal Level of
Inbreeding in the Common Lizard,” Proc Royal Soc of London B 276 (2009): 2779. Fish, and
related parents invested more in rearing: T. Thünken et al., “Active Inbreeding in a Cichlid
Fish and Its Adaptive Significance,” Curr Biol 17 (2007): 225. Numerous birds: P. Bateson,
“Preferences for Cousins in Japanese Quail,” Nat 295 (1982): 236; L. Cohen and D. Dearborn,
“Great Frigatebirds, Fregata minor, Choose Mates That Are Genetically Similar,” Animal
Behav 68 (2004): 1129; N. Burley et al., “Social Preference of Zebra Finches for Siblings,
Cousins and Non-kin,” Animal Behav 39 (1990): 775. Birds sneaking outside monogamy: O.
Kleven et al., “Extrapair Mating Between Relatives in the Barn Swallow: A Role for Kin
Selection?” Biol Lett 1 (2005): 389; C. Wang and X. Lu, “Female Ground Tits Prefer Relatives
as Extra-pair Partners: Driven by Kin-Selection?” Mol Ecology 20 (2011): 2851. I assume that
no one on earth is ever going to read this sentence, so if you do, I’d love to hear from you, in
order to congratulate you on your extraordinarily thorough reading habits—
sapolsky@stanford.edu. Rodents: S. Sommer, “Major Histocompatibility Complex and Mate

775

Choice in a Monogamous Rodent,” Behav Ecology and Sociobiology 58 (2005): 181; C.
Barnard and J. Fitzsimons, “Kin Recognition and Mate Choice in Mice: The Effects of
Kinship, Familiarity and Interference on Intersexual Selection,” Animal Behav 36 (1988):
1078; M. Peacock and A. Smith, “Nonrandom Mating in Pikas Ochotona princeps: Evidence
for Inbreeding Between Individuals of Intermediate Relatedness,” Mol Ecology 6 (1997): 801.
24. A. Helgason et al., “An Association Between the Kinship and Fertility of Human Couples,”
Sci 319 (2008): 813: S. Jacob et al., “Paternally Inherited HLA Alleles Are Associated with
Women’s Choice of Male Odor,” Nat Genetics 30 (2002): 175.
25. T. Shingo et al., “Pregnancy-Stimulated Neurogenesis in the Adult Female Forebrain
Mediated by Prolactin,” Sci 299 (2003): 117; C. Larsen and D. Grattan, “Prolactin,
Neurogenesis, and Maternal Behaviors,” Brain, Behav and Immunity 26 (2012): 201.
26. W. D. Hamilton, “The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour,” J Theoretical Biol 7 (1964):
1.
27. S. West and A. Gardner, “Altruism, Spite and Greenbeards,” Sci 327 (2010): 1341.
28. S. Smukalla et al., “FLO1 Is a Variable Green Beard Gene That Drives Biofilm-like
Cooperation in Budding Yeast,” Cell 135 (2008): 726; E. Queller et al., “Single-Gene
Greenbeard Effects in the Social Amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum,” Sci 299 (2003): 105.
29. B. Kerr et al., “Local Dispersal Promotes Biodiversity in a Real-Life Game of Rock-PaperScissors,” Nat 418 (2002): 171; J. Nahum et al., “Evolution of Restraint in a Structured RockPaper-Scissors Community,” PNAS 108 (2011): 10831.
30. G. Wilkinson, “Reciprocal Altruism in Bats and Other Mammals,” Ethology and
Sociobiology 9 (1988): 85; G. Wilkinson, “Reciprocal Food Sharing in the Vampire Bat,” Nat
308 (1984): 181.
31. W. D. Hamilton, “Geometry for the Selfish Herd,” J Theoretical Biol 31 (1971): 295.
32. R. Trivers, “The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism,” Quarterly Rev of Biol 46 (1971): 35.
33. R. Seyfarth and D. Cheney, “Grooming, Alliances and Reciprocal Altruism in Vervet
Monkeys,” Nat 308 (1984): 541.
34. R. Axelrod and W. D. Hamilton, “The Evolution of Cooperation,” Sci 211 (1981): 1390.
35. M. Nowak and K. Sigmund, “Tit for Tat in Heterogeneous Populations,” Nat 355 (1992): 250;
R. Boyd, “Mistakes Allow Evolutionary Stability in the Repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma Game,”
J Theoretical Biol 136 (1989): 4756.
36. Nowak and R. Highfield, SuperCooperators: Altruism, Evolution, and Why We Need Each
Other to Succeed (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012). Footnote: Nowak and K. Sigmund, “A
Strategy of Win-Stay, Lose-Shift that Outperforms Tit-for-Tat in the Prisoner’s Dilemma
Game,” Nat 364 (1993): 56.
37. E. Fischer, “The Relationship Between Mating System and Simultaneous Hermaphroditism in
the Coral Reef Fish, Hypoplectrus nigricans (Serranidae),” Animal Behav 28 (1980): 620.
38. M. Milinski, “Tit for Tat in Sticklebacks and the Evolution of Cooperation,” Nat 325 (1987):
433.
39. C. Packer et al., “Egalitarianism in Female African Lions,” Sci 293 (2001): 690; M.
Scantlebury et al., “Energetics Reveals Physiologically Distinct Castes in a Eusocial
Mammal,” Nat 440 (2006): 795; R. Heinsohn and C. Packer, “Complex Cooperative Strategies
in Group-Territorial African Lions,” Sci 269 (1995): 1260.
40. R. Trivers, “Parent-Offspring Conflict,” Am Zoologist 14 (1974): 249.
41. D. Maestripieri, “Parent-Offspring Conflict in Primates,” Int J Primat 23 (2002): 923.
42. D. Haig, “Genetic Conflicts in Human Pregnancy,” Quartery Rev of Biol 68 (1993): 495; R.
Sapolsky, “The War Between Men and Women,” Discover, May 1999, p. 56.
43. S. J. Gould, “Caring Groups and Selfish Genes,” in The Panda’s Thumb: More Reflections in
Natural History (London: Penguin Books, 1990), p. 72.
44. S. Okasha, Evolution and the Levels of Selection (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2006).

776

45. P. Bijma et al., “Multilevel Selection 1: Quantitative Genetics of Inheritance and Response to
Selection,” Genetics 175 (2007): 277. A similar example to the chickens, in spiders: J. Pruitt
and C. Goodnight, “Site-Specific Group Selection Drives Locally Adapted Group
Compositions,” Nat 514 (2014): 359.
46. S. Bowles, “Conflict: Altruism’s Midwife,” Nat 456 (2008): 326.
47. D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson, “Rethinking the Theoretical Foundation of Sociobiology,”
Quarterly Rev of Biol 82 (2008): 327.
48. F. de Waal, Our Inner Ape (NY: Penguin, 2005); I. Parker, “Swingers: Bonobos Are
Celebrated as Peace-Loving, Matriarchal, and Sexually Liberated. Are They?” New Yorker,
July 30, 2007, p. 48; R. Wrangham and D. Peterson, Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of
Human Violence (NY: Houghton Mifflin, 1996); R. Wrangham et al., “Comparative Rates of
Violence in Chimpanzees and Humans,” Primates 47 (2006): 14.
49. D. Falk et al., “Brain Shape in Human Microcephalics and Homo floresiensis,” PNAS 104
(2007): 2513. The opposite view: M. Henneberg et al., “Evolved Developmental Homeostasis
Disturbed in LB1 from Flores, Indonesia, Denotes Down Syndrome and Not Diagnostic Traits
of the Invalid Species Homo floresiensis,” PNAS 111 (2014): 11967.
50. K. Prufer et al., “The Bonobo Genome Compared with the Chimpanzee and Human
Genomes,” Nat 486 (2012): 527; W. Enard et al., “Intra- and Interspecific Variation in Primate
Gene Expression Patterns,” Sci 296 (2002): 340.
51. D. Barash and J. Lipton, The Myth of Monogamy: Fidelity and Infidelity in Animals and
People (New York: Henry Holt, 2002); B. Chapais, Primeval Kinship: How Pair-Bonding
Gave Birth to Human Society (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
52. T. Zerjal et al., “The Genetic Legacy of the Mongols,” Am J Hum Genetics 72 (2003): 713.
53. M. Daly and M. Wilson, “Evolutionary Social Psychology and Family Homicide,” Sci 242
(1988): 519. Replication: V. Weekes-Shackelford and T. K. Shackelford, “Methods of Filicide:
Stepparents and Genetic Parents Kill Differently,” Violence and Victims 19 (2004): 75.
Swedish failures of replication: H. Temrin et al., “Step-Parents and Infanticide: New Data
Contradict Evolutionary Predictions,” Proc Royal Soc B 267 (2000): 943; M. Van Ijzendoorn et
al., “Elevated Risk of Child Maltreatment in Families with Stepparents but Not with Adoptive
Parents,” Child Maltreatment 14 (2009): 369.; J. Nordlund and H. Temrin, “Do Characteristics
of Parental Child Homicide in Sweden Fit Evolutionary Predictions?” Ethology 113 (2007):
1029.
54. K. Hill et al., “Co-residence Patterns in Hunter-Gatherer Societies Show Unique Human
Social Structure,” Sci 331 (2011): 1286.
55. R. Topolski et al., “Choosing Between the Emotional Dog and the Rational Pal: A Moral
Dilemma with a Tail,” Anthrozoös 26 (2013): 253.
56. B. Thomas et al., “Harming Kin to Save Strangers: Further Evidence for Abnormally
Utilitarian Moral Judgments After Ventromedial Prefrontal Damage,” J Cog Nsci 23 (2011):
2186.
57. R. Sapolsky, “Would You Break That Law for Your Family?” Los Angeles Times, November
17, 2013.
58. J. Persico, My Enemy, My Brother: Men and Days of Gettysburg (Cambridge, MA: Da Capo
Press, 1996).
59. R. MacMahon, Homicide in Pre-famine and Famine Ireland (Liverpool, UK: Liverpool
University Press, 2014). Cheeseburger murder: J. Berlinger and T. Marco, “Man Kills Brother
in Argument over Cheeseburger, Police Say,” CNN.com, May 9, 2016,
www.cnn.com/2016/05/08/us/man-allegedly-kills-brother-over-cheeseburger/index.html.
60. Footnote: “MP Comes to the Aid of 5 Year Old Girl at Risk of Being Sold,” Kenya Daily
Nation, October 13, 2014, www.nation.co.ke/video/-/1951480/2484684/-/gditgq/-/index.html.
61. S. Friedman and P. Resnick, “Child Murder by Mothers: Patterns and Prevention,” World
Psychiatry 6 (2007): 137; S. West, et al., “Fathers Who Kill Their Children: An Analysis of the

777

Literature,” J Forensic Sci 54 (2009): 463; S. B. Hrdy, Mother Nature: A History of Mothers,
Infants and Natural Selection (New York: Pantheon, 1999).
62. J. Shepher, “Mate Selection Among Second Generation Kibbutz Adolescents and Adults:
Incest Avoidance and Negative Imprinting,” Arch Sexual Behav 1 (1971): 293; A. Wolf, Sexual
Attraction and Childhood Association: A Chinese Brief for Edward Westermarck (Palo Alto,
CA: Stanford University Press, 1995).
63. K. Hill et al., “Co-residence Patterns in Hunter-Gatherer Societies Show Unique Human
Social Structure,” Sci 331 (2011): 1286.
64. N. Eldredge and S. J. Gould, “Punctuated Equilibria: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradualism,”
in Models in Paleobiology, ed. T. J. M. Schopf (San Francisco: Freeman Cooper, 1972), p. 82.
65. J. Goldman, “Man’s New Best Friend? A Forgotten Russian Experiment in Fox
Domestication,” Sci Am, September 2010; D. Belyaev and L. Trut, “Behaviour and
Reproductive Function of Animals. II: Correlated Changes Under Breeding for Tameness,”
Bull Moscow Soc of Naturalists B Series (in Russian) 69 (1964): 5.
66. S. Sternthal, “Moscow’s Stray Dogs,” Financial Times, January 16, 2010.
67. Footnote: M. Carneiro et al., “Rabbit Genome Analysis Reveals a Polygenic Basis for
Phenotypic Change During Domestication,” Sci 345 (2014): 1074.
68. S. Fisher and M. Ridley, “Culture, Genes, and the Human Revolution,” Sci 340 (2013) 929;
D. Swallow, “Genetics of Lactase Persistence and Lactose Intolerance,” Ann Rev of Genetics
37 (2003): 197; J. Troelsen, “Adult-Type Hypolactasia and Regulation of Lactase Expression,”
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1723 (2005): 19.
69. N. Mekel-Bobrov et al., “Ongoing Adaptive Evolution of ASPM, a Brain Size Determinant in
Homo sapiens,” Sci 309 (2005): 1720.
70. J. Weiner, The Beak of the Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Time (New York: Knopf,
1994); J. Neel, “Diabetes Mellitus: A ‘Thrifty’ Genotype Rendered Detrimental by
‘Progress’?” Am J Hum Genetics 14 (1962): 353; J. Diamond, “Sweet Death,” Natural History,
February 1992. American versus Mexican Pimas: P. Kopelman, “Obesity as a Medical
Problem,” Nat 404 (2000): 635. Genes identified: C. Ezzell, “Fat Times for Obesity Research,”
J NIH Research 7 (1995): 39; C. Holden, “Race and Medicine,” Sci 302 (2003): 594; J.
Diamond, “The Double Puzzle of Diabetes,” Nat 423 (2003): 599.
71. E. Pennisi, “The Man Who Bottled Evolution,” Sci 342 (2013): 790.
72. S. J. Gould and N. Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution
Reconsidered,” Paleobiology 3 (1977): 115.
73. P. W. Andrews et al., “Adaptationism—How to Carry Out an Exaptationist Program,” BBS 25
(2002): 489; S. J. Gould and E. S. Vrba, “Exaptation—a Missing Term in the Science of
Form,” Paleobiology 8 (1982): 4; A. Figueredo and S. Berry, “‘Just Not So Stories’:
Exaptations, Spandrels, and Constraints,” BBS 25 (2002): 517; J. Roney and D. Maestripieri,
“The Importance of Comparative and Phylogenetic Analyses in the Study of Adaptation,” BBS
25 (2002): 525.
74. A. Brown, The Darwin Wars: The Scientific Battle for the Soul of Man (New York:
Touchstone/Simon and Schuster, 1999).
75. S. J. Gould and R. Lewontin, “The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A
Critique of the Adaptationist Programme,” Proc Royal Soc of London B 205 (1979): 581.
76. D. Barash and J. Lipton, “How the Scientist Got His Ideas,” Chronicle of Higher Education,
January 3, 2010.
Chapter 11: Us Versus Them
1. D. Hofstede, Planet of the Apes: An Unofficial Companion (Toronto: ECW Press, 2001).
2. T. A. Ito and G. R. Urland, “Race and Gender on the Brain: Electrocortical Measures of
Attention to the Race and Gender of Multiply Categorizable Individuals,” JPSP 85 (2003):
616; T. Ito and B. Bartholow, “The Neural Correlates of Race,” TICS 13 (2009): 524.

778

3. A. Greenwald et al., “Measuring Individual Differences in Implicit Cognition: The Implicit
Association Test,” JPSP 74 (1998): 1464.
4. N. Mahajan et al., “The Evolution of Intergroup Bias: Perceptions and Attitudes in Rhesus
Macaques,” JPSP 100 (2011): 387.
5. H. Tajfel, “Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations,” Ann Rev of Psych 33 (1982): 1; H.
Tajfel, “Experiments in Intergroup Discrimination,” Sci Am 223 (1970): 96.
6. E. Losin et al., “Own-Gender Imitation Activates the Brain’s Reward Circuitry,” SCAN 7
(2012): 804; B. C. Müller et al., “Prosocial Consequences of Imitation,” Psych Rep 110 (2012):
891.
7. S. B. Flagel et al., “A Selective Role for Dopamine in Stimulus-Reward Learning,” Nat 469
(2011): 53–57.
8. A. S. Baron and M. R. Banaji, “The Development of Implicit Attitudes: Evidence of Race
Evaluations from Ages 6, 10, and Adulthood,” Psych Sci 17 (2006): 53; F. E. Aboud, Children
and Prejudice (New York: Blackwell, 1988); R. S. Bigler et al., “Social Categorization and the
Formation of Intergroup Attitudes in Children,” Child Development 68 (1997): 530; L. A.
Hirschfeld, “Natural Assumptions: Race, Essence and Taxonomies of Human Kinds,” Soc Res
65 (1998): 331; R. S. Bigler et al., “Developmental Intergroup Theory: Explaining and
Reducing Children’s Social Stereotyping and Prejudice,” Curr Dir Psych Sci 16 (2007): 162; P.
Bronson and A. Merryman, “See Baby Discriminate,” Newsweek, September 14, 2009, p. 53
(from their book, Nurture Shock).
9. K. D. Kinzler et al., “The Native Language of Social Cognition,” PNAS 104 (2007); 12577; S.
Sangrigoli and S. De Schonen, “Recognition of Own-Race and Other-Race Faces by ThreeMonth-Old Infants,” J Child Psych and Psychiatry 45 (2004): 1219.
10. S. Sangrigoli et al., “Reversibility of the Other-Race Effect in Face Recognition During
Childhood,” Psych Sci 16 (2005): 440.
11. R. Bigler and L. Liben, “Developmental Intergroup Theory: Explaining and Reducing
Children’s Social Stereotyping and Prejudice,” Curr Dir Psych Sci 16 (2007): 162.
12. A. J. Cuddy et al., “Stereotype Content Model Across Cultures: Towards Universal
Similarities and Some Differences,” Brit J Soc Psych 48 (2009): 1; H. Bernhard et al.,
“Parochial Altruism in Humans,” Nat 442 (2006): 912.
13. M. Levine et al., “Self-Categorization and Bystander Non-intervention: Two Experimental
Studies,” J Applied Soc Psych 32 (2002): 1452; J. M. Engelmann and E. Hermann,
“Chimpanzees Trust Their Friends,” Curr Biol 26 (2016): 252.
14. M. Levine et al., “Identity and Emergency Intervention: How Social Group Membership and
Inclusiveness of Group Boundaries Shape Helping Behavior,” PSPB 31 (2005): 443.
15. H. A. Hornstein et al., “Effects of Sentiment and Completion of a Helping Act on Observer
Helping: A Case for Socially Mediated Zeigarnik Effects,” JPSP 17 (1971): 107.
16. L. Gaertner and C. Insko, “Intergroup Discrimination in the Minimal Group Paradigm:
Categorization, Reciprocation, or Fear?” JPSP 79 (2000): 77; T. Wildschut et al., “Intragroup
Social Influence and Intergroup Competition,” JPSP 82 (2002): 975; C. A. Insko et al.,
“Interindividual-Intergroup Discontinuity as a Function of Trust and Categorization: The
Paradox of Expected Cooperation,” JPSP 88 (2005): 365.
17. M. Cikara et al., “Us Versus Them: Social Identity Shapes Neural Responses to Intergroup
Competition and Harm,” Psych Sci 22 (2011): 306; E. R. de Bruijn et al., “When Errors Are
Rewarding,” J Nsci 29 (2009): 12183; J. J. Van Bavel et al., “Modulation of the Fusiform Face
Area Following Minimal Exposure to Motivationally Relevant Faces: Evidence of In-group
Enhancement (Not Out-group Disregard),” J Cog Nsci 223 (2011): 3343. Footnote: M. Cikar et
al., “Their Pain Gives Us Pleasure: How Intergroup Dynamics Shape Empathic Failures and
Counter-empathic Responses,” JESP 55 (2014) 110.
18. T. Singer et al., “Empathic Neural Responses Are Modulated by the Perceived Fairness of
Others,” Nat 439 (2006): 466; H. Takahashi et al., “When Your Gain Is My Pain and Your Pain

779

Is My Gain: Neural Correlates of Envy and Schadenfreude,” Sci 323 (2009): 937.
19. G. Hertel and N. L. Kerr, “Priming In-group Favoritism: The Impact of Normative Scripts in
the Minimal Group Paradigm,” JESP 37 (2001): 316.
20. J. N. Gutsell and M. Inzlicht, “Intergroup Differences in the Sharing of Emotive States:
Neural Evidence of an Empathy Gap,” SCAN 7 (2012): 596; J. Y. Chiao et al., “Cultural
Specificity in Amygdala Response to Fear Faces,” J Cog Nsci 20 (2008): 2167.
21. P. K. Piff et al., “Me Against We: In-group Transgression, Collective Shame, and In-groupDirected Hostility,” Cog & Emotion 26 (2012): 634.
22. W. Barrett, “Thug Life: The Shocking Secret History of Harold Giuliani, the Mayor’s ExConvict Dad,” Village Voice, 5 July, 2000; D. Strober and G. Strober, Giuliani: Flawed or
Flawless? (New York: Wiley, 2007).
23. Footnote: J. A. Lukas, “Judge Hoffman Is Taunted at Trial of the Chicago 7 After Silencing
Defense Counsel,” New York Times, February 6, 1970.
24. S. Svonkin, Jews Against Prejudice: American Jews and the Fight for Civil Liberties (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1997). Footnote: A. Zahr, “I Refuse to Condemn,” Civil
Arab, January 9, 2015, www.civilarab.com/i-refuse-to-condemn/.
25. D. A. Stanley et al., “Implicit Race Attitudes Predict Trustworthiness Judgments and
Economic Trust Decisions,” PNAS 108 (2011): 7710; Y. Dunham, “An Angry = Outgroup
Effect,” JESP 47 (2011): 668; D. Maner et al., “Functional Projection: How Fundamental
Social Motives Can Bias Interpersonal Perception,” JPSP 88 (2005): 63; K. Hugenberg and G.
Bodenhausen, “Facing Prejudice: Implicit Prejudice and the Perception of Facial Threat,”
Psych Sci 14 (2003): 640; A. Rattan et al., “Race and the Fragility of the Legal Distinction
Between Juveniles and Adults,” PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e36680; Y. J. Xiao and J. J. Van Bavel,
“See Your Friends Close and Your Enemies Closer: Social Identity and Identity Threat Shape
the Representation of Physical Distance,” PSPB 38 (2012): 959; B. Reiek et al., “Intergroup
Threat and Outgroup Attitudes: A Meta-analytic Review,” PSPR 10 (2006): 336; H. A. Korn,
et al., “Neurolaw: Differential Brain Activity for Black and White Faces Predicts Damage
Awards in Hypothetical Employment Discrimination Cases,” Soc Nsci 7 (2012): 398.
Activation of insula when interacting with outgroup in game: J. Rilling et al., “Social
Cognitive Neural Networks During In-group and Out-group Interactions,” NeuroImage 41
(2008): 1447.
26. P. Rozin et al., “From Oral to Moral,” Science 323 (2009): 1179.
27. G. Hodson and K. Costello, “Interpersonal Disgust, Ideological Orientations, and
Dehumanization as Predictors of Intergroup Attitudes,” Psych Sci 18 (2007):691.
28. G. Hodson et al., “A Joke Is Just a Joke (Except When It Isn’t): Cavalier Humor Beliefs
Facilitate the Expression of Group Dominance Motives,” JPSP 99 (2010): 460.
29. D. Berreby, Us and Them: The Science of Identity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2008).
30. Leyens et al., “The Emotional Side of Prejudice: The Attribution of Secondary Emotions to
Ingroups and Outgroups,” PSPR 4 (2000): 186; K. Wailoo, Pain: A Political History
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014).
31. J. T. Jost and O. Hunyad, “Antecedents and Consequences of System-Justifying Ideologies,”
Curr Dir Psych Sci 14 (2005): 260; G. E. Newman and P. Bloom, “Physical Contact Influences
How Much People Pay at Celebrity Auctions,” PNAS 111 (2013): 3705.
32. J. Greenberg et al., “Evidence for Terror Management II: The Effects of Mortality Salience on
Reactions to Those Who Threaten or Bolster the Cultural Worldview,” JPSP 58 (1990): 308.
33. J. Haidt, “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral
Judgment,” Psych Rev 108 (2001): 814; J. Haidt, The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are
Divided by Politics and Religion (New York: Pantheon Books, 2012).
34. Berreby, Us and Them.

780

35. W. Cunningham et al., “Implicit and Explicit Ethnocentrism: Revisiting the Ideologies of
Prejudice,” PSPB 30 (2004): 1332.
36. Footnote: M. J. Wood et al., “Dead and Alive: Beliefs in Contradictory Conspiracy Theories,”
Social Psych and Personality Sci 3 (2012): 767.
37. C. Zogmaister et al., “The Impact of Loyalty and Equality on Implicit Ingroup Favoritism,”
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 11 (2008): 493.
38. C. D. Navarrete et al., “Race Bias Tracks Conception Risk Across the Menstrual Cycle,”
Psych Sci 20 (2009): 661. C. Navarrete et al., “Fertility and Race Perception Predict Voter
Preference for Barack Obama,” EHB 31 (2010): 391.
39. G. E. Newman and P. Bloom, “Physical Contact Influences How Much People Pay at
Celebrity Auctions,” PNAS 111 (2013): 3705; R. Sapolsky, “Magical Thinking and the Stain of
Madoff’s Sweater,” Wall Street Journal, July 12, 2014.
40. Footnote: S. Boria, Animals in the Third Reich: Pets, Scapegoats, and the Holocaust
(Providence, RI: Yogh and Thorn Books, 2000).
41. A. Rutland and R. Brown, “Stereotypes as Justification for Prior Intergroup Discrimination:
Studies of Scottish National Stereotyping,” Eur J Soc Psych 31 (2001): 127.
42. C. S. Crandall et al., “Stereotypes as Justifications of Prejudice,” PSPB 37 (2011): 1488.
43. R. Niebuhr, The Nature and Destiny of Man, vol. 1 (London: Nisbet, 1941); B. P. Meier and
V. B. Hinsz, “A Comparison of Human Aggression Committed by Groups and Individuals: An
Interindividual Intergroup Discontinuity,” JESP 40 (2004): 551; T. Wildschut et al., “Beyond
the Group Mind: A Quantitative Review of the Interindividual-Intergroup Discontinuity
Effect,” Psych Bull 129 (2003): 698.
44. T. Cohen et al., “Group morality and Intergroup Relation: Cross-Cultural and Experimental
Evidence,” PSPB 32 (2006): 1559; T. Wildschut et al., “Intragroup Social Influence and
Intergroup Competition,” JPSP 82 (2002): 975.
45. S. Bowles, “Conflict: Altruism’s Midwife,” Nat 456 (2008): 326.
46. M. Shih et al., “Stereotype Susceptibility: Identity Salience and Shifts in Quantitative
Performance,” Psych Sci 10 (1999): 80; T. Harada et al., “Dynamic Social Power Modulates
Neural Basis of Math Calculation,” Front Hum Nsci 6 (2012): 350; J. Van Bavel and W.
Cunningham, “Self-Categorization with a Novel Mixed-Race Group Moderates Automatic
Social and Racial Biases,” PSPB 35 (2009): 321; G. Bohner et al., “Situational Flexibility of
In-group-Related Attitudes: A Single Category IAT Study of People with Dual National
Identity,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 11 (2008): 301.
47. N. Jablonski, Skin: A Natural History (Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2006):
A. Gibbons, “Shedding Light on Skin Color,” Sci 346 (2014): 934.
48. R. Hahn, “Why Race Is Differentially Classified on U.S. Birth and Infant Death Certificates:
An Examination of Two Hypotheses,” Epidemiology 10 (1999): 108.
49. C. D. Navarrete et al., “Fear Extinction to an Out-group Face: The Role of Target Gender,”
Psych Sci 20 (2009): 155; J. P. Mitchell et al., “Contextual Variations in Implicit Evaluation,” J
Exp Psych: General 132 (2003): 455; this latter paper is the one involving politicians versus
athletes.
50. R. Kurzban et al., “Can Race Be Erased? Coalitional Computation and Social
Categorization,” PNAS 98 (2001): 15387.
51. M. E. Wheeler and S. T. Fiske, “Controlling Racial Prejudice: Social-Cognitive Goals Affect
Amygdala and Stereotype Activation,” Psych Sci 16 (2005): 56; J. P. Mitchell et al., “The Link
Between Social Cognition and Self-Referential Thought in the Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” J
Cog Nsci 17 (2005): 1306.
52. M. A. Halleran, The Better Angels of Our Nature: Freemasonry in the American Civil War
(Tuscaloosa AL: : University of Alabama Press, 2010).
53. T. Kennealy, The Great Shame: And the Triumph of the Irish in the English-Speaking World
(New York: Anchor Books, 2000).

781

54. Patrick Leigh Fermor obituary, Daily Telegraph (London), June, 11, 2011. For footage of the
reunion with Kreipe, see “H AΠAΓΩΓH TOY ΣTPATHΓOY KPAIΠE,” uploaded by
Idomeneas Kanakakis on October 21, 2010, www.youtube.com/watch?v=8zlUhJwddFU. For a
documentary about the kidnapping and journey, see “The Abduction of Gengeral Kreipe.avi,”
uploaded by Nico Mastorakis on February 25, 2012, www.youtube.com/watch?
v=vN1qrghgCqI.
55. E. Krusemark and W. Li, “Do All Threats Work the Same Way? Divergent Effects of Fear and
Disgust on Sensory Perception and Attention,” J Nsci 31 (2011): 3429.
56. Footnote: M. Plitt et al., “Are Corporations People Too? The Neural Correlates of Moral
Judgments About Companies and Individuals,” Social Nsci 10 (2015): 113.
57. S. Fiske et al., “A Model of (Often Mixed) Stereotype Content: Competence and Warmth
Respectively Follow from Perceived Status and Competition,” JPSP 82 (2002): 878; L. T.
Harris and S. T. Fiske, “Dehumanizing the Lowest of the Low: Neuroimaging Responses to
Extreme Out-groups,” Psych Sci 17 (2006): 847; L. T. Harris and S. T. Fiske, “Social Groups
That Elicit Disgust Are Differentially Processed in mPFC,” SCAN 2 (2007): 45. Also see: S.
Morrison et al., “The Neuroscience of Group Membership,” Neuropsychologia 50 (2012):
2114.
58. T. Ashworth, Trench Warfare: 1914–1918 (London: Pan Books, 1980).
59. K. B. Clark and M. P. Clark, “Racial Identification and Preference Among Negro Children,”
in Readings in Social Psychology, ed. E. L. Hartley (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston,
1947); K. Clark and C. Mamie, “The Negro Child in the American Social Order,” J Negro
Education 19 (1950): 341; J. Jost et al., “A Decade of System Justification Theory:
Accumulated Evidence of Conscious and Unconscious Bolstering of the Status Quo,” Political
Psych 25 (2004): 881; J. Jost et al., “Non-conscious Forms of System Justification: Implicit
and Behavioral Preferences for Higher Status Groups,” JESP 38 (2002): 586.
60. S. Lehrman, “The Implicit Prejudice,” Sci Am 294 (2006): 32.
61. K. Kawakami et al., “Mispredicting Affective and Behavioral Responses to Racism,” Sci 323
(2009): 276; B. Nosek, “Implicit-Explicit Relations,” Curr Dir Psych Sci 16 (2007): 65; L.
Rudman and R. Ashmore, “Discrimination and the Implicit Association Test,” Group
Processes & Intergroup Relations 10 (2007): 359; J. Dovidio et al., “Implicit and Explicit
Prejudice and Interracial Interaction,” JPSP 82 (2002): 62. For an additional approach to
uncovering implicit biases, see I. Blair, “The Malleability of Automatic Stereotypes and
Prejudice,” PSPR 6 (2002): 242.
62. W. Cunningham et al., “Separable Neural Components in the Processing of Black and White
Faces,” Psych Sci 15 (2004): 806; W. A. Cunningham et al., “Neural Correlates of Evaluation
Associated with Promotion and Prevention Regulatory Focus,” Cog, Affective & Behav Nsci 5
(2005): 202; K. M. Knutso et al., “Neural Correlates of Automatic Beliefs About Gender and
Race,” Hum Brain Mapping 28 (2007): 915.
63. B. K. Payne, “Conceptualizing Control in Social Cognition: How Executive Functioning
Modulates the Expression of Automatic Stereotyping,” JPSP 89 (2005): 488.
64. J. Dovidio et al., “Why Can’t We Just Get Along? Interpersonal Biases and Interracial
Distrust,” Cultural Diversity & Ethnic Minority Psych 8 (2002): 88.
65. J. Richeson et al., “An fMRI Investigation of the Impact of Interracial Contact on Executive
Function,” Nat Nsci 12 (2003): 1323; J. Richeson and J. Shelton, “Negotiating Interracial
Interactions: Cost, Consequences, and Possibilities,” Curr Dir Psych Sci 16 (2007): 316.
66. J. N. Shelton et al., “Expecting to Be the Target of Prejudice: Implications for Interethnic
Interactions,” PSPB 31 (2005): 1189.
67. P. M. Herr, “Consequences of Priming: Judgment and Behavior,” JPSP 51 (1986): 1106; N.
Dasgupta and A. Greenwald, “On the Malleability of Automatic Attitudes: Combating
Automatic Prejudice with Images of Admired and Disliked Individuals,” JPSP 81 (2001): 800.

782

68. W. A. Cunningham et al., “Rapid Social Perception Is Flexible: Approach and Avoidance
Motivational States Shape P100 Responses to Other-Race Faces,” Front Hum Nsci 6 (2012):
140.
69. A. D. Galinsky and G. B. Moskowitz, “Perspective-Taking: Decreasing Stereotype
Expression, Stereotype Accessibility, and In-group Favoritism,” JPSP 78 (2000): 708; I. Blair
et al., “Imagining Stereotypes Away: The Moderation of Implicit Stereotypes Through Mental
Imagery,” JPSP 81 (2001): 828; T. J. Allen et al., “Social Context and the Self-Regulation of
Implicit Bias,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 13 (2010): 137; J. Fehr and K.
Sassenberg, “Willing and Able: How Internal Motivation and Failure Help to Overcome
Prejudice,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 13 (2010): 167.
70. C. Macrae et al., “The Dissection of Selection in Person Perception: Inhibitory Processes in
Social Stereotyping,” JPSP 69 (1995): 397.
71. T. Pettigrew and L. A. Tropp, “A Meta-analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory,” JPSP 90
(2006): 751.
72. A. Rutherford et al., “Good Fences: The Importance of Setting Boundaries for Peaceful
Coexistence,” PLoS ONE 9 (2014): e95660; L. G. Babbitt and S. R. Sommers, “Framing
Matters: Contextual Influences on Interracial Interaction Outcomes,” PSPB 37 (2011): 1233.
73. M. J. Williams and J. L. Eberhardt, “Biological Conceptions of Race and the Motivation to
Cross Racial Boundaries,” JPSP 94 (2008): 1033.
74. G. Hodson et al., “A Joke Is Just a Joke (Except When It Isn’t): Cavalier Humor Beliefs
Facilitate the Expression of Group Dominance Motives,” JPSP 99 (2010): 460; F. Pratto and
M. Shih, “Social Dominance Orientation and Group Context in Implicit Group Prejudice,”
Psych Sci 11 (2000): 515; F. Pratto et al., “Social Dominance Orientation and the
Legitimization of Inequality Across Cultures,” J Cross-Cultural Psych 31 (2000); 369; F.
Durante et al., “Nations’ Income Inequality Predicts Ambivalence in Stereotype Content: How
Societies Mind the Gap,” Brit J Soc Psych 52 (2012): 726; A. C. Kay and J. T. Jost,
“Complementary Justice: Effects of ‘Poor but Happy’ and ‘Poor but Honest’ Stereotype
Exemplars on System Justification and Implicit Activation of the Justice Motive,” JPSP 85
(2003): 823; A Kay, et al., “Victim Derogation and Victim Enhancement as Alternate Routes to
System Justification,” Psych Sci 16 (2005): 240.
75. C. Sibley and J. Duckitt, “Personality and Prejudice: A Meta-analysis and Theoretical
Review,” PSPR 12 (2008): 248.
76. J. Dovidio et al., “Commonality and the Complexity of ‘We’: Social Attitudes and Social
Change.,” PSPR 13 (2013): 3; E. Hehman et al., “Group Status Drives Majority and Minority
Integration Preferences,” Psych Sci 23 (2011): 46.
77. A demonstration that a reward shared with an in-group member activates dopaminergic
reward pathways more than does the same reward shared with a stranger: J. B. Freeman and D.
Fareri et al., “Social Network Modulation of Reward-Related Signals,” J Nsci 32 (2012): 9045.
Chapter 12: Hierarchy, Obedience, and Resistance
1. J. Freeman et al., “The Part: Social Status Cues Shape Race Perception,” PLoS ONE 6 (2011):
e25107.
2. Footnote: George, “Faith and Toilets,” Sci Am, November 19, 2015.
3. R. I. Dunbar and S. Shultz, “Evolution in the Social Brain,” Sci 317 (2007): 1344; R. I.
Dunbar, “The Social Brain Hypothesis and Its Implications for Social Evolution,” Ann Hum
Biol 36 (2009): 562; F. J. Pérez-Barbería et al. “Evidence for Coevolution of Sociality and
Relative Brain Size in Three Orders of Mammals,” Evolution 61 (2007): 2811; J. Powell et al.,
“Orbital Prefrontal Cortex Volume Predicts Social Network Size: An Imaging Study of
Individual Differences in Humans,” Proc Royal Soc B: Biol Sci 279 (2012): 2157; P. A. Lewis
et al., “Ventromedial Prefrontal Volume Predicts Understanding of Others and Social Network
Size,” Neuroimage 57 (2011): 1624; J. L. Powell et al., “Orbital Prefrontal Cortex Volume

783

Correlates with Social Cognitive Competence,” Neuropsychologia 48 (2010): 3554; J.
Lehmann and R. I. Dunbar, “Network Cohesion, Group Size and Neocortex Size in FemaleBonded Old World Primates,” Proc Royal Soc B: Biol Sci 276 (2009): 4417; J. Sallet et al.,
“Social Network Size Affects Neural Circuits in Macaques,” Sci 334 (2011): 697.
4. F. Amici et al., “Fission-Fusion Dynamics, Behavioral Flexibility, and Inhibitory Control in
Primates,” Curr Biol 18 (2008): 1415; A. B. Bond et al., “Serial Reversal Learning and the
Evolution of Behavioral Flexibility in Three Species of North American Corvids
(Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus, Nucifraga columbiana, Aphelocoma californica),” JCP 121
(2007): 372; A. Bond et al., “Social Complexity and Transitive Inference in Corvids,” Animal
Behav 65 (2003): 479.
5. J. Lehmann and R. I. Dunbar, “Network Cohesion, Group Size and Neocortex Size in FemaleBonded Old World Primates,” Proc Royal Soc B: Biol Sci 276 (2009): 4417.
6. J. Powell et al., “Orbital Prefrontal Cortex Volume Predicts Social Network Size: An Imaging
Study of Individual Differences in Humans,” Proc Royal Soc B: Biol Sci 279 (2012): 2157; P.
A. Lewis et al., “Ventromedial Prefrontal Volume Predicts Understanding of Others and Social
Network Size,” Neuroimage 57 (2011): 1624; J. L. Powell et al., “Orbital Prefrontal Cortex
Volume Correlates with Social Cognitive Competence,” Neuropsychologia 48 (2010): 3554; K.
C. Bickart et al., “Amygdala Volume and Social Network Size in Humans,” Nat Nsci 14
(2011): 163; R. Kanai et al., “Online Social Network Size Is Reflected in Human Brain
Structure,” Proc Royal Soc B: Biol Sci 279 (2012): 1327.
7. F. Elgar et al., “Income Inequality and School Bullying: Multilevel Study of Adolescents in 37
Countries,” J Adolescent Health 45 (2009): 351.
8. E. González-Bono et al., “Testosterone, Cortisol and Mood in a Sports Team Competition,”
Horm Behav 35 (2009): 55; E. González-Bono et al., “Testosterone and Attribution of
Successful Competition,” Aggressive Behav 26 (2000): 235.
9. N. O. Rule et al., “Perceptions of Dominance Following Glimpses of Faces and Bodies,”
Perception 41 (2012): 687.
10. L. Thomsen et al., “Big and Mighty: Preverbal Infants Mentally Represent Social
Dominance,” Sci 331 (2011): 477.
11. S. V. Shepherd et al., “Social Status Gates Social Attention in Monkeys,” Curr Biol 16
(2006): R119; J. Massen et al., “Ravens Notice Dominance Reversals Among Conspecifics
Within and Outside Their Social Group,” Nat Communications 5 (2013); 3679.
12. M. Karafin et al., “Dominance Attributions Following Damage to the Ventromedial Prefrontal
Cortex,” J Cog Nsci 16 (2004): 1796; L. Mah et al., “Impairment of Social Perception
Associated with Lesions of the Prefrontal Cortex,” Am J Psychiatry 161 (2004): 1247; T.
Farrow et al., “Higher or Lower? The Functional Anatomy of Perceived Allocentric Social
Hierarchies,” Neuroimage 57 (2011): 1552; C. F. Zink et al., “Know Your Place: Neural
Processing of Social Hierarchy in Humans,” Neuron 58 (2008): 273.
13. A. A. Marsh et al., “Dominance and Submission: The Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex and
Responses to Status Cues,” J Cog Nsci 21 (2009): 713; T. Allison et al., “Social Perception
from Visual Cues: Role of the STS Region,” TICS 4 (2000): 267; J. B. Freeman et al., “Culture
Shapes a Mesolimbic Response to Signals of Dominance and Subordination That Associates
with Behavior,” Neuroimage 47 (2009): 353.
14. M. Nader et al., “Social Dominance in Female Monkeys: Dopamine Receptor Function and
Cocaine Reinforcement,” BP 72 (2012): 414; M. P. Noonan et al., “A Neural Circuit
Covarying with Social Hierarchy in Macaques,” PLoS Biol 12 (2014): e1001940; F. Wang et
al., “Bidirectional Control of Social Hierarchy by Synaptic Efficacy in Medial Prefrontal
Cortex,” Sci 334 (2011): 693.
15. M. Rushworth et al., “Are There Specialized Circuits for Social Cognition and Are They
Unique to Humans?” PNAS 110 (2013): 10806.

784

16. For example: J. C. Beehner et al., “Testosterone Related to Age and Life-History Stages in
Male Baboons and Geladas,” Horm Behav 56 (2009): 472.
17. J. Brady et al., “Avoidance Behavior and the Development of Duodenal Ulcers,” J the Exp
Analysis of Behav 1 (1958): 69; J. Weiss, “Effects of Coping Responses on Stress,” J Comp
Physiological Psych 65 (1968): 251.
18. R. Sapolsky, “The Influence of Social Hierarchy on Primate Health,” Sci 308 (2005): 648; H.
Uno et al., “Hippocampal Damage Associated with Prolonged and Fatal Stress in Primates,” J
Nsci 9 (1989): 1705; R. Sapolsky et al., “Hippocampal Damage Associated with Prolonged
Glucocorticoid Exposure in Primates,” J Nsci l0 (1990): 2897; See also E. Archie et al.,
“Social Status Predicts Wound Healing in Wild Baboons,” PNAS 109 (2012): 9017.
19. R. Sapolsky, “The Physiology of Dominance in Stable Versus Unstable Social Hierarchies,”
in Primate Social Conflict, ed. W. Mason and S. Mendoza (New York: SUNY Press, 1993).
20. L. R. Gesquiere et al., “Life at the Top: Rank and Stress in Wild Baboons,” Sci 333 (2011):
357.
21. D. Abbott et al., “Are Subordinates Always Stressed? A Comparative Analysis of Rank
Differences in Cortisol Levels Among Primates,” Horm Behav 43 (2003): 67.
22. R. Sapolsky and J. Ray, “Styles of Dominance and Their Physiological Correlates Among
Wild Baboons,” Am J Primat 18 (1989) 1; J. C. Ray and R. Sapolsky, “Styles of Male Social
Behavior and Their Endocrine Correlates Among High-Ranking Baboons,” Am J Primat 28
(1992): 231; C. E. Virgin and R. Sapolsky, “Styles of Male Social Behavior and Their
Endocrine Correlates Among Low-Ranking Baboons,” Am J Primat 42 (1997): 25.
23. J. Chiao et al., “Neural Basis of Preference for Human Social Hierarchy Versus
Egalitarianism,” ANYAS 1167 (2009): 174; J. Sidanius et al., “You’re Inferior and Not Worth
Our Concern: The Interface Between Empathy and Social Dominance Orientation,” J
Personality 81 (2012): 313.
24. G. Sherman et al., “Leadership Is Associated with Lower Levels of Stress,” PNAS 109
(2012): 17903; R. Sapolsky, “Importance of a Sense of Control and the Physiological Benefits
of Leadership,” PNAS 109 (2012): 17730.
25. N. Adler and J. Ostrove, “SES and Health: What We Know and What We Don’t,” ANYAS 896
(1999): 3; R. Wilkinson, Mind the Gap: Hierarchies, Health and Human Evolution (London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2000); I. Kawachi and B. Kennedy, The Health of Nations: Why
Inequality Is Harmful to Your Health (New York: New Press, 2002); M. Marmot, The Status
Syndrome: How Social Standing Affects Our Health and Longevity (New York: Bloomsbury,
2015).
26. A. Todorov et al., “Inferences of Competence from Faces Predict Election Outcomes,” Sci
308 (2005): 1623.
27. T. Tsukiura and R. Cabeza, “Shared Brain Activity for Aesthetic and Moral Judgments:
Implications for the Beauty-Is-Good Stereotype,” SCAN 6 (2011): 138.
28. K. Dion et al., “What Is Beautiful Is Good,” JPSP 24 (1972): 285.
29. N. K. Steffens and S. A. Haslam, “Power Through ‘Us’: Leaders’ Use of We-Referencing
Language Predicts Election Victory,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): e77952.
30. B. R. Spisak et al., “Warriors and Peacekeepers: Testing a Biosocial Implicit Leadership
Hypothesis of Intergroup Relations Using Masculine and Feminine Faces,” PLoS ONE 7
(2012): e30399; B. R. Spisak, “The General Age of Leadership: Older-Looking Presidential
Candidates Win Elections During War,” PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e36945; B. R. Spisak et al., “A
Face for All Seasons: Searching for Context-Specific Leadership Traits and Discovering a
General Preference for Perceived Health,” Front Hum Nsci 8 (2014): 792.
31. J. Antonakis and O. Dalgas, “Predicting Elections: Child’s Play!” Sci 323 (2009): 1183.
32. K. Smith et al., “Linking Genetics and Political Attitudes: Reconceptualizing Political
Ideology,” Political Psych 32 (2011): 369.

785

33. G. Hodson and M. Busseri, “Bright Minds and Dark Attitudes: Lower Cognitive Ability
Predicts Greater Prejudice Through Right-Wing Ideology and Low Intergroup Contact,” Psych
Sci 32 (2012): 187; C. Sibley and J. Duckitt, “Personality and Prejudice: A Meta-analysis and
Theoretical Review,” PSPR 12 (2008): 248.
34. L. Skitka et al., “Dispositions, Ideological Scripts, or Motivated Correction? Understanding
Ideological Differences in Attributions for Social Problems,” JPSP 83 (2002): 470; L. J.
Skitka, “Ideological and Attributional Boundaries on Public Compassion: Reactions to
Individuals and Communities Affected by a Natural Disaster,” PSPB 25 (1999): 793; L. J.
Skitka and P. E. Tetlock, “Providing Public Assistance: Cognitive and Motivational Processes
Underlying Liberal and Conservative Policy Preferences,” JPSP (1993): 65, 1205; G. S.
Morgan et al., “When Values and Attributions Collide: Liberals’ and Conservatives’ Values
Motivate Attributions for Alleged Misdeeds,” PSPB 36 (2010): 1241; J. T. Jost and M.
Krochik, “Ideological Differences in Epistemic Motivation: Implications for Attitude
Structure, Depth of Information Processing, Susceptibility to Persuasion, and Stereotyping,”
Advances in Motivation Sci 1 (2014): 181.
35. S. Eidelman et al., “Low-Effort Thought Promotes Political Conservatism,” PSPB 38 (2012):
808; H. Thórisdóttir and J. T. Jost, “Motivated Closed-Mindedness Mediates the Effect of
Threat on Political Conservatism,” Political Psych 32 (2011): 785.
36. B. Briers et al., “Hungry for Money: The Desire for Caloric Resources Increases the Desire
for Financial Resources and Vice Versa,” Psych Sci 17 (2006): 939; S. Danziger et al.,
“Extraneous Factors in Judicial Decisions,” PNAS 108 (2011): 6889. The preceding is the
source of the figure in the text. C. Schein and K. Gray, “The Unifying Moral Dyad,” PSPB 41
(2015): 1147.
37. S. J. Thoma, “Estimating Gender Differences in the Comprehension and Preference of Moral
Issues,” Developmental Rev 6 (1986): 165; S. J. Thoma, “Research on the Defining Issues
Test,” in Handbook of Moral Development, ed. M. Killen and J. Smetana (New York:
Psychology Press 2006), p. 67; N. Mahwa et al., “The Distinctiveness of Moral Judgment,”
Educational Psych Rev 11 (1999): 361; E. Turiel, The Development of Social Knowledge:
Morality and Convention (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983); N. Kuyel and R. J.
Clover, “Moral Reasoning and Moral Orientation of U.S. and Turkish University Students,”
Psych Rep 107 (2010): 463.
38. J. Haidt, “The New Synthesis in Moral Psychology,” Sci 316 (2007): 998; G. L. Baril and J.
C. Wright, “Different Types of Moral Cognition: Moral Stages Versus Moral Foundations,”
Personality and Individual Differences 53 (2012): 468.
39. N. Shook and R. Fazio, “Political Ideology, Exploration of Novel Stimuli, and Attitude
Formation,” JESP 45 (2009): 995; M. D. Dodd et al., “The Political Left Rolls with the Good
and the Political Right Confronts the Bad: Connecting Physiology and Cognition to
Preferences,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soc B 640 (2012) 640; K. Bulkeley,
“Dream Content and Political Ideology,” Dreaming 12 (2002): 61; J. Vigil, “Political Leanings
Vary with Facial Expression Processing and Psychosocial Functioning,” Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations 13 (2011): 547; J. Jost et al., “Political Conservatism as Motivated Social
Cognition,” Psych Bull 129 (2003): 339; L. Castelli and L. Carraro, “Ideology Is Related to
Basic Cognitive Processes Involved in Attitude Formation,” JESP 47 (2011): 1013; L. Carraro
et al., “Implicit and Explicit Illusory Correlation as a Function of Political Ideology,” PLoS
ONE 9 (2014): e96312; J. R. Hibbing et al., “Differences in Negativity Bias Underlie
Variations in Political Ideology,” BBS 37 (2014): 297.
40. For an interesting analysis of the relationships among rank, stability, and risk aversion, see J.
Jordan et al., “Something to Lose and Nothing to Gain: The Role of Stress in the Interactive
Effect of Power and Stability on Risk Taking,” Administrative Sci Quarterly 56 (2011): 530.
Discussed in: J. Jost et al., “Political Conservatism as Motivated Social Cognition,” Psych Bull
129 (2003): 339.

786

41. P. Nail et al., “Threat Causes Liberals to Think Like Conservatives,” JESP 45 (2009): 901; J.
Greenberg et al., “The Causes and Consequences of the Need for Self-Esteem: A Terror
Management Theory,” in Public Self and Private Self, ed. R. Baumeister (New York: Springer,
1986); T. Verlag Pyszczynski et al., “A Dual Process Model of Defense Against Conscious and
Unconscious Death-Related Thoughts: An Extension of Terror Management Theory,” Psych
Rev 106 (1999): 835.
42. J. L. Napier and J. T. Jost, “Why Are Conservatives Happier Than Liberals?” Psych Sci 19
(2008): 565.
43. J. Block and J. Block, “Nursery School Personality and Political Orientation Two Decades
Later,” J Res in Personality 40 (2006): 734. Also see: M. R. Tagar et al., “Heralding the
Authoritarian? Orientation Toward Authority in Early Childhood,” Psych Sci 25 (2014): 883;
R. C. Fraley et al., “Developmental Antecedents of Political Ideology: A Longitudinal
Investigation from Birth to Age 18 Years,” Psych Sci 23 (2012): 1425.
44. Y. Inbar et al., “Disgusting Smells Cause Decreased Liking of Gay Men,” Emotion 12 (2012):
23; T. Adams et al., “Disgust and the Politics of Sex: Exposure to a Disgusting Odorant
Increases Politically Conservative Views on Sex and Decreases Support for Gay Marriage,”
PLoS ONE 9 (2014): e95572; H. A. Chapman and A. K. Anderson, “Things Rank and Gross in
Nature: A Review and Synthesis of Moral Disgust,” Psych Bull 139 (2013): 300.
45. G. Hodson and K. Costello, “Interpersonal Disgust, Ideological Orientations, and
Dehumanization as Predictors of Intergroup Attitudes,” Psych Sci 18 (2007): 691; K. Smith et
al., “Disgust Sensitivity and the Neurophysiology of Left-Right Political Orientations,” PLoS
ONE 6 (2011): e2552.
46. J. Lee et al., “Emotion Regulation as the Foundation of Political Attitudes: Does Reappraisal
Decrease Support for Conservative Policies?” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): e83143; M. Feinberg et al.,
“Gut Check: Reappraisal of Disgust Helps Explain Liberal-Conservative Differences on Issues
of Purity,” Emotion 14 (2014): 513.
47. J. Haidt, The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion (New
York: Pantheon, 2012); L. Kass, “The Wisdom of Repugnance: Why We Should Ban the
Cloning of Human Beings,” New Republic, June 2, 1997.
48. R. Kanai et al., “Political Orientations Are Correlated with Brain Structure in Young Adults,”
Curr Biol 21 (2011): 677; D. Schreiber et al., “Red Brain, Blue Brain: Evaluative Processes
Differ in Democrats and Republicans,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): e52970; W. Ahn et al.,
“Nonpolitical Images Evoke Neural Predictors of Political Ideology,” Curr Biol 24 (2014):
2693. For a general review, see J. Hibbing et al., “The Deeper Source of Political Conflict:
Evidence from the Psychological, Cognitive, and Neurosciences,” TICS 18 (2014): 111.
49. J. Settle et al., “Friendships Moderate an Association Between a Dopamine Gene Variant and
Political Ideology,” J Politics 72 (2010): 1189; K. Smith et al., “Linking Genetics and Political
Attitudes: Reconceptualizing Political Ideology,” Political Psych 32 (2011): 369; L. Buchen,
“The Anatomy of Politics,” Nat 490 (2012): 466.
Some papers on the genetics of political orientation and involvement:
Twin studies: N. G. Martin et al., “Transmission of Social Attitudes,” PNAS 83 (1986):
4364; R. I. Lake et al., “Further Evidence Against the Environmental Transmission of
Individual Differences in Neuroticism from a Collaborative Study of 45,850 Twins and
Relatives on Two Continents,” Behav Genetics 30 (2000): 223; J. R. Alford et al., “Are
Political Orientations Genetically Transmitted,” Am Political Sci Rev 99 (2005): 153.
Genomewide linkage: P. Hatemi et al., “A Genome-wide Analysis of Liberal and
Conservative Political Attitudes,” J Politics 73 (2011): 1; D. Amodio et al., “Neurocognitive
Correlates of Liberalism and Conservatism,” Nat Nsci 10 (2007): 1246.
50. T. Kameda and R Hastie, “Herd Behavior: Its Biological, Neural, Cognitive and Social
Underpinnings,” in Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences, ed. R. Scott and S.

787

Kosslyn (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley and Sons, 2015); H. Kelman, “Compliance, Identification, and
Internalization: Three Processes of Attitude Change,” J Conflict Resolution 2 (1958): 51.
51. Footnote: B. O. McGonigle and M. Chalmers, “Are Monkeys Logical?” Nat 267 (1977): 694;
D. J. Gillian, “Reasoning in the Chimpanzee: II. Transitive Inference,” J Exp Psych: Animal
Behav Processes 7 (1981): 87; H. Davis, “Transitive Inference in Rats (Rattus norvegicus),” J
Comparative Psych 106 (1992): 342; W. Roberts and M. Phelps, “Transitive Inference in Rats:
A Test of the Spatial Coding Hypothesis,” Psych Sci 5 (1994): 368; L. von Fersen et al.,
“Transitive Inference Formation in Pigeons,” J Exp Psych: Animal Behav Processes 17 (1991):
334; J. Stern et al., “Transitive Inference in Pigeons: Simplified Procedures and a Test of Value
Transfer Theory,” Animal Learning & Behav 23 (1995): 76; A. B. Bond et al., “Social
Complexity and Transitive Inference in Corvids,” Animal Behav 65 (2003): 479; L. Grosenick
et al., “Fish Can Infer Social Rank by Observation Alone,” Nat 445 (2007): 429.
52. C. Watson and C. Caldwell, “Neighbor Effects in Marmosets: Social Contagion of Agonism
and Affiliation in Captive Callithrix jacchus,” Am J Primat 72 (2010): 549; K. Baker and F.
Aureli, “The Neighbor Effect: Other Groups Influence Intragroup Agonistic Behavior in
Captive Chimpanzees,” Am J Primat 40 (1996): 283.
53. L. A. Dugatkin, “Animals Imitate, Too,” Sci Am 283 (2000): 67.
54. K. Bonnie et al., “Spread of Arbitrary Conventions Among Chimpanzees: A Controlled
Experiment,” Proc Royal Soc of London B 274 (2007): 367; M. Dindo et al., “In-group
Conformity Sustains Different Foraging Traditions in Capuchin Monkeys (Cebus apella),”
PLoS ONE 4 (2009): e7858; D. Fragaszy and E. Visalberghi, “Socially Biased Learning in
Monkeys,” Learning Behav 32 (2004): 24; L. Aplin et al., “Experimentally-Induced
Innovations Lead to Persistent Culture via Conformity in Wild Birds,” Nat 518 (2014): 538.
One study that failed to replicate the basic de Waal finding: E. Van Leeuwen et al.,
“Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) Flexibly Adjust Their Behaviour in Order to Maximize
Payoffs, Not to Conform to Majorities,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): e80945.
55. E. van de Waal et al., “Potent Social Learning and Conformity Shape a Wild Primate’s
Foraging Decisions,” Sci 340 (2013): 483.
56. A. Shestakova et al., “Electrophysiological Precursors of Social Conformity,” SCAN 8 (2013):
756
57. H. Tajfel and J. C. Turner, “The Social Identity Theory of Intergroup Behaviour,” in
Psychology of Intergroup Relations, ed. S. Worchel and W. G. Austin (Chicago IL: NelsonHall, 1986), pp. 7–24; E. A. Losin et al., “Own-Gender Imitation Activates the Brain’s Reward
Circuitry,” SCAN 7 (2012): 804; R. Yu and S. Sun, “To Conform or Not to Conform:
Spontaneous Conformity Diminishes the Sensitivity to Monetary Outcomes,” PLoS ONE 28
(2013): e64530.
58. R. Huber et al., “Neural Correlates of Informational Cascades: Brain Mechanisms of Social
Influence on Belief Updating,” Neuroimage 249 (2010): 2687; G. Berns et al., “Neural
Mechanisms of the Influence of Popularity on Adolescent Ratings of Music,” BP 58 (2005):
245; M. Edelson et al., “Following the Crowd: Brain Substrates of Long-Term Memory
Conformity,” Sci 333 (2011): 108; H. L. Roediger and K. B. McDermott, “Remember When?”
Sci 333 (2011): 47; J. Chen et al., “ERP Correlates of Social Conformity in a Line Judgment
Task,” BMC Nsci 13 (2012): 43; K. Izuma, “The Neural Basis of Social Influence and Attitude
Change,” Curr Opinion in Neurobiol 23 (2013): 456.
59. J. Zaki et al., “Social Influence Modulates the Neural Computation of Value,” Psych Sci 22
(2011): 894.
60. V. Klucharev et al., “Downregulation of the Posterior Medial Frontal Cortex Prevents Social
Conformity,” J Nsci 31 (2011): 11934; See also: A. Shestakova et al., “Electrophysiological
Precursors of Social Conformity,” SCAN 8 (2013): 756; V. Klucharev et al., “Reinforcement
Learning Signal Predicts Social Conformity,” Neuron 61 (2009): 140.

788

61. G. Berns et al., “Neurobiological Correlates of Social Conformity and Independence During
Mental Rotation,” BP 58 (2005): 245.
62. S. Asch, “Opinions and Social Pressure,” Sci Am 193 (1955): 35; S. Asch, “Studies of
Independence and Conformity: A Minority of One Against a Unanimous Majority,” Psych
Monographs 70 (1956): 1.
63. S. Milgram, Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View (New York: HarperCollins,
1974).
64. C. Haney et al., “Study of Prisoners and Guards in a Simulated Prison,” Naval Research Rev
9 (1973): 1; C. Haney et al., “Interpersonal Dynamics in a Simulated Prison,” Int J
Criminology and Penology 1 (1973): 69.
65. M. Banaji, “Ordinary Prejudice,” Psych Sci Agenda 8 (2001): 8.
66. Footnote: C. Hofling et al., “An Experimental Study of Nurse-Physician Relationships,” J
Nervous and Mental Disease 141 (1966): 171.
67. S. Fiske et al., “Why Ordinary People Torture Enemy Prisoners,” Sci 306 (2004): 1482.
68. P. Zimbardo, The Lucifer Effect: Understanding How Good People Turn Evil (New York:
Random House, 2007). This is also one source of the Solzhenitsyn quote.
69. Ibid.
70. G. Perry, Behind the Shock Machine: The Untold Story of the Notorious Milgram Psych
Experiments (New York: New Press, 2013).
71. T. Carnahan and S. McFarland, “Revisiting the Stanford Prison Experiment: Could
Participant Self-Selection Have Led to the Cruelty?” PSPB 33 (2007): 603; S. H. Lovibond et
al., “Effects of Three Experimental Prison Environments on the Behavior of Non-convict
Volunteer Subjects,” Psychologist 14 (1979): 273.
72. S. Reiche and S. A. Haslam, “Rethinking the Psychology of Tyranny: The BBC Prison
Study,” Brit J Soc Psych 45 (2006): 1; S. A. Haslam and S. D. Reicher, “When Prisoners Take
Over the Prison: A Social Psychology of Resistance,” PSPR 16 (2012): 154.
73. P. Zimbardo, “On Rethinking the Psychology of Tyranny: The BBC Prison Study,” Brit J Soc
Psych 45 (2006): 47.
74. A. Abbott, “How the Brain Responds to Orders,” Nat 530 (2016): 394.
75. B. Müller-Hill, Murderous Science: Elimination by Scientific Selection of Jews, Gypsies, and
Others, Germany 1933–1945 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988).
76. S. Asch, “Opinions and Social Pressure,” Sci Am, 193 (1955): 35.
77. R. Sapolsky, “Measures of Life,” Sciences, March/April 1994, p. 10.
78. R. Watson, “Investigation into Deindividuation Using a Cross-Cultural Survey Technique,”
JPSP 25 (1973): 342.
79. A. Bandura et al., “Disinhibition of Aggression Through Diffusion of Responsibility and
Dehumanization of Victims,” J Res in Personality 9 (1975): 253.
80. L. Bègue et al., “Personality Predicts Obedience in a Milgram Paradigm,” J Personality 83
(2015): 299; V. Zeigler-Hill, et al., “Neuroticism and Negative Affect Influence the Reluctance
to Engage in Destructive Obedience in the Milgram Paradigm,” J Soc Psych 153 (2013): 161;
T. Blass, “Right-Wing Authoritarianism and Role as Predictors of Attributions About
Obedience to Authority,” Personality and Individual Differences 1 (1995): 99; P. Burley and J.
McGuinnes, “Effects of Social Intelligence on the Milgram Paradigm,” Psych Rep 40 (1977):
767.
81. A. H. Eagly and L. L. Carli, “Sex of Researchers and Sex-Typed Communications as
Determinants of Sex Differences in Influenceability: A Meta-analysis of Social Influence
Studies,” Psych Bull 90 (1981): 1; S. Ainsworth and J. Maner, “Sex Begets Violence: Mating
Motives, Social Dominance, and Physical Aggression in Men,” JPSP 103 (2012): 819; H.
Reitan and M. Shaw, “Group Membership, Sex-Composition of the Group, and Conformity
Behavior,” J Soc Psych 64 (1964): 45.
82. S. Milgram, “Nationality and Conformity,” Sci Am 205 (1961): 45.

789

Chapter 13: Morality and Doing the Right Thing, Once You’ve Figured Out What That Is
1. A. Shenhav and J. D. Greene, “Moral Judgments Recruit Domain-General Valuation
Mechanisms to Integrate Representations of Probability and Magnitude,” Neuron 67 (2010):
667; P. N. Tobler et al., “The Role of Moral Utility in Decision Making: An Interdisciplinary
Framework,” Cog, Affective & Behav Nsci 8 (2008): 390; B. Harrison et al., “Neural Correlates
of Moral Sensitivity in OCD,” AGP 69 (2012): 741.
2. L. Young et al., “The Neural Basis of the Interaction Between Theory of Mind and Moral
Judgment,” PNAS 104 (2007): 8235; L. Young and R. Saxe, “Innocent Intentions: A
Correlation Between Forgiveness for Accidental Harm and Neural Activity,”
Neuropsychologia 47 (2009): 2065; L. Young et al., “Disruption of the Right Temporoparietal
Junction with TMS Reduces the Role of Beliefs in Moral Judgments,” PNAS 107 (2009):
6753; L. Young and R. Saxe, “An fMRI Investigation of Spontaneous Mental State Inference
for Moral Judgment,” J Cog Nsci 21 (2009): 1396.
3. J. Knobe, “Intentional Action and Side Effects in Ordinary Language Analysis,” 63 (2003):
190; J. Knobe, “Theory of Mind and Moral Cognition: Exploring the Connections,” TICS 9
(2005): 357.
4. J. Knobe, “Theory of Mind and Moral Cognition: Exploring the Connections,” TICS 9 (2005):
357.
5. P. Singer, “Sidgwick and Reflective Equilibrium,” Monist 58 (1974), reprinted in Unsatisfying
Human Life, ed. H. Kulse (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002).
6. J. Haidt, “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral
Judgment,” Psych Rev 108 (2001): 814–34; J. Haidt, “The New Synthesis in Moral
Psychology,” Sci 316 (2007): 996.
7. J. S. Borg et al., “Infection, Incest, and Iniquity: Investigating the Neural Correlates of Disgust
and Morality,” J Cog Nsci 20 (2008): 1529.
8. M. Haruno and C. D. Frith, “Activity in the Amygdala Elicited by Unfair Divisions Predicts
Social Value Orientation,” Nat Nsci 13 (2010): 160; C. D. Batson, “Prosocial Motivation: Is It
Ever Truly Altruistic?” Advances in Exp. Soc Psych 20 (1987): 65; A. G. Sanfey et al., “The
Neural Basis of Economic Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game,” Sci 300 (2003): 1755.
9. J. Van Bavel et al., “The Importance of Moral Construal: Moral Versus Non-moral Construal
Elicits Faster, More Extreme, Universal Evaluations of the Same Actions,” PLoS ONE 7
(2012): e48693.
10. G. Miller, “The Roots of Morality,” Sci 320 (2008): 734.
11. For this entire section on rudiments of morality in young children, see the excellent P. Bloom,
Just Babies: The Origins of Good and Evil (Portland, OR: Broadway Books, 2014). This
source applies to the subsequent half dozen paragraphs.
12. S. F. Brosnan and F. B. M. de Waal, “Monkeys Reject Unequal Pay,” Nat 425 (2003): 297.
13. F. Range et al., “The Absence of Reward Induces Inequity Aversion in Dogs,” PNAS 106
(2009): 340; C. Wynne “Fair Refusal by Capuchin Monkeys,” Nat 428 (2004): 140; D.
Dubreuil et al., “Are Capuchin Monkeys (Cebus apella) Inequity Averse?” Proc Royal Soc of
London B 273 (2006): 1223.
14. S. F. Brosnan and F. B. M. de Waal, “Evolution of Responses to (un)Fairness,” Sci 346
(2014): 1251776; S. F. Brosnan et al., “Mechanisms Underlying Responses to Inequitable
Outcomes in Chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes,” Animal Behav 79 (2010): 1229; M. Wolkenten et
al., “Inequity Responses of Monkeys Modified by Effort,” PNAS 104 (2007): 18854.
15. K. Jensen et al., “Chimpanzees Are Rational Maximizers in an Ultimatum Game,” Sci 318
(2007): 107; D. Proctor et al., “Chimpanzees Play the Ultimatum Game,” PNAS 110 (2013):
2070.
16. V. R. Lakshminarayanan and L. R. Santos, “Capuchin Monkeys Are Sensitive to Others’
Welfare,” Curr Biol 17 (2008): 21; J. M. Burkart et al., “Other-Regarding Preferences in a
Non-human Primate: Common Marmosets Provision Food Altruistically,” PNAS 104 (2007):

790

19762; J. B. Silk et al., “Chimpanzees Are Indifferent to the Welfare of Unrelated Group
Members,” Nat 437 (2005); 1357; K. Jensen et al., “What’s in It for Me? Self-Regard
Precludes Altruism and Spite in Chimpanzees,” Proc Royal Soc B 273 (2006): 1013; J. Vonk et
al., “Chimpanzees Do Not Take Advantage of Very Low Cost Opportunities to Deliver Food to
Unrelated Group Members,” Animal Behav 75 (2008): 1757.
17. F. De Waal and S. Macedo, Primates and Philosophers: How Morality Evolved (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton Science Library, 2009).
18. B. Thomas et al., “Harming Kin to Save Strangers: Further Evidence for Abnormally
Utilitarian Moral Judgments After Ventromedial Prefrontal Damage,” J Cog Nsci 23 (2011):
2186.
19. J. Greene et al., “An fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment,” Sci
293 (2001): 2105; J. Greene et al., “The Neural Bases of Cognitive Conflict and Control in
Moral Judgment,” Neuron 44 (2004): 389; J. Greene, Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason and the
Gap Between Us and Them (New York: Penguin, 2014).
20. D. Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions (New York:
Harper Perennial, 2010).
21. P. Singer, “Famine, Affluence, and Morality,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 1 (1972) 229.
22. D. A. Smalia et al., “Sympathy and Callousness: The Impact of Deliberative Thought on
Donations to Identifiable and Statistical Victims,” Organizational Behav and Hum Decision
Processes 102 (2007): 143; L. Petrinovich and P. O’Neill, “Influence of Wording and Framing
Effects on Moral Intuitions,” Ethology and Sociobiology 17 (1996): 145; L. Petrinovich et al.,
“An Empirical Study of Moral Intuitions: Toward an Evolutionary Ethics,” JPSP 64 (1993):
467; R. E. O’Hara et al., “Wording Effects in Moral Judgments,” Judgment and Decision
Making 5 (2010): 547.
23. A. Cohn et al., “Business Culture and Dishonesty in the Banking Industry,” Nat 516 (2014):
86. See also M. Villeval, “Professional Identity Can Increase Dishonesty,” Nat 516 (2014): 48.
24. R. Zahn et al., “The Neural Basis of Human Social Values: Evidence from Functional MRI,”
Cerebral Cortex 19 (2009): 276.
25. K. Starcke et al., “Does Stress Alter Everyday Moral Decision-Making?” PNE 36 (2011):
210; F. Youssef et al., “Stress Alters Personal Moral Decision Making,” PNE 37 (2012): 491.
26. E. Pronin, “How We See Ourselves and How We See Others,” Sci 320 (2008): 1177.
27. R. M. N. Shweder et al., “The ‘Big Three’ of Morality and the ‘Big Three’ Explanations of
Suffering,” in Morality and Health, ed. A. M. B. P. Rozin (Oxford: Routledge, 1997).
28. M. Shermer, The Science of Good and Evil (New York: Holt, 2004).
29. F. W. Marlowe et al., “More ‘Altruistic’ Punishment in Larger Societies,” Sci 23 (2006):
1767; J. Henrich et al., “‘Economic Man’ in Cross-Cultural Perspective: Behavioral
Experiments in 15 Small-Scale Societies,” BBS 28 (2005): 795.
30. R. Benedict, The Chrysanthemum and the Sword (Nanjing, China: Yilin Press1946); H.
Katchadourian, Guilt: The Bite of Conscience (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford General Books, 2011);
J. Jacquet, Is Shame Necessary? New Uses for an Old Tool (New York: Pantheon, 2015).
31. C. Berthelsen, “College Football: 9 Enter Pleas in U.C.L.A. Parking Case,” New York Times,
July 29, 1999, www.nytimes.com/1999/07/29/sports/college-football-9-enter-pleas-in-uclaparking-case.html.
32. J. Bakan, The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power (New York: Simon
& Schuster 2005).
33. Greene, Moral Tribes.
34. D. G. Rand et al., “Spontaneous Giving and Calculated Greed,” Nat 489 (2012): 427.
35. S. Bowles, “Policies Designed to Self-Interested Citizens May Undermine ‘The Moral
Sentiments’: Evidence from Economic Experiments,” Sci 320 (2008): 1605; E. Fehr and B.
Rockenbach, “Detrimental Effects of Sanctions on Human Altruism,” Nat 422 (2003): 137.

791

36. M. M. Littlefield et al., “Being Asked to Tell an Unpleasant Truth About Another Person
Activates Anterior Insula and Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” Front Hum Nsci 9 (2015): 553;
Footnote: S. Harris, Lying. Four Elephants Press, 2013. e-book.
37. For a tour of animal deception, see the following: B. C. Wheeler, “Monkeys Crying Wolf?
Tufted Capuchin Monkeys Use Anti-predator Calls to Usurp Resources from Conspecifics,”
Proc Royal Soc B Biol Sci 276 (2009): 3013; F. Amici et al., “Variation in Withholding of
Information in Three Monkey Species,” Proc Royal Soc B Biol Sci 276 (2009): 3311; A. le
Roux et al., “Evidence for Tactical Concealment in a Wild Primate,” Nat Communications 4
(2013): 1462; A. Whiten and R. W. Byrne, “Tactical Deception in Primates,” BBS 11 (1988):
233; F. de Waal, Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Among Apes (Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1982); G. Woodruff and D. Premack, “Intentional Communication
in the Chimpanzee: The Development of Deception,” Cog 7 (1979): 333; R. W. Byrne and N.
Corp, “Neocortex Size Predicts Deception Rate in Primates,” Proc Royal Soc B Biol Sci 271
(2004): 693; C. A. Ristau, “Language, Cognition, and Awareness in Animals?” ANYAS 406
(1983): 170; T. Bugnyar and K. Kotrschal, “Observational Learning and the Raiding of Food
Caches in Ravens, Corvus corax: Is It ‘Tactical’ Deception?” Animal Behav 64 (2002): 185; J.
Bro-Jorgensen and W. M. Pangle, “Male Topi Antelopes Alarm Snort Deceptively to Retain
Females for Mating,” Am Nat 176 (2010): E33; C. Brown et al., “It Pays to Cheat: Tactical
Deception in a Cephalopod Social Signalling System,” Biol Lett 8 (2012): 729; T. Flower,
“Fork-Tailed Drongos Use Deceptive Mimicked Alarm Calls to Steal Food,” Proc Royal Soc B
Biol Sci 278 (2011): 1548.
38. K. G. Volz et al., “The Neural Basis of Deception in Strategic Interactions,” Front Behav Nsci
9 (2015): 27.
39. Y. Yang et al., “Prefrontal White Matter in Pathological Liars,” Br J Psychiatry 187 (2005):
325; Y. Yang et al., “Localisation of Increased Prefrontal White Matter in Pathological Liars,”
Br J Psychiatry 190 (2007):174.
40. D. D. Langleben et al., “Telling Truth from Lie in Individual Subjects with Fast EventRelated fMRI,” Hum Brain Mapping 26 (2005): 262; J. M. Nunez et al., “Intentional False
Responding Shares Neural Substrates with Response Conflict and Cognitive Control,”
Neuroimage 25 (2005): 267; G. Ganis et al., “Neural Correlates of Different Types of
Deception: An fMRI Investigation,” Cerebral Cortex 13 (2003): 830; K. L. Phan et al.,
“Neural Correlates of Telling Lies: A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study at 4
Tesla,” Academic Radiology 12 (2005): 164; N. Abe et al., “Dissociable Roles of Prefrontal
and Anterior Cingulate Cortices in Deception,” Cerebral Cortex 16 (2006): 192; N. Abe, “How
the Brain Shapes Deception: An Integrated Review of the Literature,” Neuroscientist 17
(2011): 560.
41. A. Priori et al., “Lie-Specific Involvement of Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex in Deception,”
Cerebral Cortex 18 (2008): 451; L. Zhu et al., “Damage to Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex
Affects Tradeoffs Between Honesty and Self-Interest,” Nat Nsci 17 (2014): 1319.
42. T. Baumgartner et al., “The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise,” Neuron 64 (2009): 756.
43. Footnote: F. Sellal et al., “‘Pinocchio Syndrome’: A Peculiar Form of Reflex Epilepsy?” J
Neurol, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 56 (1993): 936.
44. J. D. Greene and J. M. Paxton, “Patterns of Neural Activity Associated with Honest and
Dishonest Moral Decisions,” PNAS 106 (2009): 12506.
45. L. Pascual et al., “How Does Morality Work in the Brain? A Functional and Structural
Perspective of Moral Behavior,” Front Integrative Nsci 7 (2013): 65.
46. D. G. Rand and Z. G., Epstein, “Risking Your Life Without a Second Thought: Intuitive
Decision-Making and Extreme Altruism,” PLoS ONE 9, no. 10 (2014): e109687; R. W.
Emerson, Essays, First Series: Heroism (1841).

792

Chapter 14: Feeling Someone’s Pain, Understanding Someone’s Pain, Alleviating Someone’s
Pain
1. Great reads on this general topic by leading scientists in the field: D. Keltner et al., The
Compassionate Instinct: The Science of Human Goodness (New York: W. W. Norton, 2010);
R. Davidson and S. Begley, The Emotional Life of Your Brain (New York: Plume, 2012).
2. G. Hein et al., “The Brain’s Functional Network Architecture Reveals Human Motives,” Sci
351 (2016): 1074. Also see: S. Gluth and L. Fontanesi, “Wiring the Altruistic Brain,” Sci 351
(2016): 1028.
3. A. Whiten et al., “Imitative Learning of Artificial Fruit Processing in Children (Homo sapiens)
and Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes),” JCP 110 (1996): 3; V. Horner and A. Whiten, “Causal
Knowledge and Imitation/Emulation Switching in Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and
Children (Homo sapiens),” Animal Cog 8 (2005): 164.
4. D. Jeon et al., “Observational Fear Learning Involves Affective Pain System and Ca1.2. CA2
Channels in ACC,” Nat Nsci 13 (2010): 482.
5. B. L. Warren et al., “Neurobiological Sequelae of Witnessing Stressful Events in Adult Mice,”
BP 73 (2012): 7.
6. D. J. Langford et al., “Social Modulation of Pain as Evidence for Empathy in Mice,” Sci 312
(2006): 1967.
7. M. Tomasello and V. Amrisha, “Origins of Human Cooperation and Morality,” Ann Rev Psych
64 (2013): 231; D. Povinelli et al., review of Reaching into Thought: The Minds of the Great
Apes, ed. A. E. Russon et al., TICS 2 (1998): 158.
8. F. de Waal and A. van Roosmalen, “Reconciliation and Consolation Among Chimpanzees,”
Behav Ecology and Sociobiology 5 (1979): 55; E. Palagi and G. Cordoni, “Postconflict ThirdParty Affiliation in Canis lupus: Do Wolves Share Similarities with the Great Apes?” Animal
Behav 78 (2009): 979; A. Cools et al., “Canine Reconciliation and Third-Party-Initiated
Postconflict Affiliation: Do Peacemaking Social Mechanisms in Dogs Rival Those of Higher
Primates?” Ethology 14 (2008): 53; O. Fraser and T. Bugnyar, “Do Ravens Show Consolation?
Responses to Distressed Others,” PLoS ONE 5, no. 5 (2010),
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010605; A. Seed et al., “Postconflict Third-Party Affiliation in
Rooks, Corvus frugilegus,” Curr Biol 2 (2006): 152; J. Plotnik and F. de Waal, “Asian
Elephants (Elephas maximus) Reassure Others in Distress,” Peer J 2 (2014),
doi:10.7717/peerj.278; Z. Clay and F. de Waal, “Bonobos Respond to Distress in Others:
Consolation Across the Age Spectrum,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): e55206.
9. J. P. Burkett et al., “Oxytocin-Dependent Consolation Behavior in Rodents,” Sci 351 (2016):
375.
10. G. E. Rice and P. Gainer, “‘Altruism’ in the Albino Rat,” J Comp and Physiological Psych 55
(1962): 123; J. S. Mogil, “The Surprising Empathic Abilities of Rodents,” TICS 16 (2012):
143; I. Ben-Ami Bartal et al., “Empathy and Pro-social Behavior in Rats,” Sci 334 (2011):
1427–30.
11. I. B. A. Bartal et al., “Pro-social Behavior in Rats is Modulated by Social Experience,” eLife
3 (2014): e01385.
12. C. Lamm et al., “Meta-analytic Evidence for Common and Distinct Neural Networks
Associated with Directly Experienced Pain and Empathy for Pain,” Neuroimage 54 (2011):
2492; B. C. Bernhardt and T. Singer, “The Neural Basis of Empathy,” Ann Rev Nsci 35 (2012):
1.
13. A. Craig, “How Do You Feel? Interoception: The Sense of the Physiological Condition of the
Body,” Nat Rev Nsci 3 (2002): 655; J. Kong et al., “A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Study on the Neural Mechanisms of Hyperalgesic Nocebo Effect,” J Nsci 28 (2008): 13354.
14. B. Vogt, “Pain and Emotion Interactions in Subregions of the Cingulate Gyrus,” Nat Rev Nsci
6 (2005): 533; K. Ochsner et al., “Your Pain or Mine? Common and Distinct Neural Systems

793

Supporting the Perception of Pain in Self and Other,” SCAN 3 (2008): 144; this is the source of
the Ochsner quote.
15. N. Eisenberger et al., “Does Rejection Hurt? An fMRI Study of Social Exclusion,” Sci 302
(2003): 290; D. Pizzagalli, “Frontocingulate Dysfunction in Depression: Toward Biomarkers
of Treatment Response,” Neurophyschopharmacology 36 (2011): 183.
16. C. Lamm et al., “The Neural Substrate of Human Empathy: Effects of Perspective-Taking and
Cognitive Appraisal,” J Cog Nsci 19 (2007): 42; P. Jackson et al., “Empathy Examined
Through the Neural Mechanisms Involved in Imagining How I Feel Versus How You Feel
Pain,” Neuropsychologia 44 (2006): 752; M. Saarela et al., “The Compassionate Brain:
Humans Detect Intensity of Pain from Another’s Face,” Cerebral Cortex 17 (2007): 230; N.
Eisenberg et al., “The Relations of Emotionality and Regulation to Dispositional and
Situational Empathy-Related Responding,” JPSP 66 (1994): 776; J. Burkett et al., “OxytocinDependent Consolation Behavior in Rodents,” Sci 351 (2016): 6271; M. Botvinick et al.,
“Viewing Facial Expressions of Pain Engages Cortical Areas Involved in the Direct
Experience of Pain,” Neuroimage 25 (2005): 312; C. Lamm et al., “The Neural Substrate of
Human Empathy: Effects of Perspective-Taking and Cognitive Appraisal,” J Cog Nsci 19
(2007): 42; C. Lamm et al., “What Are You Feeling? Using Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging to Assess the Modulation of Sensory and Affective Responses During Empathy for
Pain,” PLoS ONE 2 (2007): e1292.
17. D. Jeon et al., “Observational Fear Learning Involves Affective Pain System and Ca(v)1.2
Ca2+ Channels in ACC,” Nat Nsci 13 (2010): 482.
18. A. Craig, “How Do You Feel—Now? The Anterior Insula and Human Awareness,” Nat Rev
Nsci 10 (2009): 59; B. King-Casas et al., “The Rupture and Repair of Cooperation in
Borderline Personality Disorder,” Sci 321 (2008): 806; M. H. Immordino-Yang et al., “Neural
Correlates of Admiration and Compassion,” PNAS 106 (2009): 8021.
19. J. Decety and K. Michalska, “Neurodevelopmental Changes in the Circuits Underlying
Empathy and Sympathy from Childhood to Adulthood,” Developmental Sci 13 (2009): 886; J.
Decety, “The Neuroevolution of Empathy,” ANYAS 1231 (2011): 35; this second reference is
the source of the quote.
20. E. Brueau et al., “Distinct Roles of the ‘Shared Pain’ and ‘Theory of Mind’ Networks in
Processing Others’ Emotional Suffering,” Neuropsychologia 50 (2012): 219; C. Lamm et al.,
“How Do We Empathize with Someone Who Is Not Like Us? A Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging Study,” J Cog Nsci 22 (2010): 362; C. Keysers et al., “Somatosensation in
Social Perception,” Nat Rev Nsci 11 (2010): 417.
21. L. Harris and S. Fiske, “Dehumanizing the Lowest of the Low: Neuroimaging Responses to
Extreme Outgroups,” Psych Sci 17 (2006): 847.
22. I. Konvalinka et al., “Synchronized Arousal Between Performers and Related Spectators in a
Fire-Walking Ritual,” PNAS 108 (2011): 8514; Y. Cheng et al., “Love Hurts: An fMRI Study,”
NeuroImage 51 (2010): 923.
23. A. Avenanti et al., “Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Highlights the Sensorimotor Side of
Empathy for Pain,” Nat Nsci 8 (2005): 955; X. Xu et al., “Do You Feel My Pain? Racial Group
Membership Modulates Empathic Neural Responses,” J Nsci 29 (2009): 8525; V. Mathur et al.,
“Neural Basis of Extraordinary Empathy and Altruistic Motivation,” NeuroImage 51 (2010):
1468; G. Hein et al., “Neural Responses to Ingroup and Outgroup Members’ Suffering Predict
Individual Differences in Costly Helping,” Neuron 68 (2010): 149; E. Bruneau et al., “Social
Cognition in Members of Conflict Groups: Behavioural and Neural Responses in Arabs,
Israelis and South Americans to Each Other’s Misfortunes,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Soc B 367 (2012): 717; E. Bruneau and R. Saxe, “Attitudes Towards the Outgroup are
Predicted by Activity in the Precuneus in Arabs and Israelis,” NeuroImage 52 (2010): 1704; J.
Gutsell and M. Inzlicht, “Intergroup Differences in the Sharing of Emotive States: Neural
Evidence of an Empathy Gap,” SCAN 10 (2011): 1093; J. Freeman et al., “The Neural Origins

794

of Superficial and Individuated Judgments About Ingroup and Outgroup Members,” Hum
Brain Mapping 31 (2010): 150.
24. Footnote: K. Wailoo, Pain: A Political History (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2014).
25. C. Oveis et al., “Compassion, Pride, and Social Intuitions of Self-Other Similarity,” JPSP 98
(2010): 618; M. W. Kraus et al., “Social Class, Contextualism, and Empathic Accuracy,” Psych
Sci 21 (2012): 1716; J. Stellar et al., “Class and Compassion: Socioeconomic Factors Predict
Responses to Suffering,” Emotion 12 (2012): 449; P. Piff et al., “Higher Social Class Predicts
Increased Unethical Behavior,” PNAS 109 (2012): 4086.
26. J. Gutsell and M. Inzlicht, “Intergroup Differences in the Sharing of Emotive States: Neural
Evidence of an Empathy Gap,” SCAN 10 (2011): 1093; H. Takahasi et al., “When Your Gain Is
My Pain and Your Pain Is My Gain: Neural Correlates of Envy and Schadenfreude,” Sci 323
(2009): 890; T. Singer et al., “Empathic Neural Responses Are Modulated by the Perceived
Fairness of Others,” Nat 439 (2006): 466; S. Preston and F. de Waal, “Empathy: Its Ultimate
and Proximate Bases,” BBS 25 (2002): 1.
27. C. N. Dewall et al., “Depletion Makes the Heart Grow Less Helpful: Helping as a Function of
Self-Regulatory Energy and Genetic Relatedness,” PSPB 34 (2008): 1653. Mother Theresa is
quoted in: P. Slovic, “‘If I Look At the Mass, I Will Never Act’: Psychic Numbing and
Genocide,” Judgment and Decision Making, 2 (2007): 1. The quote has been attributed to
Stalin in many places, including: L Lyons, “Looseleaf Notebook,” Washington Post, January
30, 1947.
28. A. Jenkins and J. Mitchell, “Medial Prefrontal Cortex Subserves Diverse Forms of SelfReflection,” Soc Nsci 6 (2011): 211.
29. G. Di Pellegrino et al., “Understanding Motor Events: A Neurophysiological Study,” Exp
Brain Res 91 (1992): 176; G. Rizzolatti et al., “Premotor Cortex and the Recognition of Motor
Actions,” Cog Brain Res 3 (1996): 131; also see: P. Ferrari et al., “Mirror Neurons Responding
to the Observation of Ingestive and Communicative Mouth Actions in the Ventral Premotor
Cortex,” Eur J Nsci 17 (2003): 1703; G. Rizzolatti and L. Craighero, “The Mirror-Neuron
System,” Ann Rev Nsci 27 (2004): 169.
30. Footnote: P. Molenberghs et al., “Is the Mirror Neuron System Involved in Imitation? A Short
Review and Meta-analysis,” Nsci and Biobehavioral Reviews 33 (2009): 975.
31. Human MRI studies: V. Gazzola and C. Keysers, “The Observation and Execution of Actions
Share Motor and Somatosensory Voxels in All Tested Subjects: Single-Subject Analyses of
Unsmoothed fMRI Data,” Cerebral Cortex 19 (2009): 1239; M. Iacoboni et al., “Cortical
Mechanisms of Human Imitation,” Sci 286 (1999): 2526. Single neuron recordings in humans:
C. Keysers and V. Gazzola, “Social Neuroscience: Mirror Neurons Recorded in Humans,”
Curr Biol 20 (2010): R353; J. Kilner and A. Neal, “Evidence of Mirror Neurons in Human
Inferior Frontal Gyrus,” J Nsci 29 (2009): 10153.
32. M. Rochat et al., “The Evolution of Social Cognition: Goal Familiarity Shapes Monkeys’
Action Understanding,” Curr Biol 18 (2008): 227; M. Lacoboni, “Grasping the Intentions of
Others with One’s Own Mirror Neuron System,” PLoS Biol 3 (2005): e79.
33. C. Catmur et al., “Sensorimotor Learning Configures the Human Mirror System,” Curr Biol
17 (2007): 1527.
34. G. Hickok, “Eight Problems for the Mirror Neuron Theory of Action Understanding in
Monkeys and Humans,” J Cog Nsci 7 (2009): 1229.
35. V. Gallese and A. Goldman, “Mirror Neurons and the Simulation Theory,” TICS 2 (1998):
493.
36. V. Caggiano et al., “Mirror Neurons Differentially Encode the Peripersonal and Extrapersonal
Space of Monkeys,” Sci 324 (2009): 403.
37. V. Gallese et al., “Mirror Neurons,” Perspectives on Psych Sci 6 (2011): 369.

795

38. A sampling of some relevant papers: L. Oberman et al., “EEG Evidence for Mirror Neuron
Dysfunction in Autism Spectrum Disorders,” Brain Res: Cog Brain Res 24 (2005): 190; M.
Dapretto et al., “Understanding Emotions in Others: Mirror Neuron Dysfunction in Children
with Autism Spectrum Disorders,” Nat Nsci 9 (2006): 28; I. Dinstein et al., “A Mirror Up to
Nature,” Curr Biol 19 (2008): R13; A. Hamilton, “Reflecting on the Mirror Neuron System in
Autism: A Systematic Review of Current Theories,” Developmental Cog Nsci 3 (2013): 91.
39. G. Hickok, The Myth of Mirror Neurons: The Real Neuroscience of Communication and
Cognition (New York: Norton, 2014).
40. D. Freedberg and V. Gallese, “Motion, Emotion and Empathy in Esthetic Experience,” TICS
11 (2007): 197; S. Preston and F. de Waal, “Empathy: Its Ultimate and Proximate Bases,” BBS
25 (2002); 1; J. Decety and P. Jackson, “The Functional Architecture of Human Empathy,”
Behav and Cog Nsci Rev 3 (2004): 71.
41. J. Pfeifer et al., “Mirroring Others’ Emotions Relates to Empathy and Interpersonal
Competence in Children,” NeuroImage 39 (2008): 2076; V. Gallese, “The ‘Shared Manifold’
Hypothesis: From Mirror Neurons to Empathy,” J Consciousness Studies 8 (2001): 33.
42. J. Kaplan and M. Iacoboni, “Getting a Grip on Other Minds: Mirror Neurons, Intention
Understanding, and Cognitive Empathy,” Soc Nsci 1 (2006): 175.
43. Center for Building a Culture of Empathy, “Mirror Neurons,” http://cultureofempathy.com/,
no date, http://cultureofempathy.com/References/Mirror-Neurons.htm; J. Marsh, “Do Mirror
Neurons Give Us Empathy?” Greater Good Newsletter, March 29, 2012; V. Ramachandran,
“Mirror Neurons and Imitation Learning as the Driving Force Behind ‘the Great Leap
Forward’ in Human Evolution,” Edge, May 31, 2000.
44. Grayling is quoted in C. Jarrett, “Mirror Neurons: The Most Hyped Concept in
Neuroscience?” Psychology Today, December 10, 2012,
www.psychologytoday.com/blog/brain-myths/201212/mirror-neurons-the-most-hypedconcept-in-neuroscience; C. Buckley, “Why Our Hero Leapt onto the Tracks and We Might
Not,” New York Times, January 7, 2007.
45. All quotes are from Hickok, 2014, op cit. For some more analysis of the skepticism, see C.
Jarrett, “A Calm Look at the Most Hyped Concept in Neuroscience: Mirror Neurons,” Wired,
December 13, 2013; D. Dobbs, “Mirror Neurons: Rock Stars or Backup Singers?” News Blog,
ScientificAmerican.com, December 18, 2007; B. Thomas, “What’s So Special About Mirror
Neurons?” Guest Blog, ScientificAmerican.com, November 6, 2012; A. Gopnik, “Cells That
Read Minds?” Slate, April 26, 2007; and “A Mirror to the World,” Economist, May 12, 2005,
www.economist.com/node/3960516.
46. L. Jamison, “Forum: Against Empathy,” Boston Review, September 10, 2014.
47. C. Lamm et al., “The Neural Substrate of Human Empathy: Effects of Perspective-Taking and
Cognitive Appraisal,” J Cog Nsci 19 (2007): 42.
48. N. Eisenberg et al., “The Relations of Emotionality and Regulation to Dispositional and
Situational Empathy-Related Responding,” JPSP 66 (1994): 776; G. Carlo et al., “The
Altruistic Personality: In What Contexts Is It Apparent?” JPSP 61 (1991): 450.
49. B. Briers et al., “Hungry for Money: The Desire for Caloric Resources Increases the Desire
for Financial Resources and Vice Versa?” Psych Sci 17 (2006): 939; J. Twenge et al., “Social
Exclusion Decreases Prosocial Behavior,” JPSP 92 (2007): 56; L. Martin et al., “Reducing
Social Stress Elicits Emotional Contagion of Pain in Mouse and Human Strangers,” Curr Biol
25 (2015): 326.
50. R. Davidson and S. Begley, The Emotional Life of Your Brain (NY: Avery, 2012); M. Ricard
et al., “Mind of the Meditator,” Sci Am 311 (2014): 39.
51. A. Lutz et al., “Long-Term Meditators Self-Induce High-Amplitude Gamma Synchrony
During Mental Practice,” PNAS 101 (2004): 16369; T. Singer and M. Ricard, eds., Caring
Economics: Conversations on Altruism and Compassion, Between Scientists, Economists, and
the Dalai Lama (New York: St Martin’s Press, 2015); O. Klimecki et al., “Functional Neural

796

Plasticity and Associated Changes in Positive Affect After Compassion Training,” Cerebral
Cortex 23 (2013): 1552.
52. P. Bloom, “Against Empathy,” Boston Review, September 10, 2014; B. Oakley, Cold-Blooded
Kindness (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2011); Y. Cheng et al., “Expertise Modulates the
Perception of Pain in Others,” Curr Biol 17 (2007): 1708; Davidson and Begley, op cit.; this is
the source of the quote.
53. K. Izuma et al., “Processing of the Incentive for Social Approval in the Ventral Striatum
During Charitable Donation,” J Cog Nsci 22 (2010): 621; K. Izuma et al., “Processing of
Social and Monetary Rewards in the Human Striatum,” Neuron 58 (2008): 284; E. Dunn et al.,
“Spending Money on Others Promotes Happiness,” Sci 319 (2008): 1687.
54. B. Purzycki et al., “Moralistic Gods, Supernatural Punishment and the Expansion of Human
Sociality,” Nat 530 (2016): 327.
55. L. Penner et al., “Prosocial Behavior: Multilevel Perspectives,” Ann Rev Psych 56 (2005):
365.
56. W. Harbaugh et al., “Neural Responses to Taxation and Voluntary Giving Reveal Motives for
Charitable Donations,” Sci 316 (2007): 1622.
57. E. Tricomi et al., “Neural Evidence for Inequality-Averse Social Preferences,” Nat 463
(2010): 1089.
Chapter 15: Metaphors We Kill By
1. “Fighting and Dying for the Colors at Gettysburg,” HistoryNet.com, June 7, 2007,
www.historynet.com/fighting-and-dying-for-the-colors-at-gettysburg.htm.
2. The killing of Tavin Price: Brainuser1, “Mentally Challenged Teen Shot Dead for Wearing
Wrong Color Shoes,” EurThisNThat.com, September 22, 2016,
www.eurthisnthat.com/2015/06/03/mentally-challenged-teen-shot-dead-for-wearing-wrongcolor-shoes/comment-page-1/. Irish hunger strikers: “1981 Irish Hunger Strike,”
Wikipedia.com, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1981_Irish_hunger_strike#First_hunger_strike.
“My Way” killings: N. Onishi, “Sinatra Song Often Strikes Deadly Chord,” New York Times,
February 7, 2010.
3. Footnote: T. Appenzeller, “Old Masters,” Nat 497 (2013): 302.
4. R. Hughes, The Shock of the New (New York: Knopf, 1991). The following reference is
included in the hopes that it will make it seem like I actually read this book: M. Foucault, This
Is Not a Pipe (Oakland: University of California Press, 1983).
5. T. Deacon, The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain (New York:
Norton, 1997).
6. Footnote: L. Boroditsky, “How Language Shapes Thought,” Sci Am, February, 2011.
7. G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1980); G. Lakoff, Moral Politics: What Conservatives Know That Liberals Don’t (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996).
8. T. Singer and C. Frith, “The Painful Side of Empathy,” Nat Nsci 8 (2005): 845.
9. M. Kramer et al., “Distinct Mechanism for Antidepressant Activity by Blockade of Central
Substance P Receptors,” Sci 281 (1998): 1640; B. Bondy et al., “Substance P Serum Levels are
Increased in Major Depression: Preliminary Results,” BP 53 (2003): 538; G. S. Berns et al.,
“Neurobiological Substrates of Dread,” Sci 312 (2006): 754.
10. H. Takahasi et al., “When Your Gain Is My Pain and Your Pain Is My Gain: Neural Correlates
of Envy and Schadenfreude,” Sci 323 (2009): 890.
11. P. Ekman and W. Friesen, Unmasking the Face: A Guide to Recognizing Emotions from
Facial Cues (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1975).
12. M. Hsu et al., “The Right and the Good: Distributive Justice and Neural Encoding of Equity
and Efficiency,” Sci 320 (2008): 1092; F. Sambataro et al., “Preferential Responses in
Amygdala and Insula During Presentation of Facial Contempt and Disgust,” Eur J Nsci 24

797

(2006): 2355; P. S. Russell and R. Giner-Sorolla, “Bodily Moral Disgust: What It Is, How It Is
Different from Anger, and Why It Is an Unreasoned Emotion,” Psych Bull 139 (2013): 328; H.
A. Chapman and A. K. Anderson, “Things Rank and Gross in Nature: A Review and Synthesis
of Moral Disgust,” Psych Bull 139 (2013): 300; H. Chapman et al., “In Bad Taste: Evidence
for the Oral Origins of Moral Disgust,” Sci 323 (2009): 1222; P. Rozin et al., “From Oral to
Moral,” Sci 323 (2009): 1179.
13. C. Chan et al., “Moral Violations Reduce Oral Consumption,” J Consumer Psych 24 (2014):
381; K. J. Eskine et al., “The Bitter Truth About Morality: Virtue, Not Vice, Makes a Bland
Beverage Taste Nice,” PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e41159.
14. E. J. Horberg et al., “Disgust and the Moralization of Purity,” JPSP 97 (2009): 963.
15. K. Smith et al., “Disgust Sensitivity and the Neurophysiology of Left-Right Political
Orientations,” PLoS ONE 6 (2011): e2552; G. Hodson and K. Costello, “Interpersonal Disgust,
Ideological Orientations, and Dehumanization as Predictors of Intergroup Attitudes,” Psych Sci
18 (2007): 691; M. Landau et al., “Evidence That Self-Relevant Motives and Metaphoric
Framing Interact to Influence Political and Social Attitudes,” Psych Sci 20 (2009): 1421.
16. A. Sanfey et al., “The Neural Basis of Economic Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game,”
Sci 300 (2003): 1755.
17. T. Wang et al., “Is Moral Beauty Different from Facial Beauty? Evidence from an fMRI
Study,” SCAN 10 (2015): 814.
18. S. Lee and N. Schwarz, “Washing Away Postdecisional Dissonance,” Sci 328 (2010): 709.
19. S. Schnall et al., “With a Clean Conscience: Cleanliness Reduces the Severity of Moral
Judgments,” Psych Sci 19 (2008): 1219; K. Kaspar et al., “Hand Washing Induces a Clean
Slate Effect in Moral Judgments: A Pupillometry and Eye-Tracking Study,” Sci Rep 5 (2015):
10471.
20. C. B. Zhong and K. Liljenquist, “Washing Away Your Sins: Threatened Morality and
Physical Cleansing,” Sci 313 (2006): 1451; L. N. Harkrider et al., “Threats to Moral Identity:
Testing the Effects of Incentives and Consequences of One’s Actions on Moral Cleansing,”
Ethics & Behav 23 (2013): 133.
21. M. Schaefer et al., “Dirty Deeds and Dirty Bodies: Embodiment of the Macbeth Effect Is
Mapped Topographically onto the Somatosensory Cortex,” Sci Rep 5 (2015): 18051. See also
C. Denke et al., “Lying and the Subsequent Desire for Toothpaste: Activity in the
Somatosensory Cortex Predicts Embodiment of the Moral-Purity Metaphor,” Cerebral Cortex
26 (2016): 477. A debate about these findings: D. Johnson et al., “Does Cleanliness Influence
Moral Judgments? A Direct Replication of Schnall, Benton, and Harvey (2008),” Soc Psych 45
(2014): 209; J. L. Huang, “Does Cleanliness Influence Moral Judgments? Response Effort
Moderates the Effect of Cleanliness Priming on Moral Judgments,” Front Psych 5 (2014):
1276.
22. S. W. Lee et al., “A Cultural Look at Moral Purity: Wiping the Face Clean,” Front Psych 6
(2015): 577.
23. H. Xu et al., “Washing the Guilt Away: Effects of Personal Versus Vicarious Cleansing on
Guilty Feelings and Prosocial Behavior,” Front Hum Nsci 8 (2014): 97.
24. J. Ackerman et al., “Incidental Haptic Sensations Influence Social Judgments and Decisions,”
Sci 328 (2010): 1712; also see: M. V. Day and D. R. Bobocel, “The Weight of a Guilty
Conscience: Subjective Body Weight as an Embodiment of Guilt,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013):
e69546.
25. L. Williams and J. Bargh, “Experiencing Physical Warmth Promotes Interpersonal Warmth,”
Sci 322 (2008): 606; Y. Kang et al., “Physical Temperature Effects on Trust Behavior: The
Role of Insula,” SCAN 6 (2010): 507.
26. B. Briers et al., “Hungry for Money: The Desire for Caloric Resources Increases the Desire
for Financial Resources and Vice Versa,” Psych Sci 17 (2006): 939; X. Wang and R. Dvorak,

798

“Sweet Future: Fluctuating Blood Glucose Levels Affect Future Discounting,” Psych Sci 21
(2010): 183.
27. M. Anderson, “Neural Reuse: A Fundamental Organizational Principle of the Brain,” BBS
245 (2014); 245; G. Lakoff, “Mapping the Brain’s Metaphor Circuitry: Metaphorical Thought
in Everyday Reason,” Front Hum Nsci (2014), doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00958.
28. P. Gourevitch, We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed with Our Families
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux 2000); R. Guest, The Shackled Continent (Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Books, 2004); G. Stanton, “The Rwandan Genocide: Why Early Warning
Failed,” J African Conflicts and Peace Studies 1 (2009) 6; R. Lemarchand, “The 1994
Rwandan Genocide,” in Century of Genocide, ed. S. Totten and W. Parsons, 3rd ed.
(Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2009), p. 407.
29. S. Atran et al., “Sacred Barriers to Conflict Resolution,” Sci 317 (2007): 1039.
30. Hussein quote from CNN, Nov 6, 1995.
31. D. Thornton, “Peter Robinson and Martin McGuinness Shake Hands for the First Time,” Irish
Central, January 18, 2010, www.irishcentral.com/news/peter-robinson-and-martinmcguinness-shake-hands-for-the-first-time-81957747-237681071.html.
32. J. Carlin, Playing the Enemy: Nelson Mandela and the Game That Made a Nation (New
York: Penguin Press, 2008); D. Cruywagen, Brothers in War and Peace: Constand and
Abraham Viljoen and the Birth of the New South Africa (Cape Town, South Africa: Zebra
Press, 2014).
Chapter 16: Biology, the Criminal Justice System, and (Oh, Why Not?) Free Will
1. Innocence Project, “DNA Exonerations in the United States,” www.innocenceproject.org/dnaexonerations-in-the-united-states/.
2. N. Schweitzer and M. Saks, “Neuroimage Evidence and the Insanity Defense,” Behav Sci &
the Law 29 (2011): 4; A. Roskies et al., “Neuroimages in Court: Less Biasing Than Feared,”
TICS 17 (2013): 99.
3. J. Marks, “A Neuroskeptic’s Guide to Neuroethics and National Security,” Am J Bioethics:
Nsci 1 (2010): 4; A. Giridharadas, “India’s Use of Brain Scans in Courts Dismays Critics,”
New York Times, September 15, 2008; A. Madrigal, “MRI Lie Detection to Get First Day in
Court,” Wired, March 16, 2009.
4. S. Reardon, “Smart Enough to Die?” Nat 506 (2014): 284.
5. J. Monterosso et al., “Explaining Away Responsibility: Effects of Scientific Explanation on
Perceived Culpability,” Ethics & Behav 15 (2005): 139; S. Aamodt, “Rise of the Neurocrats,”
Nat 498 (2013): 298.
6. J. Rosen, “The Brain on the Stand,” New York Times Magazine, March 11, 2007.
7. Footnote: S. Lucas, “Free Will and the Anders Breivik Trial,” Humanist, Sept/Oct 2012, p. 36;
J. Greene and J. Cohen, “For the Law, Neuroscience Changes Nothing and Everything,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soc B, Biol Sci 359 (2004): 1775.
8. D. Robinson, Wild Beasts and Idle Humours: The Insanity Defense from Antiquity to the
Present (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996).
9. S. Kadri, The Trial: Four Thousand Years of Courtroom Drama (New York: Random House,
2006).
10. J. Quen, “An Historical View of the M’Naghten Trial,” Bull of the History of Med 42 (1968):
43.
11. Both O’Connor and Scalia are quoted from their dissenting opinions in Roper v. Simmons,
545 U.S. 551 (2005).
12. L. Buchen, “Arrested Development,” Nat 484 (2012): 304.
13. Rosen, “Brain on the Stand.”
14. L. Mansnerus, “Damaged Brains and the Death Penalty,” New York Times, July 21, 2001, p.
B9; M. Brower and B. Price, “Neuropsychiatry of Frontal Lobe Dysfunction in Violent and

799

Criminal Behaviour: A Critical Review,” J Neurol, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 71 (2001):
720.
15. M. Gazzaniga, “Free Will Is an Illusion, but You’re Still Responsible for Your Actions,”
Chronicle of Higher Education, March 18, 2012; M. Gazzaniga, Who’s in Charge? Free Will
and the Science of the Brain (New York: Ecco, 2012).
16. L. Steinberg et al., “Are Adolescents Less Mature Than Adults? Minors’ Access to Abortion,
the Juvenile Death Penalty, and the Alleged APA ‘Flip-flop,’” Am Psychologist 64 (2009): 583.
17. S. Morse, “Brain and Blame,” Georgetown Law J 84 (1996): 527.
18. B. Libet, “Can Conscious Experience Affect Brain Activity?” J Consciousness Studies 10
(2003): 24; B. Libet et al., “Time of Conscious Intention to Act in Relation to Onset of
Cerebral Activity (Readiness-Potential),” Brain 106 (1983): 623.
19. V. Ramachandran, The Tell-Tale Brain: A Neuroscientist’s Quest for What Makes Us Human
(NY: Norton, 2012).
20. C. Dweck, Mindset: How You Can Fulfill Your Potential (London, UK: Constable &
Robinson, 2012); C. Dweck, “Motivational Processes Affecting Learning,” Am Psychologist
41 (1986): 1040; S. Levy and C. Dweck, “Trait-Focused and Process-Focused Social
Judgment,” Soc Cog (1998); 151; C. Mueller and C. Dweck, “Intelligence Praise Can
Undermine Motivation and Performance,” JPSP 75 (1998): 33–52.
21. J. Cantor, “Do Pedophiles Deserve Sympathy?” CNN.com, June 21, 2012.
22. S. Morse, “Neuroscience and the Future of Personhood and Responsibility,” in Constitution
3.0: Freedom and Technological Change, ed. J. Rosen and B. Wittes (Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Press, 2011); J. Rosen, “Brain on the Stand” New York Times, March 11,
2007; S. Morse, “Brain Overclaim Syndrome and Criminal Responsibility: A Diagnostic
Note,” Ohio State J Criminal Law 397 (2006): 397; this is the source of the Morse quotes in
the subsequent paragraphs.
23. H. Bok, “Want to Understand Free Will? Don’t Look to Neuroscience,” Chronicle Review,
March 23, 2012.
24. Morse, “Neuroscience and the Future of Personhood”; S. Nichols, “Experimental Philosophy
and the Problem of Free Will,” Sci 331 (2011): 1401.
25. Morse, 2011, op cit.
26. Marvin Minsky, quoted in J. Coyne, “You Don’t Have Free Will,” Chronicle Review, March
23, 2012.
27. Footnote: J. Kaufman et al., “Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor–5-HTTLPR Gene
Interactions and Environmental Modifiers of Depression in Children,” BP 59 (2006): 673.
28. J. Russell, Witchcraft in the Middle Ages (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1972).
29. D. Dennett, Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1984).
30. Greene and Cohen, “For the Law, Neuroscience Changes Nothing.”
31. M. Hoffman, The Punisher’s Brain: The Evolution of Judge and Jury (Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press, 2014)
32. K. Gospic et al., “Limbic Justice: Amygdala Involvement in Immediate Rejections in the
Ultimatum Game,” PLoS ONE 9 (2011): e1001054; Buckholtz, “Neural Correlates of ThirdParty Punishment.”.
33. D. de Quervain et al., “The Neural Basis of Altruistic Punishment,” Sci 305 (2004): 1254; B.
Knutson, “Sweet Revenge?” Sci 305 (2004): 1246.
34. Footnote: J. Bonnefon et al., “The Social Dilemma of Autonomous Vehicles,” Sci 352 (2016):
1573; J. Greene, “Our Driverless Dilemma,” Sci 352 (2016): 1514.
Chapter 17: War and Peace
1. M. Fisher, “The Country Where Slavery Is Still Normal,” Atlantic, June 28, 2011; C. Welzel,
Freedom Rising: Human Empowerment and the Quest for Emancipation (Cambridge:

800

Cambridge University Press, 2013).
2. S. Pinker, The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined (New York: Penguin,
2011).
3. N. Elias, The Civilizing Process: Sociogenetic and Psychogenetic Investigations, rev. ed.
(Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2000); W. Yang, “Nasty, Brutish, and Long,” New York, October 16,
2011.
4. S. Herman and D. Peterson, “Steven Pinker on the Alleged Decline of Violence,” Int Socialist
Rev, November/December, 2012.
5. R. Douthat, “Steven Pinker’s History of Violence,” New York Times, October 17, 2011; J. Gray,
“Delusions of Peace,” Prospect, October 2011; E. Kolbert, “Peace in Our Time: Steven
Pinker’s History of Violence,” New Yorker, October 3, 2011; T. Cowen, “Steven Pinker on
Violence,” Marginal Revolution, October 7, 2011.
6. C. Apicella et al., “Social Networks and Cooperation in Hunter-Gatherers,” Nat 481 (2012):
497.
7. S. Huntington, “Democracy for the Long Haul,” J Democracy 7 (1996): 3; T. Friedman, The
Lexus and the Olive Tree (New York: Anchor Books, 1999).
8. L. Rhue and A. Sundararajan, “Digital Access, Political Networks and the Diffusion of
Democracy,” Soc Networks 36 (2014): 40.
9. M. Inzlicht et al., “Neural Markers of Religious Conviction,” Psych Sci 20 (2009): 385; M.
Anastasi and A. Newberg, “A Preliminary Study of the Acute Effects of Religious Ritual on
Anxiety,” J Alternative and Complementary Med 14 (2008): 163.
10. U. Schjoedt et al., “Reward Prayers,” Nsci Letters 433 (2008): 165; N. P. Azari et al., “Neural
Correlates of Religious Experience,” Eur J Nsci 13 (2001): 1649; U. Schjoedt et al., “Highly
Religious Participants Recruit Areas of Social Cognition in Personal Prayer,” SCAN 4 (2009):
199; A. Norenzayan and W. Gervais, “The Origins of Religious Disbelief,” TICS 17 (2013):
20; U. Schjoedt et al., “The Power of Charisma: Perceived Charisma Inhibits the Frontal
Executive Network of Believers in Intercessory Prayer,” SCAN 6 (2011): 119.
11. L. Galen, “Does Religious Belief Promote Prosociality? A Critical Examination,” Psych Bull
138 (2012): 876; S. Georgianna, “Is a Religious Neighbor a Good Neighbor?” Humboldt J Soc
Relations 11 (1994): 1; J. Darley and C. Batson, “From Jerusalem to Jericho: A Study of
Situational and Dispositional Variables in Helping Behavior,” JPSP 27 (1973): 100; L. Penner
et al., “Prosocial Behavior: Multilevel Perspectives,” Ann Rev Psych 56 (2005): 365.
12. C. Batson et al., Religion and the Individual: A Social-Psychological Perspective (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1993); D. Malhotra, “(When) Are Religious People Nicer? Religious
Salience and the ‘Sunday Effect’ on Pro-social Behavior,” Judgment and Decision Making 5
(2010): 138.
13. A. Norenzayan and A. Shariff, “The Origin and Evolution of Religious Prosociality,” Sci 422
(2008): 58.
14. A. Shariff and A. Norenzayan, “God Is Watching You: Priming God Concepts Increases
Prosocial Behavior in an Anonymous Economic Game,” Psych Sci 18 (2007): 803; W. Gervais,
“Like a Camera in the Sky? Thinking About God Increases Public Self-Awareness and
Socially Desirable Responding,” JESP 48 (2012): 298. See also: I. Pichon et al.,
“Nonconscious Influences of Religion on Prosociality: A Priming Study,” Eur J Soc Psych 37
(2007): 1032; M. Bateson et al., “Cues of Being Watched Enhance Cooperation in Real-World
Setting,” Biol Lett 2 (2006): 412.
15. S. Jones, “Defeating Terrorist Groups,” RAND Corporation, CT-314 (testimony presented
before the House Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on Terrorism and
Unconventional Threats and Capabilities), September 18, 2008; P. Shadbolt, “Karma
Chameleons: What Happens When Buddhists Go to War,” CNN.com, April 22, 2013.
16. J. LaBouff et al., “Differences in Attitudes Toward Outgroups in Religious and Nonreligious
Contexts in a Multinational Sample: A Situational Context Priming Study,” Int J for the Psych

801

of Religion 22 (2011): 1; B. J. Bushman et al., “When God Sanctions Killing: Effect of
Scriptural Violence on Aggression,” Psych Sci 18 (2007): 204. This is the source of the figure
in the text. H. Ledford, “Scriptural Violence Can Foster Aggression,” Nat 446 (2007): 114.
17. J. Ginges et al., “Religion and Support for Suicide Attacks,” Psych Sci 20 (2009): 224.
18. G. Allport, The Nature of Prejudice (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1954).
19. T. Pettigrew and L. Tropp, “A Meta-analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory,” JPSP 90
(2006): 751.
20. A. Al Ramiah and M. Hewstone, “Intergroup Contact as a Tool for Reducing, Resolving, and
Preventing Intergroup Conflict: Evidence, Limitations, and Potential,” Am Psychologist 68
(2013): 527; Y. Yablon and Y. Katz, “Internet-Based Group Relations: A High School Peace
Education Project in Israel,” Educational Media Int 38 (2001): 175; L. Goette and S. Meier,
“Can Integration Tame Conflicts?” Sci 334 (2011): 1356; M. Alexander and F. Christia,
“Context Modularity of Human Altruism,” Sci 334 (2011): 1392; M. Kalman,
“Israeli/Palestinian Camps Don’t Work,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 19, 2008.
21. I. Beah, A Long Way Gone (New York: Sarah Crichton Books, 2007).
22. R. Weierstall et al., “Relations Among Appetitive Aggression, Post-traumatic Stress and
Motives for Demobilization: A Study in Former Colombian Combatants,” Conflict and Health
7 (2012): 9; N. Boothby, “What Happens When Child Soldiers Grow Up? The Mozambique
Case Study,” Intervention 4 (2006): 244.
23. J. Arthur, “Remember Nayirah, Witness for Kuwait?” New York Times, January 6, 1992; J.
Macarthur, “Kuwaiti Gave Consistent Account of Atrocities; Retracted Testimony,” New York
Times, January 24, 1992; “Deception on Capitol Hill” (editorial), New York Times, January 15,
1992; T. Regan, “When Contemplating War, Beware of Babies in Incubators,” Christian
Science Monitor, September 6, 2002; R. Sapolsky, “‘Pseudokinship’ and Real War,” San
Francisco Chronicle, March 2, 2003. For Nayirah’s actual testimony, see.
www.youtube.com/watch?v=LmfVs3WaE9Y.
24. E. Queller et al., “Single-Gene Greenbeard Effects in the Social Amoeba Dictyostelium
discoideum,” Sci 299 (2003): 105; M. Nowak, “Five Rules for the Evolution of Cooperation,”
Sci 314 (2006): 1560.
25. C. Camerer and E. Fehr, “When Does Economic Man Dominate Social Behavior?” Sci 311
(2006): 47; J. McNamara et al., “Variation in Behaviour Promotes Cooperation in the
Prisoner’s Dilemma Game,” Nat 428 (2004): 745; C. Hauert and M. Doebeli, “Spatial
Structure Often Inhibits the Evolution of Cooperation in the Snowdrift Game,” Nat 428 (2004):
643.
26. M. Milinski et al., “Reputation Helps Solve the ‘Tragedy of the Commons,’” Nat 415 (2002):
424.
27. M. Nowak et al., “Fairness Versus Reason in the Ultimatum Game,” Sci 289 (2000: 1773; G.
Vogel, “The Evolution of the Golden Rule,” Sci 303 (2004): 1128.
28. J. Henrich et al., “Costly Punishment Across Human Societies,” Sci 312 (2006): 1767; B.
Vollan and E. Olstrom, “Cooperation and the Commons,” Sci 330 (2010): 923; D. Rustagi et
al., “Conditional Cooperation and Costly Monitoring Explain Success in Forest Commons
Management,” Sci 330 (2010): 961.
29. S. Gachter et al., “The Long-Run Benefits of Punishment,” Sci 322 (2008): 1510.
30. B. Knutson, “Sweet Revenge?” Sci 305 (2004): 1246; D. de Quervain et al., “The Neural
Basis of Altruistic Punishment,” Sci 305 (2004): 1254; E. Fehr and S. Gachter, “Altruistic
Punishment in Humans,” Nat 415 (2002): 137; E. Fehr and B. Rockenbach, “Detrimental
Effects of Sanctions on Human Altruism,” Nat 422 (2003): 137; C. T. Dawes et al.,
“Egalitarian Motives in Humans,” Nat 446 (2007): 794
31. E. Fehr and U. Fischbacher, “The Nature of Human Altruism,” Nat 425 (2003): 785; M.
Janssen et al., “Lab Experiments for the Study of Social-Ecological Systems,” Sci 328 (2010):

802

613; R. Boyd et al., “Coordinated Punishment of Defectors Sustains Cooperation and Can
Proliferate When Rare,” Sci 328 (2010): 617.
32. J. Jordan et al., “Third-Party Punishment as a Costly Signal of Trustworthiness,” Nat 530
(2016): 473.
33. A. Gneezy et al., “Shared Social Responsibility: A Field Experiment in Pay-What-You-Want
Pricing and Charitable Giving,” Sci 329 (2010): 325; S. DellaVigna, “Consumers Who Care,”
Sci 329 (2010): 287.
34. J. McNamara et al., “The Coevolution of Choosiness and Cooperation,” Nat 451 (2008): 189.
35. IDASA, National Elections Survey, August 1994 (Cape Town: Institute for Democracy in
South Africa, 1994); Human Science Research Council, Omnibus, May 1995 (Pretoria, South
Africa: HSRC/Mark Data, 1995); B. Hamber et al., “‘Telling It Like It Is . . .’: Understanding
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission from the Perspective of Survivors,” Psych in Soc 26
(2000): 18.
36. D. Filkins, “Atonement: A Troubled Iraq Veteran Seeks Out the Family He Harmed,” New
Yorker, October 29, 2012; D. Margolick, Elizabeth and Hazel: Two Women of Little Rock (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011).
37. R. Fehr and M. Gelfand, “When Apologies Work: How Matching Apology Components to
Victims’ Self-Construals Facilitates Forgiveness,” Organizational Behav and Hum Decision
Processes 113 (2010): 37.
38. M. McCullough, Beyond Revenge: The Evolution of the Forgiveness Instinct (Hoboken, New
Jersy: Jossey-Bass, 2008).
39. M. Berman, “‘I Forgive You.’ Relatives of Charleston Church Shooting Victims Address
Dylann Roof,” Washington Post, June 19, 2015.
40. J. Thompson-Cannino et al., Picking Cotton: Our Memoir of Injustice and Redemption (New
York: St. Martin’s Griff, 2010).
41. L. Toussaint et al., “Effects of Lifetime Stress Exposure on Mental and Physical Health in
Young Adulthood: How Stress Degrades and Forgiveness Protects Health,” J Health Psych 21
(2014): 1004; K. A. Lawler et al., “A Change of Heart: Cardiovascular Correlates of
Forgiveness in Response to Interpersonal Conflict,” J Behav Med 26 (2003): 373; M. C.
Whited et al., “The Influence of Forgiveness and Apology on Cardiovascular Reactivity and
Recovery in Response to Mental Stress,” J Behav Med 33 (2010): 293; C. vanOyen Witvliet et
al., “Granting Forgiveness or Harboring Grudges: Implications for Emotion, Physiology, and
Health,” Psych Sci 12 (2001): 117; P. A. Hannon et al., “The Soothing Effects of Forgiveness
on Victims’ and Perpetrators’ Blood Pressure,” Personal Relationships 19 (2011): 27; G. L.
Reed and R. D. Enright, “The Effects of Forgiveness Therapy on Depression, Anxiety, and
Posttraumatic Stress for Women After Spousal Emotional Abuse,” J Consulting Clin Psych 74
(2006): 920.
42. D. Kahneman and J. Renshon, “Why Hawks Win,” Foreign Policy, January/February 2007.
43. D. Laitin, “Confronting Violence Face to Face,” Sci 320 (2008): 51.
44. D. Grossman, On Killing: The Psychological Costs of Learning to Kill in War and Society
(New York: Back Bay Books, 1995).
45. M. Power, “Confessions of a Drone Warrior,” GQ, October 22, 2013; J. L. Otto and B. J.
Webber, “Mental Health Diagnoses and Counseling Among Pilots of Remotely Piloted Aircraft
in the United States Air Force,” MSMR 20 (2013): 3; J. Dao, “Drone Pilots Are Found to Get
Stress Disorders Much as Those in Combat Do,” New York Times, February 22, 2013.
46. J. Altmann et al., “Body Size and Fatness of Free-Living Baboons Reflect Food availability
and Activity Level,” Am J Primat 30 (1993): 149; J. Kemnitz et al., “Effects of Food
Availability on Insulin and Lipid Levels in Free-Ranging Baboons,” Am J Primat 57 (2002):
13; W. Banks et al., “Serum Leptin Levels as a Marker for a Syndrome X-Like Condition in
Wild Baboons,” J Clin Endo and Metabolism 88 (2003): 1234.

803

47. R. Tarara et al., “Tuberculosis in Wild Baboon (Papio cynocephalus) in Kenya,” J Wildlife
Diseases 21 (1985): 137; R. Sapolsky and J. Else, “Bovine Tuberculosis in a Wild Baboon
Population: Epidemiological Aspects,” J Med Primat 16 (1987): 229.
48. R. Sapolsky and L. Share, “A Pacific Culture Among Wild Baboons, Its Emergence and
Transmission,” PLoS Biol 2 (2004): E106; R. Sapolsky, “Culture in Animals, and a Case of a
Non-human Primate Culture of Low Aggression and High Affiliation,” Soc Forces 85 (2006):
217; R. Sapolsky, “Social Cultures in Non-human Primates,” Curr Anthropology 47 (2006):
641; R. Sapolsky, “A Natural History of Peace,” Foreign Affairs 85 (2006): 104.
49. I. DeVore, Primate Behavior: Field Studies of Monkeys and Apes (New York: Holt, 1965).
50. A. McAvoy, “Pearl Harbor Vets Reconcile in Hawaii,” Associated Press, December 6, 2006;
R. Ohira, “Zenji Abe, the Enemy Who Became a Friend,” Honolulu Advertiser, April 12,
2007.
51. N. Rhee, “Why US Veterans Are Returning to Vietnam,” Christian Science Monitor,
November 10, 2013.
52. K. Sim and M. Bilton, Remember My Lai, (PBS Video, 1989); G. Eckhardt, My Lai: An
American Tragedy (Kansas City: University of Missouri—Kansas City Law Review, Summer
2000); M. Bilton and K. Sim, Four Hours in My Lai (New York: Penguin, 1993); this is the
source of the Varnado Simpson quote; T. Angers, The Forgotten Hero of My Lai: The Hugh
Thompson Story (Lafayette, LA: Acadian House, 1999); this is the source of the Hugh
Thompson quote.
53. Footnote: M. Bilton and K. Sim, Four Hours in My Lai (NY: Penguin, 1993).
54. A. Hochschild, Bury the Chains: The British Struggle to Abolish Slavery (Basingstoke, UK:
Pan Macmillan, 2005); E. Metaxas, Amazing Grace: William Wilberforce and the Heroic
Campaign to End Slavery (New York: HarperOne, 2007).
55. G. Bell, Rough Notes by an Old Soldier: During Fifty Years’ Service, from Ensign G. B. to
Major-General C. B. (London: Day, 1867).
56. M. Seidman, “Quiet Fronts in the Spanish Civil War,” libcom.org, Summer 1999; F.
Robinson, Diary of the Crimean War (1856); E. Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier (1841);
BiblioLife, 2013; J. Persico My Enemy, My Brother: Men and Days of Gettysburg (Cambridge,
MA: Da Capo Press, 1996).
57. S. Weintraub, Silent Night: The Story of the World War I Christmas Truce (New York: Plume
Press, 2002).
58. T. Ashworth, Trench Warfare, 1914–1918: The Live and Let Live System (London: Pan
Books, 1980). Live and Let Live is also analyzed in R. Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation
(New York: Basic Books, 2006).
59. E. Jones, “One War Is Enough,” Atlantic, February 1946.

804

Illustration Credits

Here Courtesy Chickensaresocute/CC BY-SA 3.0.
Here Photo Researchers, Inc./Science Source.
Here Courtesy Angela Catlin.
Here AFP/Getty Images.
Here Zoonar GmbH/Alamy.
Here Katherine Cronin and Edwin van Leeuwen/Chimfunshi Wildlife Orphanage Trust.
Here Courtesy Yulin Jia/Dale Bumpers National Rice Research Center/U.S. Department of
Agriculture/CC BY 2.0.
Here (Right) Augustin Ochsenreiter/South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology.
Here (Left) Eurac/Samadelli/Staschitz/South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology.
Here Courtesy Mopane Game Safaris/CC BY-SA 4.0.
Here (Bottom) SD Dirk/Wikimedia Commons.
Here Courtesy Liz Schulze.
Here Vincent J. Musi/National Geographic Creative.
Here ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy.
Here (Top right) Jacob Halls/Alamy.
Here (Bottom) Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures/Lucasfilm Ltd.
Here Dennis Hallinan/Alamy.
Here Courtesy © 2016 C. Herscovici/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York.
Here Moshe Milner/Israel’s Government Press Office/Flickr.
Here (Top) Courtesy © 2013 Marcus Bleasdale/VII for Human Rights Watch.
Here (Bottom left) Courtesy Pierre Holtz/UNICEF CAR/CC BY-SA 2.0.
Here (Bottom right) Bjorn Svensson/Alamy.
Here Chris Belsten/Flickr.
Here (Left) NA (Public Domain).
Here (Right) Courtesy Maureen Monte.
Here (Left) Courtesy Jim Andreotta.
Here (Right) Courtesy Susan T. Kummer.
Here Ralph Crane/The LIFE Images Collection/Getty Images.
Here War posters/Alamy.
Here Courtesy BruceBlaus/CC BY 3.0.
Here Courtesy MethoxyRoxy/CC BY-SA 2.5.
Here Deco Images/Alamy.
Here Keystone Pictures USA/Alamy.
Here Courtesy Doc. RNDr. Josef Reischig, CSc./CC BY SA 3.0.
Here Courtesy Blacknick and Nataliia Skrypnyk, Taras Shevchenko National University of
Kyiv/CC BY-SA 4.0.
Here Courtesy Livet, Sanes, and Lichtman/Harvard University.
Here Courtesy Rajalakshmi L. Nair et al./CC BY 2.0.

805

Index

The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will take you to the beginning of
that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location to find the corresponding reference on your e-reader. Page
numbers in italics refer to illustrations.
abortion, 190–91, 592
Abe, Zenji, 654–55, 655, 660, 668, 670
Abu Ghraib Prison, 464, 469, 652
ACC, see anterior cingulate cortex
acetylcholine, 27, 692, 694
ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone), 125, 708–9
ADHD (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder), 76
Adler, Nancy, 293–94
adolescence, 59, 154–73
criminal justice system and, 170–71, 589–90, 592–93
culture and, 155–56
dopamine reward system and, 162–64, 163
empathy, sympathy, and moral reasoning in, 167–69, 543
frontal cortical maturation in, 154–60, 171–73, 589–90, 592–93
legal adulthood and, 155n
novelty craving in, 161–62, 168
peers, social acceptance, and social exclusion in, 164–67
puberty in, 158–59
risk taking in, 160–64
violence in, 170–71
Adorno, Theodor, 202, 401, 446
adrenal gland, 27
adrenaline, 27
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 125, 708–9
affiliation, 3
African Americans, 407n, 408n, 582, 627, 640
doll studies and, 415
prejudice and stereotypes and, 89, 417
aggression, 2, 3, 11, 15, 16, 19, 43
air rage, 295–96
alcohol and, 134, 136
amygdala and, 31–34, 44
papers published on, 605
context of, 19
ecological duress and, 303
displacement, 17, 132
fear and, 44
in females, 117–24, 135–36
maternal, 118–19, 121
pain and, 91
religion and, 624–26, 625
ritualistic, 17
serotonin and, 76–77, 250–55
stress and, 131–32
testosterone and, 100–102, 107, 115, 135, 215, 216, 218–20, 259–60
papers published on, 605
types of, 16–17
vasopressin and, 116
see also violence
agriculture, 317–18, 326
rice, 278–79, 278, 281

806

Ahern, Bertie, 577n–78n
air rage, 295–96
AIS (androgen insensitivity syndrome), 216–17
Akil, Huda, 71
Alberts, Susan, 437
albinos, 370n, 616
alcohol, 196, 249
aggression and, 134, 136
aliens, space, 398, 401n
Allen, Robert, 554
Allman, John, 46, 506–8
allomothering, 337
Allport, Gordon, 420
Altmann, Jeanne, 437
Altman, Joseph, 147, 149, 150
altruism, 3, 15, 16, 18, 339, 342, 364, 487, 546–47, 551, 565
pathological, 18, 39, 545–46
reciprocal, 324, 342–54, 372–73, 499, 547
indirect, 324
in single-cell amoeba, 344n
self-interest in, 547–51
Always Cooperate/Defect, 350, 351, 353, 363
Alzheimer’s, 53n
Amazonians, 310, 310
ambiguity, 450
American Psychological Association (APA), 592
Amin, Idi, 414
amino acids, 712
Among the Believers: An Islamic Journey (Naipaul), 13
amygdala, 30–44, 59–62, 73, 125, 143, 144, 193, 454, 518, 531, 545
aggression and, 31–34, 44
papers published on, 605
basolateral (BLA), 36–40, 129
childhood adversity and, 196, 201
faces and, 85, 89, 388, 395, 408–9, 416, 418, 614, 628–29
fear and, 34, 36–40, 42, 44, 85, 87–90, 97, 129
as part of networks, 40–44
punishment and, 610
removal of, 32
stress and, 128–29
testosterone and, 100, 102–4
urban living and, 296
Andaman Islanders, 317, 318
Andreotta, Glenn, 657, 658n, 658, 660, 670
androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), 216–17
anger, 62
anhedonia, 197
animal cruelty and animal rights, 508, 617
dog-meat market, 510, 510
Harlow’s studies and, 191n
animals, 10–11
compassion in, 523–26
conformity in, 456–58
emotional contagion in, 523–26, 569
morality in, 484–87
sensory triggers of behavior in, 83–84
see also specific types of animals
antagonistic pleiotropy, 329
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 46, 59, 516–19, 528–34, 547, 559–60, 569, 622
anxiety, 143
amygdala and, 34–35, 40, 44
apes, 10, 11, 45
apologies, 638–40
Arab Spring, 653
Arafat, Yasir, 577
archaeology, 305–9, 608
Archer, John, 101
Ardrey, Robert, 316
Arendt, Hannah, 202, 475
Ariely, Dan, 491
Aristotle, 120n, 488

807

Armistead, Lewis, 409
arousal, 43–44
Asch, Solomon, 461, 464, 470, 474
Ashworth, Tony, 665, 666
Asia, 277–78
atheism, 626
athletes, 396, 397, 502–3
Atlantic, 668
Atran, Scott, 574–75
Attachment and Loss (Bowlby), 189
attachment theory, 189
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 76
auditory stimuli, 6, 83–84, 89
authority, 449, 450, 455–56
obedience to, see obedience and conformity
autism, 114
mirror neurons and, 539–40
automaticity, 50
autonomic nervous system, 22, 26–27
Axelrod, Robert, 346, 348, 372, 574–75, 634
Baader-Meinhof Gang, 33
baboons, 17, 123, 131–32, 162, 172, 191–92, 196, 207, 295, 303, 337, 338, 429, 648–52, 648, 650
“Garbage Dump” troop of, 648–50, 649
hierarchies and, 426–27, 427, 428, 436–39, 442, 455
Balkans, 300, 618, 663
Banaji, Mahzarin, 464
Barash, David, 382
Bargh, John, 565, 566
Barnum, P. T., 52
Baumeister, Roy, 91
Baumgartner, Thomas, 517
Baumrind, Diana, 202–3, 208
BBC Prison Study, 467–68
BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor), 129, 143, 195
beauty, 88, 443
Beckwith, Jonathan, 384
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), 43, 102, 143
Begin, Menachem, 16n
behaviorism, 8–9, 82–83, 188–90
Bell, George, 662
Belyaev, Dmitry, 377–78
Ben Ali, Zine El Abidine, 653
Benchley, Robert, 387
Benedict, Ruth, 502
Berkowitz, David, 225n, 593n
Bernhardt, Michael, 656–57
Berreby, David, 399
Better Angels of Our Nature, The: Why Violence Has Declined (Pinker), 306, 309n, 616–19
Bible, 11, 624–25, 625, 660
Bingham, Hiram, 409
Blakemore, Sarah-Jayne, 161
Block, Ned, 242
Bloom, Paul, 484, 545, 546, 562
body, interoceptive information about, 90–92, 528, 529, 566
Boehm, Christopher, 322–25
Bok, Hilary, 599
Bokassa, Jean-Bédel, 367
Boko Haram, 631–32
bonobos, 111, 122, 317, 325, 365, 525, 614
Boroditsky, Lera, 558n
Bouazizi, Mohamed, 652–53, 653, 660
Bouchard, Thomas, 235, 239, 244
Bowlby, John, 189–90, 222
Bowles, Samuel, 309, 321, 364, 405, 512
Boyce, Tom, 195
Boyd, Robert, 350
Brady, Joseph, 436
Braille, 144–46
brain, 6–8, 11, 21–80, 154, 679–706
amygdala in, see amygdala

808

anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) in, 46, 59, 516–19, 528–34, 547, 559–60, 569, 622
autonomic nervous system and, 22, 26–27
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) in, 43, 102, 143
changes in size of regions in, 150–52
conformity and, 459–61
damage to, 53, 149, 590–91, 597, 601–2, 609, 705
directions in, 54n
frontal cortex in, see frontal cortex
fusiform face area in, 80, 85–86, 88, 114, 122n, 388, 402
hemispheres and lateralization of, 30, 30
hippocampus in, see hippocampus
limbic system of, see limbic system
locus coeruleus in, 43
malleability of, 53
mesolimbic/mesocortical dopamine system in, see dopamine
neocortex in, 23
neurons in, see neurons
neurotransmitters in, see neurotransmitters
nucleus accumbens in, 64–65, 103
obedience and, 459–61
periaqueductal gray (PAG) in, 41, 42, 59, 527
plasticity in, 137–53, 172, 188, 223
prefrontal cortex in, see prefrontal cortex
premotor cortex (PMC) in, 47, 166–68, 535–36, 540
size of, and social group size, 429, 430
social rank and, 434, 475
temporoparietal juncture (TPJ) in, 55n, 114, 178, 275, 480, 527, 531, 533, 535
triune model of, 22–23
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), 129, 143, 195
breast-feeding, 189n
British Empire, 415
Brooks, Stephen, 656n
Brosnan, Sarah, 484–87
Brown, Andrew, 381
Brown, Donald, 271
Brown, Stuart, 205
Brown v. Board of Education, 415
Bucy, Paul, 24
Buddhists, 19, 544–45, 551, 624
bullying, 199–200, 292–93, 431
Bush, George H. W., 632
Bush, George W., 403, 443, 454
bystander effect, 94–95
Cagots, 401
CAH (congenital adrenal hyperplasia), 215–18
Cajal, Santiago, 681, 684, 688
calcium, 140
Calhoun, John C., 285, 298
California Caverns, 160–61
California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT), 48n
Calley, William, Jr., 656, 657, 658n
Camp David Peace Accords, 16n
Cantor, James, 597
Carnegie Medal, 520
Carrion, Victor, 195
Carter, Sue, 110, 112
Caspi, Avshalom, 254
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 256–58
categorical thinking, 5–9
causation, 599–600
compulsion and, 593
multifactorial, 602–3
cave paintings, 556, 556, 557
CBT (cognitive behavioral therapy), 61
Ceauşescu, Nicolae, 201
cells, 703, 703
red blood (RBCs), 680, 680, 681
Chagnon, Napoleon, 312–14
Champagne, Frances, 221
charitability, 115, 370, 548–50

809

Charlie Hebdo, 554
cheating, 324, 449, 492, 514–20
reciprocal altruism and, 344–53
Cheney, Dorothy, 337–38
Chestnut, Joey, 431
Chicago riots, 472
Chicago Seven, 396n
childhood, children, 7, 8, 21, 174–222
adolescence, see adolescence
class differences and, 207–9
in collectivist vs. individualist cultures, 206–7
compassion in, 527–28
culture and, 202–10
in cultures of honor, 207
developmental stages in, 174–87, 177, 479
empathy in, 179–81
hospitalization in, 189
marshmallow test and, 185–87
media violence and, 198, 206–7
neighborhood and, 205
parenting and, see parents, parenting
peers in, 204
play in, 204–5
Us/Them-ing in, 391–92
childhood adversity, 194–201
abuse, 193–94, 254
by stepparent, 367–68
biology and, 194–97
bullying, 199–200, 431
observing violence, 197–98
poverty, 195–96
resilience and, 200
in Romanian institutions, 201, 201
serotonin and, 254–55
child labor, 508, 615
child soldiers, 156n, 630–31, 631
Chimpanzee Politics (de Waal), 444
chimpanzees, 111, 269–70, 270, 316, 317, 325, 365, 717
conformity in, 457–58, 470
observational learning in, 523–24
trust and, 393
Us/Them and, 389
yawning in, 457n
China, 414, 415, 654
Chomsky, Noam, 384
chromosomes, 223
Chuck E. Cheese’s, 342n
Churchland, Patricia, 541
Cinderella effect, 367
cities, 296, 298–99
civilizing process, 617
Civil War, 409, 662
Battle of Gettysburg, 554, 644
Clark, Kenneth and Mamie, 415
class, see socioeconomic status
Clay, Henry, 285
cleanliness, 564–65
climate, 302–3
Clinton, Bill, 640
cognition, 617–18
adolescence and, 159
cognitive load, 49–50, 416–17, 546
empathy fatigue, 534–35
emotion and, 54–58
empathy and, 528, 531–35, 552
frontal cortex and, 47–50, 159
stages of cognitive development, 176–79
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 61
Cohen, Dov, 285, 286, 287
Cohen, Jonathan, 47, 58, 609
Cohn, Alain, 491

810

Cohn, Roy, 396
Colburn, Lawrence, 657, 658n, 658, 660, 670
Coles, Robert, 181n
Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed (Diamond), 302
collectivist cultures, 97, 156, 206–7, 273–82, 474, 501–3
Coming of Age in Samoa (Mead), 122
compassion, 15, 522, 523, 542
acts of, 542–45, 551, 614
effective, 545–46
in animals, 523–26
in children, 527–28
self-interest in, 547–50, 642
wealthy people and, 533–34
see also empathy
compatibilism, 586
competition, 2–4, 15, 16
moral judgment and, 495–500
COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase), 256–58
conditioned place preference, 103
confidence, 102–3, 237
confirmation biases, 403
conflict monitoring, 528–29
conflict resolution, sacred values in, 575–79, 643–44
conformity, see obedience and conformity
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 215–18
consequentialism, 504–7, 520
consolation behavior, 525–26
contact theory, 420, 626–30
cooperation, 3, 4, 15, 547, 633–35
moral judgment and, 495–500, 508–9
optimal strategy for, 345–53
punishment used to promote, 635
starting, 353–54, 508–9
corporate personhood, 411n, 503
Correll, Joshua, 86
corruption, 267
Corry, Stephen, 315
cortex, 29
Cotton, Ronald, 641–42
Craddock, Sandie, 124
CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone), 125, 129, 132, 708–9
Crick, Francis, 714
crime:
abortion and, 190–91
broken window theory of, 95–96
income inequality and, 295
in 1970s and 1980s, 311
organized, 395–96
urbanization and, 296
Crimean War, 662
criminal justice system, 171, 253, 398, 502–3, 580–600, 608–12
adolescents and, 170–71, 589–90, 592–93
brain damage and, 590–91, 597, 598, 601–2, 609
and causation vs. compulsion, 593
cognitive biases in jurors, 582
and diminished responsibility for actions, 587
free will and, see free will
judicial decisions, 448, 449, 483, 583, 643
neuroimaging data and, 582, 599
and starting a behavior vs. halting it, 594–95
and time course of decision making for action, 592–93
crises, cultural, 301–3
culture(s), 7, 11, 21, 266–327
adolescence and, 155–56
changes in, over time, 276–77
childhood and, 202–10
collectivist, 97, 156, 206–7, 273–82, 474, 501–3
crises and, 301–3
definitions of, 269–71
differences in, 271–73
gender-related, 272

811

diffusion and, 621
egalitarian, 291–96
of honor, 207, 283, 284, 501
American South, 207, 284–88, 501
honor killings in, 288–91, 290
human universals in, 271–72
hunter-gatherer, 291, 315–25, 318, 372–73, 407, 499, 616–17, 620
gods in, 297
Hadza, 317–19, 318, 498, 620
violence in, 319–25, 322
individualistic, 97, 156, 206–7, 273–82, 474, 501–3
learning in, 457
long-lasting effects of, 267
math skills and, 266–67, 406
moral judgments and, 275, 493–503
pastoral, 282–83, 288, 379
religion and, 283, 304
prehistoric and contemporary indigenous, 305–26, 307, 310, 318, 320, 322
religion in, see religion
sensory processing and, 276
similarities in, 271–72
stratified, 291–96
stress responses and, 274–75
violence and, 272
Cushing’s syndrome, 151n
Cyberball, 165–66, 529–30, 559
Dalai Lama, 544
Dale, Henry, 692
Dalton, Katharina, 123
Daly, Martin, 367
Damasio, Antonio, 28, 56, 61, 97, 507, 538
Darden, Chris, 396
Darkness in El Dorado: How Scientists and Journalists Devastated the Amazon (Tierney), 312n
Darwin, Charles, 230n
Darwin’s finches, 379
Das, Gopal, 147
Davidson, Richard, 544
Davis, Richard, 574–75
Dawkins, Richard, 330, 333, 361, 362
DeCasper, Anthony, 210–11
deception, 512–17
Decety, Jean, 180, 532
decision making, 38–39, 46–47
De Dreu, Carsten, 116–17
De Kock, Eugene, 629–30
Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of Human Violence (Wrangham and Peterson), 316, 317
Dennett, Daniel, 607, 668–69
deontology, 504, 505, 520
depression, 143, 437, 602–3
childhood adversity and, 196–97
5HTT variant and, 246
Descarte, René, 28
Descartes’ Error (Damasio), 28
despotism, avoidance of, 324
DeVore, Irven, 384, 427, 651
De Waal, Frans, 271, 444, 457, 484–87, 525, 526
diabetes, 379–80
gestational, 359n
dichotomizing, 392
see also Us/Them dichotomies
Dictator Game, 497, 498
Diallo, Amadou, 86
Diamond, Jared, 302
Diana, Princess of Wales, 401n–2n
disgust, 411, 560–65
adolescents and, 160n
insular cortex and, 41, 46, 69, 398–99, 454, 560–61
interpersonal, 399
moral, 398, 454, 561–65
political orientation and, 453–55

812

Us/Them and, 398–99
dishonesty, 512–17
Disney, Walt, 84
DNA, 108, 147, 223, 225–33, 261–62
as blueprint for constructing proteins, 712–14
exons and introns and, 230–31
mutations and polymorphisms and, 714–17
noncoding, 226
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 328
dog(s), 112
deception in, 513
dog-meat market and, 510, 510
feral Moscow, 378, 379
scenario of saving person vs., 368, 371
doll studies, 415
Donohue, John, 190
dopamine (mesolimbic/mesocortical dopamine system), 30, 64–77, 84, 103, 151, 275, 390, 555–56, 692
in adolescence, 162–64, 163
arbitrary signals and, 391
charitable acts and, 548–50
childhood adversity and, 196
D4 receptor, gene for (DRD4), 256, 258, 260, 261, 279
7R variant, 256, 279–81
empathy and, 534, 545, 546
genes and, 255–58, 264, 279–81, 280
L-DOPA and, 693
DRD4 gene, 256, 258, 260, 261, 279
7R variant of, 256, 279–81
drone pilots, 645–46
drought, 303
drugs, 65, 76, 196
neuropharmacology, 693–94
Drummond, Edward, 586
Dunbar, Robin, 429
Dunbar’s number, 430
Dweck, Carol, 595
Dylan, Bob, 184
Eakin, John, 554
East Asia, 277–78
Eckford, Elizabeth, 640
E. coli, 343, 380
economic games and game theory, 18, 55, 66, 77, 89, 93, 104, 112, 116, 255, 272, 292, 345, 393, 398, 497–500, 609, 610,
624
Dictator Game, 497, 498
hunger and, 92, 449
language effects on, 92–93, 491
Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD), 92, 116, 345–46, 372, 393, 557, 633, 634
public good, 495–96
third-party punishment, 497
Tit for Tat, 346–53, 363, 634, 666
Contrite, 350
Forgiving, 350, 351
Ultimatum Game, 38–39, 106, 486, 497, 498, 500, 610, 635
educational attainment, 263
egalitarian cultures, 291–96
egalitarianism, 167, 180–81
Eichmann, Adolf, 464, 475
Eisenberger, Naomi, 165
Eisenegger, Christoph, 106
Eldredge, Niles, 374–75, 385
Elias, Norbert, 617
Ellsberg, Daniel, 652
El Niños, 302
Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church, 641
Ember, Carol, 319, 321
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 520
emotional contagion, 522
in animals, 523–26, 569
in children, 527–58
brain and, 22–28

813

cognition and, 54–58
eyes and, 89, 97
and frontal cortical changes in adolescence, 160
reappraisal and, 60–61, 160, 453
empathy, 3, 4, 15, 18, 46, 169, 454, 521–52, 617
in adolescence, 167–69
affective side of, 528–31, 552
cognitive load and, 534–35, 546
cognitive side of, 528, 531–35, 552
compassionate acts and, 542–45, 551, 614
effectiveness in, 545–46
emotional contagion, 522
in animals, 523–26, 569
in children, 527–28
group loyalty and, 395
mimicry and, 102, 522–24
mirror neurons and supposed role in, 540–41
pain and, 86, 133, 169, 180, 395, 522, 523, 527, 532, 533, 540, 545–47, 550–52, 560, 568
self-interest in, 547–50, 642
stress and, 133
Us/Them and, 532–35
wealthy people and, 533–34
in young children, 179–81
endocrinology, 7
basics of, 707–10
see also hormones
Enlightenment, 615, 617
environmental degradation, 302
envy, 15, 67
epilepsy, 605–6, 610, 611
epinephrine, 27, 126
equality, 395
Escherichia coli, 343, 380
estrogen, 117, 118, 144, 158
genes and, 260
prenatal, 211–13
ethology, 10, 81–84
Evans, Robert, 294–95
evolution, 7, 15, 21, 328–86
adaptation in, 380–85
basics of, 328–31
behavior and, 331–32
continuous and gradual, 374–80
evidence for, 329–30
exaptation in, 381, 569
fossil record and, 329, 330, 375, 376
founder populations and, 353–54, 633
genes and, 328–29, 373–74
genotype vs. phenotype in, 360–62
group selection in, 332–33, 426
human, 365–73
individual selection in, 366–68
kin selection in, 368–72, 499
and reciprocal altruism and neo-group selectionism, 372–73
as tournament vs. pair-bonded, 365–66
individual selection in, 333–36, 366–68
intersexual genetic conflict and, 359–60
kin selection in, 336–42, 368–72, 499, 570
cousins and, 339–40
green-beard effect and, 341–42, 353, 390, 409, 633, 637
and recognizing relatedness, 340–41, 570
misconceptions about, 328–29
multilevel selection in, 360–65
natural selection in, 330–31
neo-group selection in, 360, 363–65, 372–73
observed in real time, 379–80
and pair-bonding vs. tournament species, 354–58, 360, 365–66, 383
parent-offspring conflict and, 358–59
punctuated equilibrium in, 374–80, 384–85
reciprocal altruism and, 342–54, 372–73
optimal cooperation strategy and, 345–53

814

starting cooperation and, 353–54
selection for complexity and, 329
selection for preadaptation and, 329
sexual selection in, 330–31
sociobiology and, 331–33, 374–76, 380–84
spandrels and, 381–82, 382
survival of the fittest and, 328–29
tinkering and improvisation in, 381, 568–69
evolutionary psychology, 331–32
executions, 170–71, 472, 582
firing squads, 471–72
executive function, 48
sustained stress and, 130–31
see also cognition; frontal cortex
executive stress syndrome, 436
eyes, social impact of, 89, 97, 623
Facebook, 164, 667
faces, 85–89, 129, 275
amygdala and, 85, 89, 388, 395, 408–9, 416, 418
beauty in, and confusion with goodness, 88, 443
disgust and, 411
dominant, 432, 433
eyes, social impact of, 89, 97, 623
fear and, 85, 395, 411
fusiform response to, 80, 85–86, 88, 114, 122n, 388, 402
gender of, 88
infants and, 391–92
race of, 85–87, 89, 391–92, 398, 408–9, 418–19, 614, 628–29
testosterone and, 102, 104
voting and, 442–44
FADS2 gene, 246
Fail-Safe (Burdick and Wheeler), 349n–50n
Fairbanks, Lynn, 337
fairness and justice, 323–24, 449, 450
children’s sense of, 181, 483–84
see also morality and moral decisions
Farah, Martha, 195
fascism, 202, 308, 401
fear:
aggression and, 44
amygdala and, 34, 36–40, 42, 44, 85, 87–90, 97, 129
faces and, 85, 395, 411
innate vs. learned, 36
pheromones and, 90
sustained stress and, 128–30
Fehr, Ernst, 55, 106, 517
Felt, W. Mark, 652
Ferguson, R. Brian, 308, 309
fetus, 210–11
conflict with mother, 358–59
prenatal environment and, 7, 210–21
hormones in, 211–19
fight or flight response, 26, 125, 133–34, 149n
finches, 379
firing squads, 471–72
Fischer, David Hackett, 288
fish, tit for tat behavior in, 351–52
Fiske, Richard, 654–55, 655, 660, 668, 670
Fiske, Susan, 408, 411, 421, 522, 533, 628–29
5HTT gene, 246, 251, 260, 261
fission-fusion species, 51, 429–30
flags, symbolic power of, 391, 554
Floyd, Pretty Boy, 184
Flynn effect, 617
Forbes, Chad, 89
forgiveness, 15, 18, 395, 638, 640–42
truth and reconciliation commissions (TRC), 638–39, 642
fossils, 329, 330, 375, 376
founder populations, 353–54, 633
foxes, domestication of Siberian silver, 377–78, 378

815

Francis, Darlene, 220
Frank, Laurence, 120
Franklin, Rosalind, 714
free will, 583n, 585, 586, 591, 598, 605, 607–9, 612–13
brain damage and, 590–91, 597, 598, 601–2, 609
and causation vs. compulsion, 593
Libet experiment and, 594
mitigated, 586–90, 592, 593, 595–98, 605
homunculus concept of, 588–89, 595–97, 600, 602, 607, 608
and starting a behavior vs. halting it, 594–95
Freud, Sigmund, 188–90, 222
Friedman, Thomas, 620
frontal cortex, 18, 19, 30, 38, 42, 45–64, 88, 91–92, 100, 132–34, 143, 144, 557, 607, 614
childhood adversity and, 195, 196
cognition and, 47–50, 159
damage to, 53, 590–91, 609
and doing the harder thing when it’s the correct thing to do, 45, 47–48, 50, 51, 55, 56, 63, 64, 74, 75, 92, 130, 134, 513,
515, 614
genes and, 173
insular cortex (insula), 41–42, 46, 59, 69, 398–99, 454, 531, 560–61, 10
limbic system and, 58–64
maturation in adolescence, 154–60, 171–73, 589–90, 592–93
subregions of, 46–47
Us/Them dichotomies and, 416–17
see also prefrontal cortex
frontal lobotomies (aka leukotomies), 9
Fry, Douglas, 313, 314, 322–23, 322
fusiform face area, 80, 85–86, 88, 114, 122n, 388, 402
GABA, 119, 692
Gabrieli, John, 86
Gaddafi, Muammar, 653
Gage, Fred “Rusty,” 148
Gage, Phineas, 51–53, 52
Gallese, Vittorio, 535, 539, 540
galvanic skin resistance (GSR), 453
gambling, 73
game theory, see economic games and game theory
Gandhi, Mahatma, 652
Gauthier, Isabel, 80
Gazzaniga, Michael, 591
Geertz, Clifford, 271
gender:
differences, see sex differences
of a face, 88
grammatical, 558n
generosity, punishment for, 292n, 496
genes, 7–8, 10, 21, 108, 173, 223–65, 614
behavior and, 224, 233–49
“Big Five” personality traits and, 236
and difference between traits being inherited and having a high degree of heritability, 242–43
and fragile nature of heritability estimates, 241–45
gene/environment interactions and, 245–48
indirect routes in, 237
molecular genetics and, 249–50
papers published on, 605
suspicion of links in, 224
twin and adoption studies and, 234–41
violence, 224
candidate, study of, 250
chance and, 232–33
chromosomes, 223
and collectivist vs. individualistic populations, 277
and distortions of genetics, 224
DNA in, 108, 147, 223, 225–33, 261–62
as blueprint for constructing proteins, 712–14
mutations and polymorphisms and, 714–17
noncoding, 226
dopamine system and, 255–58, 264, 279–81, 280
DRD4, 256, 258, 260, 261, 279
7R variant, 256, 279–81

816

environment and, 225–29, 245–48
epigenetics, 220–21, 229–30
papers published on, 605
essentialism and, 224–25
evolution and, 328–29, 373–74
exons and introns, 230–31
FADS2, 246
“fishing expeditions” in study of, 261–63
5HTT, 246, 251, 260, 261
frontal cortex and, 173
oxytocin and vasopressin and, 227, 258–59
political orientation and, 455
reductionist view and, 224
RNA in, 225, 226, 230, 233, 713–14
“selfish,” 333, 342, 361, 367
serotonin and, 227, 246, 250–55, 264
steroid hormones and, 259–61
estrogen, 260
testosterone, 227, 259–60
transcription factor (TF) and, 226–29, 233
transposable elements in, 231–32
“warrior,” 77, 253–54
Genghis Khan, 367
genome, 223
genomewide association studies (GWAS), 261–64
genomics, 224
Genovese, Kitty, 94
Gettysburg, Battle of, 554, 644
Giuliani, Rudy, 95, 395–96
Gladwell, Malcolm, 152
glia cells, 680
global warming, 303
Glowacki, Luke, 314
glucocorticoids, 125–27, 129, 130, 132, 143, 144, 149n, 193, 275
early-life stressors and, 194–96
genes and, 260
prenatal, 219–20
rank and, 436–38, 438, 440
glutamate, 139–41, 143, 692
Gobodo-Madikizela, Pumla, 629–30
Golden Balls, 345n
Golden Rule, 494, 520
Golgi, Camillo, 688
Goodall, Jane, 269–71, 358n
Gopnik, Adam, 79
Gore, Al, 403
gorillas, mountain, 335–36
gossip, 324, 433, 503
Gould, Elizabeth, 148
Gould, Stephen Jay, 84, 362, 374–75, 380–85
Goy, Robert, 212–15
Graham v. Florida, 589
Grant, Peter and Rosemary, 379
graven images, 553
Grayling, Anthony, 541
Greely, Hank, 598n
Green Bay Packers, 405
green-beard effect, 341–42, 353, 390, 409, 633, 637
Greene, Joshua, 58, 450, 488–90, 505–9, 511, 518–19, 533, 575, 586, 609
Gross, James, 60
Grossman, David, 644–47, 660
guilt, 471–72, 502
Guilt: The Bite of Conscience (Katchadourian), 502
Gulag Archipelago, The (Solzhenitsyn), 465
Gulf War, 632
Guthrie, Woody, 184
Habituation to reward, 67–70
Habyarimana, Juvénal, 571
Hadza, 317–19, 318, 498, 620
Haidt, Jonathan, 400, 449, 450, 481, 483, 488, 494, 509, 562

817

Haig, David, 359
Haig, Douglas, 395
haka ritual, 17n
Haldane, J. B. S., 336
Hamad, Ghazi, 575
Hamilton, W.D. (Bill), 333, 341–42, 344, 348, 634
Hamlin, Kiley, 484
Hancock, Winfield Scott, 409n
Harlow, Harry, 190–91, 205, 222
Harmless People, The (Thomas), 319
Harris, Judith Rich, 203–4
Harris, Sam, 513n, 583n
Hartley, L. P., 616
Haslam, Alex, 467–68
health:
disease, 302, 423
personality and, 439
status and, 293–95, 439, 441–42
Hebb, Donald, 138, 147, 248
Henrich, Joseph, 496–97, 623
Heraclitus, 624
Heston, Charlton, 387
Hickok, Gregory, 538–40
hierarchy(ies), 425–44, 475–76, 478, 491
leadership and, 425–26, 436, 442
nature and variety of, 426–30
pecking order, 427
rank, in humans, 430–44
body and, 435–39
brain and, 434, 475
detecting, 432–34
internal standards and, 432
leaders and, 442–44, 476
membership in multiple hierarchies, 431
specialization of, 431
ranking systems, 425–30
Us/Them categorization and, 421–22, 425
Hines, Melissa, 216
Hinkley, John, Jr., 587
hippocampus, 38n, 42, 45, 60, 78, 141–44, 148–53, 436
childhood adversity and, 195, 196
neurons in, 704
Hitler, Adolf, 1–2, 202, 664
Hoa, Do, 658
Hobbes, Thomas, 305, 309, 317, 321, 325, 616
Ho Chi Minh, 415
Hoffman, Abbie, 396n
Hoffman, Julius, 396n
Hoffman, Morris, 609
Hofling hospital experiment, 464n
Holland, John, 350
Holt, Luther, 188
homeostasis, 125, 126
homunculus, in free will, 588–89, 595–97, 600, 602, 607, 608
homosexuality, 236
honor, 501
cultures of, 207, 283, 284, 501
American South, 207, 284–88, 501
honor killings in, 288–91, 290
hormones, 6–8, 11, 15, 21, 27, 99–136, 223
ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone), 125, 708–9
and aggression in females, 117–24, 135–36
perimenstrual, 121–24
CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone), 125, 129, 132, 708–9
endocrinology basics, 707–10
estrogen, 117, 118, 144, 158
genes and, 260
prenatal, 211–13
neurotransmitters and, 707–10
oxytocin, see oxytocin and vasopressin
in prenatal environment, 211–19

818

progesterone, 117–19, 124, 158, 211, 708
receptors of, 709–10
stress and, 17, 36–37, 124–34, 708
testosterone, see testosterone
vasopressin, see oxytocin and vasopressin
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer, 119, 121, 334, 384
Hubbard, Ruth, 384
Hughes, Robert, 556–57
Huizinga, Johan, 204
Human Being Died That Night, A (Gobodo-Madikizela), 629–30
Human Rights Caucus, 632
Hume, David, 56
hunger, 301
economic decisions and, 92, 449, 566
judicial decisions and, 448, 449, 566, 583, 643
Hunter, Kim, 387
hunter-gatherer societies, 291, 315–25, 318, 372–73, 407, 499, 616–17, 620
gods in, 297, 623
Hadza, 317–19, 318, 498, 620
!Kung, 319, 320, 324, 373n
Mbuti, 317, 318, 373n
violence in, 319–25, 322
hunting, 323–24
Huntington’s disease, 53
Hussein, King, 576–77, 670
Hutu and Tutsi tribes, 372, 469, 570–73
hyenas, sex reversal system in, 120
Iacoboni, Marco, 539, 540
Ibn Saud, 367
Ibrahim, Meriam, 397
icons, 553
imitation, see mimicry
immigration, 277, 562
Implicit Association Test (IAT), 116, 388, 389, 416, 582
imp of the perverse, 62
impulse control, 77, 103, 142, 592–93
inbreeding, 339
India, Sepoy Mutiny in, 391n
indigenous and prehistoric cultures, 305–26, 307, 310, 318, 320, 322
individualistic cultures, 97, 156, 206–7, 273–82, 474, 501–3
Indonesia and the New Order, 13
infants:
competitive infanticide, 334–36, 354, 367, 383
faces and, 391–92
moral reasoning in, 483–84
mother-infant bond, 189–90
status differences recognized by, 432–33
stress in newborns, 193
influence, social, 274–75
Innocence Project, 581
Insanity Defense Reform Act, 587
insects, eusocial, 333
Insel, Thomas, 110
insular cortex (insula), 41–42, 46, 59, 69, 398–99, 454, 531, 560–61, 10
insulin resistance, 359
integrative complexity, 447
intelligence:
IQ, 157, 215, 246, 249, 582, 617
political orientation and, 446–47
interoceptive information, 90–92, 528, 529, 566
Iran, 415
Iraq, 632–33
Irgun, 16n
Irish Republican Army (IRA), 468, 555, 577
irrationalities, recognizing, 642–44
Islam, Muslims, 372, 396n, 553–54, 624, 626
isomorphic sensorimotor response, 86, 395, 522
Israel, 16n, 575–77, 640
Jordan and, 576
kibbutz system in, 371

819

Palestine and, 575
Is Shame Necessary? (Jacquet), 502

820

Jackson, Andrew, 285
Jacquet, Jennifer, 502, 503
James, LeBron, 397
James, William, 56, 90–91
James-Lange theory, 90–91
Jamison, Leslie, 542–43, 546
Japan, Japanese, 413
in World War II, 413, 640, 653–55, 668, 669
Jews, 372, 396, 464
in Holocaust, 572, 574, 576n
Jindal, Bobby, 397
Johnson, Mark, 558
Jones, Steve, 362n
Jost, John, 400, 450
justice, sense of, see fairness and justice
justice system, see criminal justice system
Jyllands-Posten, 553–54
Kagame, Paul, 572n
Kahneman, Daniel, 93, 512n, 643
Kamin, Leon, 240, 384
Kant, Immanuel, 481
Kaplan, George, 294, 295
Kaplan, Michael, 147–48, 295
karaoke and “My Way” killings, 555
Kass, Leon, 454
Katchadourian, Herant, 502
Kaufman, Irving, 396
Kawachi, Ichiro, 294
Keeley, Lawrence, 306–11, 313, 315, 317, 321, 325
Keizer, Kees, 96
Kelling, George, 95
Keltner, Dacher, 533–34
Kendler, Kenneth, 238, 239
Kennedy, Anthony, 171
Kennedy, John F., 403
Kenya, 191, 208n, 283n, 370n
Mau Mau rebellion in, 630
Kerry, John, 443
Kidd, Kenneth, 280–81
Kiehl, Kent, 54
Kikuyu, 630
Kimberly-Clark and corporate shaming, 503
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 652
King, Mary-Claire, 228
King David Hotel, 16n
Kipling, Rudyard, 381
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 271
Klüver, Heinrich, 24
Klüver-Bucy syndrome, 24–25
Knutson, Brian, 70, 75, 275
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 182, 184–85, 449, 479, 488, 519
Koreans, 115, 259, 275
Korean War, 647
Kramer, Heinrich, 606–7
Kreipe, Heinrich, 410
Kroeber, Alfred, 271
!Kung, 319, 320, 324, 373n
Kusserow, Adrie, 208
Kuwait, 632–33
lactase persistence, 379
Lakoff, George, 558
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 221n, 230, 332
Lange, Carl, 90–91
language, 175, 557
grammatical gender in, 558n
metaphors, 557–58
see also metaphorical and symbolic thinking
moral context and, 491

821

unconscious effects of, 92–93
Lantos, Tom, 633
Lavater, Johann, 515n
L-DOPA as dopamine precursor, 693
leaders, 425–26, 436, 442
choosing, 442–44, 476
lead exposure, 196n
learning, 139, 141, 523
observational, 523–24, 537, 538
pattern separation, 149
social, conformity in, 456–57
LeDoux, Joseph, 36, 37, 38n, 41n
Lee, John, 554
Lee, Robert E., 284–85
legal system, see criminal justice system
Leigh Fermor, Patrick, 410
Lenski, Richard, 380
Leukotomies (aka lobotomies), 9
Levitt, Steven, 190
Lewontin, Richard, 381–82
Libet, Benjamin, 594
lie detectors, 516–17
limbic system, 24–30, 65, 84
frontal cortex and, 58–64
hypothalamus, 25–28, 100, 708
interface between cortex and, 28–29
Lincoln, Abraham, 652
lions, 352
Lipton, Judith, 382
Little Rock Central High School, 640
Liulevicius, Vejas, 369
liver, 703, 703
Lobello, Lu, 639–40
lobotomies, 9 (aka leukotomies)
locus coeruleus, 43
Lømo, Terje, 140
London taxi drivers and hippocampal expansion, 151
Lorenz, Konrad, 10, 83n, 316, 470
love, 15, 19, 44
loyalty, 395, 449, 450, 451, 456
lying, 63–64, 512–17, 557, 564, 568
Lying (Harris), 513n
Maasai, 208n, 284, 310, 310, 319n, 324n, 630
Macbeth effect, 564–65
Maccoby, Eleanor, 203
MacFarquhar, Larissa, 18
MacLean, Paul, 22–24
Madoff, Bernie, 403
Mafia, 284, 395–96
Magritte, René, 556–57, 556
Maimonides, Moses, 548
Malleus Maleficarum (Kramer and Sprenger), 606–7
malnutrition, 187, 200, 219, 239
Mandela, Nelson, 468, 578–79, 652, 670
mandrills, 355, 357
MAO-A (monoamine oxidase-A), 251–55, 257, 264, 605
Maori, 253n
Marcus, Gary, 541
market integration and economic game play, 498, 499
marshmallow test and impulse control in children, 185–87
Martin, John, 203
Maslach, Christina, 463
Massery, Hazel Bryan, 640
maternal behaviors, 109, 115–16
aggression, 118–19, 121
math skills, 266–67, 267, 406
Mau Mau rebellion, 630
Mayr, Ernst, 354n, 362
Maze Prison, 468, 555
Mazrui, Ali, 302

822

Mbuti, 317, 318, 373n
McCarthy, Joseph, 451n
McClintock, Barbara, 231
McDonald’s, 620
McGaugh, James, 38n
McGuinness, Martin, 577
Mead, Margaret, 122
Meaney, Michael, 195, 220–22
Medina, Ernest, 657
meditation, 19, 544, 545
Meinhof, Ulrike, 32–33
Méliès, Georges, 398
Melzack, Ronald, 699
memory, 38n, 138–42, 147, 150
spatial maps and the hippocampus, 151
menstrual cycle, 144n
ovulation, 88, 122n, 402
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), 121–22
premenstrual syndrome (PMS), 121–24
meritocratic thinking, 167
metaphorical and symbolic thinking, 553–79
dark side of, 570–74
pseudospeciation, 372, 570, 572–73, 574, 632–33
real vs. metaphorical sensation, 565–68
sacred values in conflict resolution, 575–79, 643–44
Metaphors We Live By (Lakoff and Johnson), 558
MHC (major histocompatibility complex) and individual recognition, 340–41, 370
mice, 35, 110–12, 133, 134, 247, 250, 524–25, 555–56
Middle East conflict, 575–77
Milgram, Stanley, 461–62, 464–66, 468, 469, 470, 471, 473, 474
Milk, Harvey, 92n
Miller v. Alabama, 171, 589
mimicry, 390
empathic, 102, 522–24
mirror neurons and, see mirror neurons
minimal group paradigm, 389–91
Minsky, Marvin, 603, 605
mirror neurons and supposed functions, 166n, 180n, 536–41
autism and, 539–40
empathy and, 540–41
social interactions and, 538–39
Mischel, Walter, 186–87
Mitchell, David, 657
M’Naghten, Daniel, 586–87, 598
Mogil, Jeffrey, 133, 524, 544
mole rats, 120, 352
Moniz, Egas, 9
Money, John, 215
monkeys, 4, 35, 36, 47, 48, 50–51, 55, 67, 68, 70, 71, 73–74, 82, 104, 109–10, 123, 148, 172, 221, 429, 535, 557
baboons, 17, 123, 131–32, 162, 172, 191–92, 196, 207, 295, 303, 337, 338, 429, 648–52, 648, 650
“Garbage Dump” troop of, 648–50, 649
hierarchies and, 426–27, 427, 428, 436–39, 442, 455
deception in, 513
“executive,” stress in, 436
Harlow’s experiments with, 189–90, 190, 192
kinship understanding in, 337–38
langurs and competitive infanticide, 334–35
moral judgments in, 484–85, 487
sex differences in behaviors of, 213–14, 214
social rank and, 433, 434
tamarins, 110, 213, 355, 357
monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A), 251–55, 257, 264, 605
monogamy, 339, 366
morality and moral decisions, 478–520
in animals, 484–87
applying science of, 504–20
automaticity and, 50
in children, 181–85
reasoning in, 182–83
competition and, 495–500
consequentialism and, 504–7, 520

823

context in, 488–503
cultural, 275, 493–503
framing, 491–92
language, 491
proximity, 491
special circumstances, 492–93
cooperation and, 495–500, 508–9
cultural differences and, 275
deontology and, 504, 505, 520
disgust and, 398, 454, 561–65
doing the harder thing when it’s the correct thing to do, 45, 47–48, 50, 51, 55, 56, 63, 64, 74, 75, 92, 130, 134, 513, 515,
614
dumbfounding in, 483
honesty and duplicity and, 512–20
in infants, 483–84
internal motives and external actions in, 493
intuition in, 478, 479, 481–83, 507–8
“me vs. us” and “us vs. them” in, 508–12
obedience and, 471, 473
see also obedience and conformity
political orientation and, 449–50
punishment and, see punishment
reasoning in, 169, 478–81, 487–88, 507–8, 542
in adolescents, 167–69
in children, 182–83
in infants, 483–84
runaway trolley problem (killing one person to save five) and, 55, 56, 58–59, 117, 482, 488–91, 505–7
self-driving cars and, 612n
saving person vs. dog, 368, 371
and sins of commission vs. omission, 490
and tragedy of the commons vs. tragedy of commonsense morality, 508–11, 533
universals of, 494–95
utilitarianism and, 505–7
virtue ethics and, 504, 520
Moral Life of Children, The (Coles), 181n
Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism, and Shame (Boehm), 323
Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think (Lakoff), 558
Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason, and the Gap Between Us and Them (Greene), 508–9
Mormons, 367
Morozov, Pavlik, 368–69, 487
Morse, Stephen, 598–600
Moscone, George, 92n
Mother Teresa, 535
motivation, “you must be so smart” vs. “you must have worked so hard” and, 595–96, 598
Mubarak, Hosni, 653
Muhammad, controversies surrounding cartoon images of, 553–54
multifactorial nature of behavior, 602–3
Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy, 18n–19n
Muslims, Islam, 372, 396n, 553–54, 624, 626
Mutual of Omaha’s Wild Kingdom, 332
Myth of Mirror Neurons, The (Hickok), 540
My Lai Massacre, 464, 655–58, 657, 658
“My Way” killings in the Philippines, 555
Naipaul, V. S., 13
Napoleon, 624
Native Americans, 619, 657
natural abilities, 596
“you must be so smart” vs. “you must have worked so hard” and, 595–96, 598
Nature, 262, 352n, 485, 491, 526
Nature Neuroscience, 220
Nauta, Walle, 28–29, 54
Navarrete, Carlos, 402, 408
Nayirah testimony concerning supposed atrocities during the Gulf War, 632–33
Nazis, 10, 403, 414, 465, 469, 470, 506
Eichmann, 464, 475
Hitler, 1–2
Holocaust, 572, 574, 576n
Nelson, Charles, 201
autonomic, 22, 26–27
parasympathetic, 27

824

sympathetic, 26–27, 37, 43, 60–62
remapping of, 144–46
Netanyahu, Benjamin, 575
neurobiology and neuroscience (see brain)
neurons, 11, 37–38, 175, 680–87, 681, 686, 704
action potentials of, 683–87
axons of, 681–82, 681
myelin sheath around, 157–59, 175, 705, 705
plasticity of, 144–46
BLA (basolateral amygdala), 37–39, 143
circuits of, 680, 694–706, 700
neuromodulation in, 694–95, 695
and sharpening a signal over time and space, 695–98, 696, 697
dendrites of, 681–82, 681
glia cells and, 680
mirror, supposed functions of 166n, 180n, 536–41
autism and, 539–40
empathy and, 540–41
social interactions and, 538–39
neurogenesis, 147–50, 152, 341
pain types and, 698–99, 698
plasticity of, 137–53, 172, 188, 223
axonal, 144–46
resting potential of, 682–83
reuse of, 569
synapses and, 138–43, 145, 146, 175, 687–94
LTD (long-term depression) and LTP (long-term potentiation), 140–42
von Economo (aka spindle neurons), 46, 569
neuropeptides, 108
neuropharmacology, 693–94
neurotransmitters, 27, 31, 37, 139, 223, 689–91, 690, 707–8
acetylcholine, 27, 692, 694
dopamine, see dopamine
GABA, 119, 692
glutamate, 139–41, 143, 692
hormones and, 707–10
norepinephrine, 27, 43, 253, 692
serotonin, see serotonin
substance P, 560
types of, 691–93
New Guinea, 310, 310
Newton, John, 659–61, 661, 670
New Yorker, 18, 79, 148n, 639
New York Times, 151, 541, 555
Nichols, Shaun, 600
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 404
Nigeria, 413, 631–32
Nike, 503
9/11 attacks, 619
Nisbett, Richard, 275, 284, 285, 286, 287
Nixon, Richard, 624n
NMDA glutamate receptors, 139–40
Nobel Prize, 9, 10, 83n, 231, 643, 688n
Norenzayan, Ara, 297, 623, 625–26
norepinephrine, 27, 43, 253, 692
Nottebohm, Fernando, 148
novelty, 161–62, 168, 450
Nowak, Martin, 350
Ntaryamira, Cyprien, 571n
nucleus accumbens, 64–65, 103
Nurture Assumption, The (Harris), 203–4
Nyangatom, 314
Obama, Barack, 402n–3n
obedience and conformity, 35, 449, 451, 455–75, 477
in animals, 456–58
brain and, 459–61
modulators of, 469–75
alternative actions, 474–75
nature of authority, 470
nature of victim, 473

825

qualities of person being pressured, 473–74
stress, 474
what is being required and in what context, 470–73
roots of, 456–59
studies on, 461–69
by Asch, 461, 464, 470, 474
BBC Prison Study 467–68
Hofling hospital experiment, 464n
Milgram’s shock experiment, 461–62, 464–66, 468, 469, 470, 471, 473, 474
Zimbardo’s Stanford Prison Experiment (SPE), 461, 463–68, 475
object permanence, 176
Ochsner, Kevin, 529
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 590, 592
olfaction, see smell
olfactory bulb, 24
On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society (Grossman), 644–47
operant conditioning, 37n, 82
optimism, 102–3, 643
organ donation to strangers, 18
Organization of Behavior, The (Hebb), 138
Otzi, 307, 307
ovulation, 88, 122n, 402
oxytocin and vasopressin, 107–17, 133, 134, 135, 530
ASD (autism spectrum disorder) and, 114
and behavior to out-groups, 116–17, 135, 389, 614
contingent effects of, 115
dark side of, 115–17
genes and, 227, 258–59
papers published on, 603, 604
prosociality vs. sociality and, 113–14, 116, 117
Pääbo, Svante, 365
pain, 559–60
aggression and, 91
amygdala and, 41
empathy and, 86, 133, 169, 180, 395, 522, 523, 527, 532, 533, 540, 545–47, 550–52, 560, 568
two types of, 698–99, 698
pair bonding, 109–12, 337
tournament species vs., 354–58, 360, 383
Paisley, Ian, 577n–78n
Palestinians, 575
Panglossian paradigm, 383
Papez, James, 24
parasites, 232n
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 27
parents, parenting, 202–9
attachment, 189n
authoritarian, 203
authoritative, 203
communal child rearing and, 371
conflict with offspring, 358–59
mother-infant bond, 189–90
mothers, 109, 115–16, 188–94
breastfeeding, 189n
permissive, 203
Parkes, A. S., 298
Parkinson’s disease, 693
Parks, Rosa, 652
Pascual-Leone, Alvaro, 146
pastoralism, 282–83, 288, 379
religion and, 283, 304
pattern separation, 149
Pavlovian conditioning, 37n
Paxton, Joseph, 518–19
peace:
peaceology, 647
see also war and peace
Pearl Harbor, 653–55
pedophilia, 597, 598
Peel, Robert, 586–87
peers, 164–67, 204

826

periaqueductal gray (PAG), 41, 42, 59, 527
Perkins, Marlin, 332, 426, 427
Perry, Gina, 466
personality traits, 439
compliance and, 473–74
genes and, 236
repressive, 63n
perspective taking, 419, 522, 523, 617
Peterson, Dale, 316
Phelps, Elizabeth, 67, 85
phenylketonuria, 246
pheromones, 84, 90, 340
phobias and amygdala, 36
Piaget, Jean, 176–78, 181, 479
Pinker, Steven, 306–9, 311–15, 319, 321, 541, 616–20
pituitary gland, 99, 108, 125, 621, 708–9
Planet of the Apes, 387, 388
Plants and transposable genetic elements, 232
play, 204–5
playback experiments, 338, 352, 428
Plomin, Robert, 239
PMC (premotor cortex), 47, 166–68, 535–36, 540
PMDD (premenstrual dysphoric disorder), 121–22
PMS (premenstrual syndrome), 121–24
Poe, Edgar Allan, 62
political orientations, 88, 90, 444–55, 476–77
biology and, 452–55
genetic influences on, 455
genetics as viewed via, 224n, 237n
implicit factors underlying, 446–52
affective psychological differences, 450–52
intellectual style, 447–49
intelligence, 446–47
moral cognition, 449–50
internal consistency of, 445–46
right-wing authoritarianism (RWA), 422, 446–47, 450, 451
polygamy, 339, 366
polygraph tests, 516–17
populations:
density of, 297–99
heterogeneity of, 299–301
size of, 296–97
Porter, John, 632–33
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 34, 78, 150, 152, 153, 195, 645, 646, 656n
poverty, 195–96, 249, 294, 295, 441, 576, 614
prairie voles, 110–11, 113n, 116, 229, 525–26, 530
Predictably Irrational (Ariely), 491
prefrontal cortex (PFC), 46–51, 54–61, 63, 65, 72, 74, 75, 79, 85, 88, 103, 129, 130, 157, 168, 416, 433, 434, 460, 535, 545
empathy and, 527, 531
moral decision making and, 479–82, 487–89, 492, 505–7, 513, 515–19
punishment and, 609–10
prehistoric and indigenous cultures, 305–26, 307, 310, 318, 320, 322
prejudice:
racial, 89, 392, 416
see also Us/Them dichotomies
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), 121–22
premenstrual syndrome (PMS), 121–24
premotor cortex (PMC), 47, 166–68, 535–36, 540
Price, Tavin, 555
Prinz, Jesse, 546
prisoners, 464, 468
IRA, 468, 555
judicial decisions on, 448, 449, 566, 583, 643
Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD), 92, 116, 345–46, 372, 393, 557, 633, 634
prison experiments:
BBC, 467–68
Stanford, 461, 463–68
progesterone, 117–19, 124, 158, 211, 708
prostate gland, 329
proteins, 709, 711–17
amino acids in, 712

827

DNA as blueprint for, 712–14
shape of, 711–12
Provance, Samuel, 652
Prozac, 694
psilocybin, 693
psychopaths, 44, 54, 97
PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder), 34, 78, 150, 152, 153, 195, 645, 646, 656n
puberty, 158–59
see also adolescence
Punisher’s Brain, The: The Evolution of Judge and Jury (Hoffman), 609
punishment, 2, 38, 39, 56, 57, 62, 66, 182–83, 297, 484, 609–11, 635–37
antisocial, 272, 292–93, 496, 497
free-riding, 496, 497
third-party, 297, 636
purity, hygiene, and moral judgment, 563–65
quantum mechanics, 583n
Rabin, Yitzhak, 576–77, 670
race, 406–8, 425
faces and, 85–87, 89, 391–92, 398, 408–9, 418–19, 614, 628–29
stereotypes and racism, 89, 392, 416
Raine, Adrian, 54
Rakic, Pasko, 147–50
Ramachandran, Vilayanur, 541, 594–95
Ramón y Cajal, Santiago, 681, 684, 688
Ramses II, 366–67
Rand, David, 511
Rapoport, Anatol, 346
rats, 37, 71, 82, 103, 127, 142, 146, 148, 151, 193, 205
population density and, 298
ravens, 428
Rayburn, Sam, 515n
Reagan, Ronald, 587
reappraisal strategies, 60–61, 160, 453
reasoning, 617
moral, 169, 478–81, 487–88, 507–8, 542
in adolescents, 167–69
in children, 182–83
in infants, 483–84
see also morality and moral decisions
see also cognition
reciprocal altruism, 324, 342–54, 372–73, 499, 547
indirect, 324
in single-cell amoeba, 344n
red blood cells, 680, 680, 681
reciprocity, 15, 523
reconciliation, 3, 15, 18, 525, 614, 637–42, 670
truth and reconciliation commissions (TRC), 638–39, 642
Red Queen scenario, 344
Reicher, Stephen, 467–68
religion, 88, 304–5, 547, 553, 617, 621–26
aggression and, 624–26, 625
atheism and, 626
Bible in, 11, 624–25, 625, 660
commonalities in, 621–22
and fairness and punishment, 498–99
in hunter-gatherer societies, 297, 623
Islam, 372, 396n, 553–54, 624, 626
pastoralism and, 283, 304
Theory of Mind and, 622
violence and, 624
Religion, Brain and Behavior, 622
Reparations for slavery, 638, 640
repressive personalities, 63n
reputation, 95, 106, 393, 548, 634, 635
revenge, 15, 501
reward, 39–40, 65–70, 548
adolescence and, 162–64, í163
anticipation of, 70–73, 70, 72
arbitrary markers and, 391

828

pursuit of, 73–76, 75
Ricard, Matthieu, 544–45
rice farming and culture, 278–79, 278, 281
rights revolution, 617
right-wing authoritarianism (RWA), 422, 446–47, 450, 451
risk taking, 103, 131 (see also dopamine, and DRD4)
in adolescence, 160–64
Rivers, Mendel, 658n
Rizzolatti, Giacomo, 535, 538–39
RNA, 225, 226, 230, 233, 713–14
Robinson, Peter, 577
Roof, Dylann, 641
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 640
Roper v. Simmons, 170–71, 589, 590, 592
Rosenberg, Julius and Ethel, 396
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 305, 309, 325, 616
Rozin, Paul, 399, 562
Rudolph, Wilma, 596
runaway trolley problem (killing one person to save five), 55, 56, 58–59, 117, 482, 488–91, 505–7
self-driving cars and, 612n
Russell, Jeffrey, 606
Rwanda, 570
genocide in, 571–72, 573, 619
Hutu and Tutsi tribes in, 372, 469, 570–73
Sabah, Nayirah al-, and supposed atrocities during the Gulf War, 632–33
sacred values, in conflict resolution, 575–79, 643–44
Sahlins, Marshall, 318
Saleh, Ali Abdullah, 653
Samoans, 122
Sandusky, Jerry, 597
Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre, 561
San Francisco earthquake (1989), 301
Santayana, George, 669–70
Saud, King, 367
Saypol, Irving, 396
Scalia, Antonin, 590
scapegoating, 531
schadenfreude, 15, 413
Schiller, Friedrich, 443
schizophrenia, 234, 235, 239, 582, 586, 593, 607
Schultz, Wolfram, 68, 71
Science, 133, 246–47, 251, 266, 278, 300n, 313, 322, 495, 524, 546, 549, 574–75, 636
Scientific American, 298
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 694
self-confidence, 102–3, 237
Semai, 313, 502n
Semang, 317, 318
sensorimotor contagion, 86, 395, 522
sensory stimuli, 6–7, 15, 81–98
amygdala and, 40–41
in animals, 83–84
auditory, 6, 83–84, 89
cultural differences in processing, 276
haptic (touch), 565–66
hormones and, see hormones
interoceptive information, 90–92, 528, 529, 566
real vs. metaphorical sensation, 565–68
and sensitivity of sensory organs, 96–97
subliminal and unconscious, 84–90, 93–96
language, 92–93
temperature, 566
visual, 6, 84
Sepoy Mutiny, 391n
September 11 attacks, 619
Seromba, Athanase, 572
serotonin, 134, 692
aggression and, 76–77, 250–55
genes and, 227, 246, 250–55, 264
psilocybin and, 693
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 694

829

SES, see socioeconomic status
sex, 11, 39, 43, 65–66, 95
oxytocin and, 110
sex differences, 266
cultural, 272
dimorphic, 366
and hormones in prenatal environment, 211–19
math skills and, 266–67, 267, 406
obedience and, 474
in monkey behaviors, 213–14, 214
transgender individuals and, 215n
sexual selection, 330–31
Seyfarth, Robert, 337–38
shame, 502–3
Shariff, Azim, 623
Shepher, Joseph, 371
Sherman, Marshall, 554
Shermer, Michael, 495
Shweder, Richard, 271, 494
Sigmund, Karl, 350
Silkwood, Karen, 652
Simpson, O. J., 396, 408n
Simpson, Varnado, 656n
Singer, Peter, 481, 491
Singer, Tania, 544
Skinner, B. F., 82, 190
Skitka, Linda, 447–48
slaves, slavery, 278n, 399, 508, 615–16, 619, 640
on British ship, 661
Newton and, 659–61
Small, Meredith, 202
smell, 6, 24–25, 84, 89–90
kinship and, 340–41
Snowden, Edward, 652
SNS (sympathetic nervous system), 26–27, 37, 43, 60–62
Sobell, Morton, 396
Sobhuza II, King, 367
social capital, 291–93, 496
social group size, 430
brain size and, 429, 430
fairness and, 498, 499
social identity theory, 459
sociality, 113–14
social sciences, 4
social status, 88
social-dominance orientation (SDO), 422, 440, 450
unstable, 35, 88, 430, 433–34
see also hierarchy; socioeconomic status
sociobiology, 331–33, 374–76, 380–84
socioeconomic status (SES), 195, 207–9, 249, 292–93, 425, 431, 476
air rage and, 295–96
Cinderella effect and, 367
empathy and compassion and, 533–34
health and, 293–95, 441–42
inequality in, 292–94, 421, 431, 450
poverty, 195–96, 249, 294, 295, 441, 476, 614
sociogram, 274
sociopaths, 179, 182–83, 517, 618
Söderberg, Patrik, 322–23, 322
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr, 465
somatic markers, 61–62, 507, 538
Son of Sam murders, 225n, 593n
Sophie’s Choice, 62n
South, American, 181n, 207, 284–88, 501
South Africa, 578–79, 629, 639
spandrels, 381–82, 382
Spanish Civil War, 662
spatial maps, 151
Spence, Melanie, 211
Sprenger, Jakob, 606–7
Stalin, Joseph, 369, 487–88, 535, 618

830

Stanford Prison Experiment (SPE), 461, 463–68
Star Wars, 472, 472
Steele, Claude, 89
Steinberg, Laurence, 164, 166, 592
stress, 115, 423
acute, 125–27, 143
aggression and, 131–32
amygdala and, 62
chronic, 125–27, 143, 151, 197
conformity and obedience and, 474
cultural differences and, 274–75
fight or flight response in, 26, 125, 133–34, 149n
frontal cortex and, 62
hippocampus and, 78
hormones and, 17, 36–37, 124–34, 708
inverted U concept of, 127–28, 128, 142, 143
in newborns, 193
positive, 127–28
rank and, 435–37
selfishness and, 132
sustained, 136, 143
executive function and judgment and, 13031
fear and, 128–30
pro- and antisociality and, 131–34
stroke, 28, 149n
subliminal and unconscious cuing, 84–90, 93–96
language, 92–93
Suharto, 13
Sullivan, Regina, 192, 193
Suomi, Stephen, 221
Supreme Court, 170–71, 403, 589
Brown v. Board of Education, 415
Roper v. Simmons, 170–71, 589, 590, 592
Suu Kyi, Aung San, 652
symbolism, see metaphorical and symbolic thinking
sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 26–27, 37, 43, 60–62
sympathy, 15, 18, 168, 522, 523, 542
see also empathy
Szyf, Moshe, 221
tactile information, 144–46
Tajfel, Henri, 459n, 389–90, 470
tamarins, 110, 213, 355, 357
Taylor, Shelley, 133
temperament, 439
temperature sensation, 566
temporoparietal juncture (TPJ), 55n, 114, 178, 275, 480, 527, 531, 533, 535
Territorial Imperative, The (Ardrey), 316
terrorism, 624
terror-management theory, 452
Tetlock, Philip, 447
testosterone, 90, 99–107, 151, 158, 432, 444, 708
aggression and violence and, 100–102, 107, 115, 135, 170, 215, 216, 218–20, 259–60
papers published on, 605
challenge hypothesis of, 105–7, 435
contingent effects of, 104–5, 115
in females, 119–21
genes and, 227, 259–60
math skills and, 266
prenatal, 211–20
prosocial and nurturing behaviors and, 106n
social rank and, 435
subtleties of effects of, 102–4
winning and, 102, 103, 105
Theory of Mind (ToM), 114, 177–81, 206, 274, 275, 411n, 429, 430, 433, 475, 480, 515, 527, 531, 533, 617–18
mirror neurons and, 538
religion and, 622
Thinking, Fast and Slow (Kahneman), 512n
Thomas, Elizabeth Marshall, 319
Thompson, Hugh, Jr., 657–58, 658, 660, 661, 670
Thompson-Cannino, Jennifer, 641–42

831

threat perception, 451–52, 561–62
Tierney, Patrick, 312n
Tinbergen, Niko, 83n
Tit for Tat, 346–53, 363, 634, 666
Contrite, 350
Forgiving, 350, 351
Tomasello, Michael, 486
tool use, 269, 270, 523
tournament species, pair bonding vs., 354–58, 360, 383
Toxoplasma gondii, 151, 219
trade, 620–21
tragedy of the commons vs. tragedy of commonsense morality, 508–11, 533
transcription factor (TF), 226–29, 233
transgender individuals, 215n
Treachery of Images, The (Magritte), 556–57, 556
Trench Warfare: 1914–1918 (Ashworth), 665, 666
Trip to the Moon, A, 398
Trivers, Robert, 344, 384
trolley problem (killing one person to save five), 55, 56, 58–59, 117, 482, 488–91, 505–7
self-driving cars and, 612n
trust, 112–13, 116, 292, 496
chimpanzees and, 393
truth and reconciliation commissions (TRC), 638–39, 642
tryptophan hydroxylase (TH), 251
Tsai, Jeanne, 275
Tunisia and the Arab Spring, 652–53
Turchin, Peter, 291
Tutsi and Hutu tribes, 372, 469, 570–73
Tutu, Desmond, 639
Tversky, Amos, 93
Twinkie defense, 92n
twins, 336, 717
studies of, 234–41
Tylor, Edward, 269
UCLA, 502–3
Uganda, 414
Ultimatum Game, 38–39, 106, 486, 497, 498, 500, 610, 635
unconscious and subliminal cuing, 84–90, 93–96
language, 92–93
United States:
ethnicity in, 395
individualism in, 277
regionalism in, 288
South in, 181n, 207, 284–88, 501
urban living, 296, 298–99
Us and Them: The Science of Identity (Berreby), 399
Us/Them dichotomies, 387–424, 425, 478, 493, 526
in children, 391–92
conformity and, 470
converts and, 397
and discrepancies between what people claim to believe and how they act, 416–18
disgust and, 398–99
elimination of, 423
empathy and, 532–35
essentialism and, 399, 407, 423
individuation vs., 420–21
frontal cortex and, 416–17
hierarchies and, 421–22, 425
honorable enemy phenomenon and, 414, 415
Implicit Association Test (IAT) and, 116, 388, 389, 416, 582
magical contagion and, 403
manipulation of, 418–22, 469
by changing rank ordering of categories, 419–20
by contact, 420, 626–30
by cuing and priming, 418–19
to decrease implicit biases, 419, 643
essentialism vs. individuation in, 420–21
hierarchies in, 421–22
minimal, arbitrary groupings in, 389–91, 393
oxytocin and, 116–17, 389

832

race and, 406–8
self-hating and, 415
strength of, 388–93
Them in, 398–405
dehumanization and pseudospeciation of, 372, 570, 572–73, 574, 632–33
different feelings about different types of, 410–11
individual vs. group interactions with, 404–5
oxytocin and, 116–17, 135, 614
religion and, 624
thoughts vs. feelings about, 400–404
uniquely human realms of, 405–18
Us in, 393–97
multiple categories of, 405–10, 491
warmth and competence categories in, 410–15, 522
values, sacred, in conflict resolution, 575–79, 643–44
vasopressin, see oxytocin and vasopressin
Vietnam War, 415, 624, 647, 664
My Lai Massacre in, 464, 655–58, 657, 658
Viljoen, Constand and Abraham Viljoen, 578, 670
violence, 2–4, 11, 15
in adolescence, 170–71
in American South, 285–88, 286, 501
context of, 3
in crime waves of 1970s and 1980s, 311
crowding and, 298–99
culture and, 272
decline in, 306, 615–21
fear and, 44
frontal cortex and, 54
genes and, 224
hot-blooded vs. cold-blooded, 18
in hunter-gatherer societies, 319–25, 322
income inequality and, 295
incompetence at and aversion to, 644–47
intrafamily, 369–70
media, 198, 206–7
observing in childhood, 197–98
in prehistoric and indigenous cultures, 306–15
psychopathic, 44
religion and, 624
reproductive success and, 367
serotonin and, 76–77
temperature and, 303
testosterone and, 170
see also aggression
virtue ethics, 504, 520
visual spectrum, 6
visual stimuli, 6, 84
voles, 110–11, 113n, 116, 229, 525–26, 530
Voltaire, 383
Von Frisch, Karl, 83n
Von Neumann, John, 345
voting, 237, 403, 442–44, 451
Wall, Patrick, 699
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 230n
Wallen, Kim, 215
war and peace, 614–70
Civil War, 409, 662
Battle of Gettysburg, 554, 644
collective power and, 662–68
contact and, 420, 626–30
decline in violence, 306, 615–21
fraternizing between enemy soldiers, 662
Golden Arches theory of peace, 620
individuals making a difference, 652–61
religion and, 621–26
trade and, 620–21
Vietnam War, 415, 624, 647, 664
My Lai Massacre in, 464, 655–58, 657, 658

833

World War I, 394–95, 414, 619–21, 662–68, 670
Christmas truce in, 410, 663–65, 663, 667
Live and Let Live truces in, 665–67
propaganda posters in, 667
World War II, 202, 308, 404, 410, 413, 618, 619, 645–47
Japanese in, 413, 640, 653–55, 668, 669
War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage (Keeley), 306
Washington, Booker T., 642
Watergate, 652
Watson, James, 714
Watson, John, 8–9, 82
weaning conflict, 358
weather, 302–3
Wegner, Daniel, 62
Wellesley effect, 11, 90
Wendorf, Fred, 308
Westermarck effect, 371
Weyer, Johann, 584
Wheeler, Mary, 408
White, Dan, 92n
Whiten, Andrew, 458
Whitman, Charles, 33
Who’s in Charge? Free Will and the Science of the Brain (Gazzaniga), 591
Wiesel, Elie, 19
Wiessner, Polly, 324
Wilberforce, William, 659
Wilde, Oscar, 509
Wilkinson, Richard, 294
Williams, George, 333
Williams, Robin, 17n
willpower, 91, 449
Wilson, Allan, 228
Wilson, Margo, 367
Wilson, David Sloan, 364
Wilson, E. O., 364, 383–84
Wilson, James Q., 95
Wingfield, John, 105
winning, 102, 103, 105
witchcraft, 583–84, 606–8
Woodward, James, 506–8
Worchel, Stephen, 628
word definitions, 15–16, 18, 20
World War I, 394–95, 414, 619–21, 662–68, 670
Christmas truce in, 410, 663–65, 663, 667
Live and Let Live truces in, 665–67
propaganda posters in, 667
World War II, 202, 308, 404, 410, 413, 618, 619, 645–47
Japanese in, 413, 640, 653–55, 668, 669
Wrangham, Richard, 314, 316–17
Wyatt-Brown, Bertram, 285
Wynn, Karen, 484
Wynne-Edwards, V. C., 332
Yanomamö, 311–14, 316, 319
Yanomamo: The Fierce People (Chagnon), 312
Young, Larry, 110, 526
zero-sum games, 394–95
Zhong, Chen-Bo, 564
Zimbardo, Philip, 461, 463–68, 475
Zulus, 310, 310

834

Robert M. Sapolsky is the author of several works of nonfiction,
including A Primate’s Memoir, The Trouble with Testosterone, and Why
Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers. He is a professor of biology and neurology at
Stanford University and the recipient of a MacArthur Foundation genius
grant. He lives in San Francisco.

835

* Shortly after making this pronouncement, Watson fled academia amid sexual scandal. He eventually resurfaced as the vice
president of an advertising company. You may not be able to shape people into anything you wish, but at least you can often
shape them into buying some useless gewgaw.

836

* I recently found a startling example of unorthodox defining of terms. This concerned Menachem Begin, one of the
surprising architects of the Camp David Peace Accords in 1978 as the prime minister of Israel. In the mid-1940s he headed
the Irgun, the Zionist paramilitary group intent on driving Britain out of Palestine in order to facilitate the founding of Israel.
The Irgun raised money to buy arms through extortion and robbery, hanged two captive British soldiers and booby-trapped
their bodies, and carried out a series of bombings including, most notoriously, an attack on British headquarters at
Jerusalem’s King David Hotel, an act that killed not only numerous British officials but also scores of Arab and Jewish
civilians. And Begin’s account of these activities? “Historically we were not ‘terrorists.’ We were, strictly speaking, antiterrorists” (my emphasis).

837

* I’ve observed a remarkable example of this among the baboons that I’ve studied in East Africa. Over the thirty-odd years
I’ve watched them, I’ve seen a handful of instances of what I believe warrants the seemingly human-specific term “rape”—
where a male baboon will forcibly vaginally penetrate a female who is not in estrus, who is not sexually receptive, who
struggles to prevent it, and who gives every indication of distress and pain when it happens. And each of these instances has
been the act of the former alpha male in the hours after he has been toppled from his position.

838

* There is a great contemporary version of human ritualistic aggression, namely the haka ritual performed by rugby teams
from New Zealand. Just before the game starts, the Kiwis line up midfield and perform this neo-Maori war dance, complete
with rhythmic stamping, menacing gestures, guttural shouting, and histrionically threatening facial expressions. It’s cool to
see from afar on YouTube (even better is watching the YouTube clip of Robin Williams doing a haka display at Charlie Rose
on PBS), while up close it typically appears to scare the bejesus out of the other team. However, some opposing teams have
come up with ritualistic responses straight out of the baboon playbook—getting in the haka-ers’ faces and trying to stare
them down. Other teams come out with ritualistic responses that are pure human uniqueness—ignoring the haka-ers while
nonchalantly warming up; using their smartphones to film the display, thereby emasculating it to something vaguely touristy
in flavor; tepidly applauding afterward with great condescension. One response initially seems uniquely human but would be
understandable to other primates after some translating—the sports newsletter for one Australian team printed a photo of the
mortal enemy New Zealanders doing a haka, with each player brandishing a Photoshopped woman’s handbag.

839

* A fascinating, grotesque example of this is Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy, where a woman (it’s overwhelmingly a
female disorder) generates illnesses in her child out of a pathological need for the attention, care, and envelopment of the
medical system. This is not someone falsely telling the pediatrician that her child had a fever last night. This is giving
children emetics to induce vomiting, poisoning them, smothering them to induce symptoms of hypoxia—often with fatal
consequences. One feature of the disorder is a stunning lack of affect in the mothers. One would expect an air of spittleflecked madness to match the actions. Instead, there is cold detachment, as if they could simply be lying to a veterinarian
about their supposedly sick goldfish or to customer service at Sears about their supposedly broken toaster, if doing so would
bring the same psychological benefits. For a lengthy overview of Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy, see R. Sapolsky,
“Nursery Crimes,” in Monkeyluv and Other Essays on Our Lives as Animals (New York: Simon and Schuster/Scribner,
2005).

840

* It is also often called the “involuntary nervous system,” contrasting it with the “voluntary nervous system.” The latter is
about conscious, voluntary movement and involves neurons in “motor” regions of the brain and their projections down the
spine to skeletal muscles.

841

* Just as a warning of complexities to come, the hypothalamus consists of a bunch of different nuclei, each receiving a unique
orchestration of limbic inputs and equivalently distinctive outputs to various midbrain/brain-stem regions. And while each
hypothalamic nucleus has a different set of functions, they all fall under the general rubric of autonomic regulation.

842

* And to needlessly complicate things further, thus explaining why this is buried in a footnote, there is actually an intervening
synapse between the long spinal projection neurons of the SNS and the SNS neurons reaching target cells. This is the second
neuron in the two-step pathway that releases norepinephrine. The first neuron in each pathway releases acetylcholine.

843

* Nice logical piece of this: Suppose you’re stressed, not by running for your life from a lion but by having to give a speech.
Your mouth gets dry, the first step of your SNS shutting down digestion until a more auspicious time.

844

* Like the SNS, the PNS gets the brain to target organs via two steps. And as one complication, the SNS and PNS branches
aren’t always working in complete opposition; in some cases they function in a more cooperative, sequential manner. For
example, erection and ejaculation involve coordination between the SNS and PNS that is so complicated that it’s a miracle
that any of us were conceived.

845

* In other words, layers 2 and 3 can influence the autonomic functions of layer 1, which alters events throughout the body,
which in turn influences all the parts of the brain. Loops and loops.

846

* Nauta was not only a towering scientist but also a force of integrity, as well as a renowned teacher who made
neuroanatomy, taught in three-hour evening classes, borderline fun. During college I did research in the lab next to his, and I
was so in awe of the guy that I’d find every possible autonomic excuse to go to the bathroom whenever I saw him heading in
that direction, just for the chance to offhandedly say hello to him by the urinals. (My awe grew further later, with my
discovery that he and his family sheltered Jews from Nazis in Holland during World War II and are cited in the Holocaust
Museum in Washington, DC.)

847

* The word is from the Greek ἀμυγδαλἠ (thank you, Wikipedia), which means “almond,” which the amygdala very vaguely
resembles. Weirdly, it turns out that the word also means “tonsil,” which must have produced some major malpractice suits
when ancient Greeks went in for tonsillectomies.

848

* The amygdala is one of those “bilateral” structures, meaning that there are two of them, one in each hemisphere, mirroring
each other.

849

* A note about specificity. To be confident that the amygdala really is selectively about aggression, you also have to show
that it activates more than do other brain regions and doesn’t activate as much during a hodgepodge of other behaviors.

850

* Wait, don’t the Marines want you to be physically threatening? Don’t they train you to be that way? This is a great example
of the big theme of this book, namely the context dependency of our best and worst behaviors: what the Marines train people
for is to be majorly physically threatening . . . in certain contexts only.

851

* By the way, what does mouse anxiety look like? Mice dislike bright lights and open spaces—go figure, for a nocturnal
animal that lots of species like to eat. So one measure of mouse anxiety is how long it takes for a mouse to go into the center
of a brightly lit area to get some food.

852

* We even have that profound renunciation of arachnophobia, namely kids becoming bereft when Charlotte dies in
Charlotte’s Web.

853

* As an important point, throughout this book, whenever I describe work done by Jane Doe or Joe Smith, I actually mean
“work done by Doe and a team of her postdocs, technicians, grad students, and collaborators spread far and wide over the
years.” I’ll be referring solely to Doe or Smith for brevity, not to imply that they did all the work on their own—science is
utterly a team process. In addition, as long as we’re at it, another point: At endless junctures throughout the book, I’ll be
reporting the results of a study, along the lines of, “And when you do whatever to this or that brain
region/neurotransmitter/hormone/gene/etc., X happens.” What I mean is that on the average X happens, and at a statistically
reliable rate. There is always lots of variability, including individuals in whom nothing happens or even the opposite of X
occurs.

854

* This is termed “Pavlovian conditioning” in a nod to Ivan Pavlov; it’s the same process by which Pavlov’s dogs learned to
associate the conditioned stimulus of a bell with the unconditioned stimulus of food, so that the former eventually was able to
provoke salivation. Less reliable are “operant conditioning” approaches, in which the degree to which something is scary is
assessed by how much an individual will work to avoid being exposed to it.

855

* As usual in science, things aren’t all that clean—some of those “plastic” changes during fear conditioning also occur in the
central amygdala.

856

* Just to make things more complicated, the BLA neurons are probably talking to the central amygdala neurons via
middlemen called intercalated cells.

857

* I would be remiss not to touch on one issue in this field—when a new fear is learned, where is that memory stored? Next to
the amygdala is the hippocampus, which plays a key role in “explicit” learning about straightforward facts (e.g., someone’s
name). While the hippocampus is where short-term knowledge about the name is turned into long-term memory, the memory
trace itself is most likely in the cortex. The hippocampus, to use a metaphor that will probably be obsolete by the time this
book sees the light of day, is the keyboard, the conduit, the portal to the cortical hard drive where a memory is stored. Is the
amygdala solely the keyboard (with fear memories stored elsewhere), or is it the hard drive as well? This has been an
ongoing, unresolved debate in the field, with the “keyboard + hard drive” view championed by LeDoux and the keyboardalone view espoused by the equally accomplished scientist James McGaugh of the University of California at Irvine.

858

* An example of the sort of complexity we’re up against here: Both fear conditioning and fear extinction involve activation
of inhibitory neurons. Hmm, that commonality seems weird, given opposite outcomes. It turns out that extinction involves
activation of neurons that inhibit excitatory neurons, while fear conditioning involves activation of inhibitory neurons that
inhibit other inhibitory neurons that project onto excitatory neurons. A double negative, equaling a positive.

859

* How might you distinguish between sexual motivation and performance in a male rat? Well, the latter is easy—what’s the
guy’s frequency and latency when with a sexually receptive female? But sexual motivation? This is measured by determining
how often a male will press a lever in order to get access to a female.

860

* I can’t resist mentioning a case report of a woman with epileptic seizures initiating in the amygdala. Before seizure onset,
she would have the delusion that she was male, including a sense that she had a deep voice and hairy arms.

861

* In contrast to this picture of growing, precarious arousal, the amygdala deactivates in both men and women during orgasm.

862

* This shortcut has been most cleanly demonstrated for auditory information, by LeDoux. The evidence for other sensory
modalities has been more inferential.

863

* Just to bring some specificity into it, the precise pattern of which subregions of the hypothalamus and which autonomic
relay nuclei are activated can vary with the type of stimulus—thus the fear and aggression associated with responding to a
predator are somewhat different from those in response to the menace of a member of one’s own species; similarly, the
pattern of response in a rodent to the smell of a cat is a bit different from the response to a cat itself.

864

* Apologies to Micah 4:4.

865

* Strongly suggesting that these neurons independently evolved on three separate occasions, given the evolutionary distances
between primates, cetaceans, and elephants. The nearest relatives of elephants, for example, are hyraxes and manatees. The
convergent evolution of von Economo neurons from three separate lineages emphasizes that these cells go hand in hand with
major sociality.

866

* To give a sense of this, consider someone deciding whether to press a button. The frontal cortex makes its decision; know
its neurons’ firing patterns, and you can predict the decision with 80 percent accuracy about seven hundred milliseconds
before the person is consciously aware of their decision.

867

* This quaintly obsolete paragraph is written with the recognition that most of this is irrelevant in the age of smartphones and
the constant companionship of Siri.

868

* This test is reminiscent of something called the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT). My wife, who spent her
professional youth as a neuropsychologist, would practice tests on me when she was in grad school; the CVLT was, without
question, the worst. It was insanely stressful—I’d be a sopping mess by the time she’d finally call it an evening. But on the
other hand, this will pay off handsomely in a few decades when I ace the neuropsych tests out of habit, despite being
seriously demented . . . and thus don’t get appropriate medical care. Hmm, I may need to rethink this.

869

* There’s a key exception to this, to be covered in chapter 13 on morality.

870

* There is an ongoing controversy in this field as to whether it is “willpower” or “motivation” being decreased by cognitive
load. For our purposes, let’s think of them as synonymous.

871

* The apathy is in contrast to early-stage Alzheimer’s sufferers, who, after making some horrible social blunder due to
memory problems—say, asking after the health of someone’s spouse because they didn’t remember that the person died years
ago—are mortified.

872

* Ian McEwan’s novel Saturday pivots around behavioral disinhibition due to Huntington’s in a central character. It’s
brilliant.

873

* A quick primer for directions in the brain, for anyone who cares. They come in three dimensions: (1) Dorsal/ventral. Dorsal
= the top of the brain (in the same way that the fin on the top of a horizontal dolphin is the dorsal fin). Ventral = the bottom.
(2) Medial/lateral. Medial = at the midline of the brain, when viewed in cross section. Lateral = as far as possible from the
midline, moving left or right. Thus the “dorsolateral” PFC is the part of the PFC that is on top and to the outside. (3)
Anterior/posterior. At the front or back of the brain. Lateralized brain structures come in pairs—one in the left hemisphere,
one in the right, both at the same place in the dorsal/ventral and anterior/posterior planes, but in opposite locations in the
medial/lateral plane.

874

* To help keep “dlPFC” and “vmPFC” straight, I’ll constantly refer to their falsely dichotomized functions, just as a reminder
—“the cognitive dlPFC” and “the emotional vmPFC.” Or here’s a mnemonic—“dl” of the cognitive dlPFC standing for
“deliberative,” the “vm” of the emotional vmPFC as “very (e)motional.” Lame, but it’s saved me on a few occasions.

875

* Moreover, dlPFC patients are poor at the difficult task of taking someone else’s perspective. This is a subtype of something
called Theory of Mind, and involves interactions between the dlPFC and a brain region called the temporoparietal juncture.
More in a later chapter.

876

* A reminder—as with all good studies of individuals with damage to particular brain regions, not only is there a control
comparison group of people with no brain damage, but there’s an additional control group of people with damage to other,
unrelated parts of the brain.

877

* For those who care, some of the strongest responses are found in a subregion of the vmPFC called the orbitofrontal cortex.

878

* We will return to Greene’s subsequent “trolleyology” work at length in the chapter on morality. Broadly, it shows that the
differing decisions pivot around (a) the personal/impersonal contrast between pulling a lever and pushing with your own
hands, (b) the means/side effect contrast between the person’s death being a necessity and its being an unintentional byproduct, (c) the psychological distance to the potential victim.

879

* Given the circuitry of the PFC, the most probable sequence is activation of the dlPFC, then activation of the vmPFC, then
inhibition of the amygdala.

880

* And this extends to a metalevel of reappraisal, as Gross has shown that one mediator of treatment outcome when using
CBT for social anxiety is the belief that one can effectively reappraise.

881

* And then there are circumstances where the limbic system overwhelms the frontal cortex, where there is no such thing as a
good decision, where each choice is worse than the other. Think about what is, for a parent, probably the most excruciating
scene in all of cinema—in Sophie’s Choice, when Sophie must make the Choice, when, without warning, she has seconds to
choose which of her two children lives, which dies. Making her bludgeoned, unimaginable choice requires her frontocortical
neurons to send signals to her prefrontal cortex and on to her motor cortex—after all, she eventually says words and moves
her hands, pushing one child forward. And the bidirectionality of the circuitry is shown by the fact that her limbic system, no
doubt, was screaming in agony to the frontal cortex.

882

* Consider individuals with “repressive” personalities. Such individuals have highly regimented affect and behavior—they’re
not emotionally expressive and aren’t great at reading emotions in others. They like ordered, structured, predictable lives, can
tell you what they’re having for dinner a week from Thursday, and complete everything on time. And they have elevated
metabolism in the frontal cortex and elevated circulating levels of stress hormones, showing that it can be enormously
stressful to construct a world in which nothing stressful ever occurs.

883

* In humans activation of the dopaminergic system is typically assessed with functional imaging techniques like fMRI, which
detect changes in metabolism in different parts of the brain. To be precise, while an increase in metabolic demands in these
regions is typically due to neurons there having lots of (dopamine-releasing) action potentials, the two are not synonymous.
Nonetheless, for simplicity I’m using “dopaminergic signaling increases,” “dopamine pathways activate,” “dopamine is
released” interchangeably.

884

* And, in a fact that hints at a world of sex differences, dopaminergic responses to sexually arousing visual stimuli are greater
in men than in women. Remarkably, this difference isn’t specific to humans. Male rhesus monkeys will forgo the chance to
drink water when thirsty in order to see pictures of—I’m not quite sure how else to say this—crotch shots of female rhesus
monkeys (while not being interested in other rhesus-y pictures).

885

* As an important point, study subjects were all female.

886

* Remarkably, in a gambling paradigm where both outcomes result in a shock, after a while, getting the lesser of the two
shocks begins to activate dopamine signaling.

887

* The phenomenon reminds me of the terribly cynical observation of a dormmate in college, one with a long string of
tumultuously disastrous relationships: “A relationship is the price you pay for the anticipation of it.”

888

* This fact prompted Greene, in a conversation with me, to dryly note how Harvard’s budget projections incorporate the
expectation that if they work hard enough, approximately 50 percent of junior faculty will receive tenure.

889

* And as a great example of the happiness of pursuit, where the rewarding quality of something is as much in the process as
in the end product, the mesolimbic dopamine system plays a key role in motivating maternal care in female rats.

890

* Its name—raphe nucleus—is not essential.

891

* An urban legend has persisted forever that Skinner raised his daughter in a giant Skinner box, where she learned to lever
press away for all her needs. Naturally, according to the legend, when she grew up she went mad, committed suicide, sued
him, tried to murder him, etc. All untrue.

892

* When I was in college, Skinner came to my dorm once for dinner and gave an extraordinarily dogmatic talk afterward. This
produced an odd thought on my part as I listened to him. “Wow, this guy is, like, a total Skinnerian.”

893

* It’s obvious which tribe I root for, being some manner of ethologist myself (but just to take this paean down a notch,
remember that one of ethology’s founders was the odious Konrad Lorenz). In an inspired move, the three founders of
ethology—Lorenz, Niko Tinbergen, and Karl von Frisch—were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1973.
The biomedical community was appalled. Giving the prize to guys with foot fungi, whose main research technique was
looking through binoculars—what’s that got to do with medicine? Of the trio, Lorenz was the energetic self-promoter and
flashy popularizer, Tinbergen, one of my heroes, was the deep thinker and amazing experimentalist, and von Frisch played
electric bass and didn’t say much.

894

* How would ethologists figure out what sensory information is pertinent to an animal? An example: Among gulls, the
mother’s beak has a conspicuous red spot. When she brings food to the chicks, they peck at the beak, and Mom regurgitates
the food. Here’s how Tinbergen proved that the red spot triggers the pecking behavior: A subtraction approach, where he’d
paint over the red spot on birds; chicks no longer pecked. A replication approach, where he’d take a two-by-four, paint a red
dot on it, and wave it over the nest; chicks would start pecking. Or super stimulation, where he’d paint a gigantic red dot on
the mother’s beak; chicks would go berserk with the pecking. This approach now incorporates robotics, where ethologists
have built, for example, robotic bees that infiltrate and fiendishly deceive bee colonies by dancing about nonexistent food
sources, which the bees then fly off in search of.

895

* A great example of interspecies cute responses: A significant factor in how much money people pledge to donate to help an
endangered species is the relative size of the animal’s eyes. Big googly eyes loosen purse strings.

896

* Unconscious cues aren’t always about faces and posture. Among closely matched teams or individual male athletic
competitors, wearing a red jersey boosts performance. This has been shown in Olympic boxing, tae kwon do, and wrestling,
for rugby and soccer teams, and when playing a virtual gladitorial computer game. It has been speculated to reflect the fact
that in many species (e.g., mandrill monkeys and widow birds) male dominance displays involve flashing a red body part,
where more testosterone equals more intense red. I’m dubious about the explanation, as it feels like cherry-picking examples
from other species.

897

* Findings like this should not be confused with the rationale behind the “Twinkie defense.” In 1978 San Francisco mayor
George Moscone and city supervisor Harvey Milk—the first openly gay politician in California—were assassinated by Dan
White, a disgruntled ex-supervisor. According to the common misconception, during his trial, White’s defense attorneys
argued that his addiction to sugary junk food somehow impaired his judgment and self-control. In reality, the defense argued
that White suffered from diminished capacity because of his depression, and his shift from a healthy diet to one of junk food
was merely evidence of his depressed state.

898

* One recent study demonstrates a pointed version of this—describing someone as “African American” evokes associations
with higher levels of education and income than does describing them as “black.”

899

* A recent study shows life-and-death consequences of linguistic cuing. For the same storm intensity, hurricanes arbitrarily
given female names kill more people than do those with male names (names alternate between the two genders). Why?
People unconsciously take male-named hurricanes more seriously and are more likely to comply with evacuation orders. And
this despite both male and female names being selected for their innocuousness—this isn’t comparing Hurricane Mary
Poppins with Hurricane Vlad the Impaler.

900

* For a horrifying, documented example of bystanders being at least as callous as the apartment dwellers were reputed to be,
Google the case of the death of two-year-old Wang Yue.

901

* In these studies the control situation is when subjects are in the presence of another man. And FYI, the presence of men has
no such effects on the behavior of women.

902

* As an important point, this is indeed a case of acculturation, rather than a reflection of populational genetic differences—
East Asian Americans show the typical American pattern.

903

* This is no surprise to fans of the history of eunuchs, who were a mainstay of the military of Imperial China, prized as fierce
soldiers.

904

* One exception: Texas, where they still use a knife.

905

* Where, as with all these studies, neither the subjects nor the scientist observing them know whether the volunteers received
testosterone or placebo, and where the testosterone levels produced are always within the normal range.

906

* This is a rich literature showing the subtleties of the human psyche. The winning effect on testosterone is lessened in
circumstances where people feel like they won by luck or where, despite winning, they feel like they underperformed. In
contast, the effect is enhanced among people who went into the competition having the strongest psychological motives for
domination. Finally, testosterone levels can rise robustly in “losers” who nonetheless performed far better than they
anticipated. Thus one might see testosterone levels rise after a marathon in a guy who came in at the back of the pack but is
triumphant because he was sure he was going to drop dead halfway through, and may decline in the guy who comes in third
but was expected to win. We all belong to numerous hierarchies, but some of the most powerful are the ones in our heads
based on our internal standards.

907

* All these circumstances of testosterone levels rising raises a question: why not just produce higher levels all the time and
save the effort? For one thing, all those androgens are lousy for the cardiovascular system. But more important, they’d get in
the way of various prosocial behaviors. For example, among monogamous birds and rodents, if testosterone levels don’t drop
around the time the female gives birth, the males won’t act paternally. And some similar patterns seem to apply to humans:
Fathers have lower testosterone levels than age-matched, married men without children, and more involved fathers have
lower levels than less involved ones. Moreover, evoking nurturing behavior in men lowers testosterone levels, as does the
birth of a man’s child. And when compared with high-testosterone fathers, those with lower average testosterone levels are
rated as better parents by their partners and have more activation of their reward-related ventral tegmentum when seeing a
picture of their child.

908

* In studies like these, this is typically accomplished either with the administration of a drug that blocks oxytocin receptors or
with genetic engineering techniques to eliminate the gene for oxytocin or for the oxytocin receptor.

909

* In other words, a familiar theme: vasopressin doesn’t cause paternal behavior; it facilitates it in species that are already
predisposed to it.

910

* This turned out to be due to a genetic difference between the two species. Interestingly, it is not a difference in the DNA
sequence that constitutes the gene for the vasopressin receptor. It is a difference in the sequence that constitutes the on/off
switch for the gene. More on this in chapter 8.

911

* This generated all sorts of caustic discussions at conferences as to whether this constituted a case of “gene transfer” (i.e.,
the value-neutral process of transferring a novel gene into an individual in order to alter a function) or “gene therapy” (i.e.,
transferring a gene in order to cure those montane males of the disease of infidelity). It strikes me that if that research had
been carried out instead at Berkeley during the Summer of Love in 1967, the gene-therapy goal would have been to make
prairie voles transcend their Middle American bourgeois genetics and become polygamous. The times, they are a changin’ to
quote a recent Nobel Laureate.

912

* Note that the entire romantic coupling literature I just discussed solely concerns heterosexual couples. As far as I know,
very little has been studied in this realm with gay or lesbian subjects.

913

* Discriminating online shoppers can now buy “Liquid Trust,” touted as “the world’s first oxytocin pheromone product.”
Perhaps worse, perfectly straitlaced scientific publications have referred to oxytocin as the “love drug” or the “cuddle drug.”
The “cuddle” part is puzzling, since the literature is about oxytocin-laden prairie voles huddling, not cuddling, and the former
doesn’t evoke images of luv-fests as much as of tubercular huddled masses yearning to breathe free.

914

* For the truly interested, the gene codes for a protein called CD38, which facilitates oxytocin secretion from neurons.

915

* In the Prisoner’s Dilemma each of the two players must decide whether to cooperate. If they both cooperate, they each get,
say, two units of reward. If they both backstab, they each get one unit. If one cooperates and the other backstabs, the cheater
gets three units and the stooge gets none.

916

* The IAT will be described in detail in a later chapter—briefly, the test takes advantage of the fact that it takes us
milliseconds longer to process pairings of information that seem discordant than pairings that make sense; thus if you’re
prejudiced against group X, it takes you longer to process a pairing of group X with a positive term—for example,
“wonderful”—than with a negative term—“dangerous.”

917

* Maternal aggression involves the amygdala; no surprise there. But (harking back to chapter 1 and its discussion of the
heterogeneity of types of aggression) it is also uniquely and crucially dependent on a tiny brain region that hasn’t been
mentioned before, the ventral premammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus.

918

* The next two paragraphs can be skipped if you already have enough complications in your life.

919

* Called allopregnanolone.

920

* Hyenas have a terrible reputation, thanks to outdated zoology that characterizes them, sneeringly, as “scavengers”
(snarkiness that makes little sense, given that most of us just scavenge dead stuff in the supermarket). Rather than living off
the scraps of lions’ kills, they are highly effective hunters. Most often, it is scavenging lions trying to drive hyenas off a kill,
rather than the other way around. And real hyenas don’t sing inane songs like in The Lion King.

921

* Think about this: Among typical mammals, when males are terrified, they lose erections. Among hyenas, that’s when they
get one (and when some moth-eaten male has the chance to mate, he’s probably terrified out of his mind). This implies some
very different wiring of the autonomic nervous system, whereby stress promotes rather than inhibits erections.

922

* More than two thousand years ago Aristotle, for reasons obscure to even the most learned, dissected some dead hyenas,
discussing them in his treatise Historia Animalium, VI, XXX. He drew the incorrect conclusion that these animals were
hermaphrodites, possessing all the machinery of both sexes.

923

* This leads us to another great factoid from the hyena world. If a low-ranking female is being menaced by a high-ranking
one, the subordinate gets a clitoral erection—“Please don’t hurt me; look, I’m just like one of those bedraggled, innocuous
males.”

924

* This is due to an obscure hormone called DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone) that is converted to an androgen within only
certain neurons, and, even stranger, some of those neurons even synthesize their own androgens.

925

* Many people more properly think of PMS as perimenstrual syndrome, in that the symptoms occur typically not just before
the onset of menses, but for a few days after as well.

926

* Mead has been savaged by later generations of Oceanic anthropologists for having painted a grossly inaccurate picture of
Samoa as the Garden of Eden, in part because of her ideological desire to see Samoa that way, and in part because the
Samoans had a grand time making things up and then gleefully watching the starry-eyed white lady fall for it hook, line, and
sinker.

927

* This literature also has produced sentences like “Such a symbolic analysis is consistent with the hermeneutic, meaningcentered focus of the ‘new cross-cultural psychiatry.’” I haven’t a clue what in hell that means.

928

* For example, the “fusiform face area” is more responsive to faces in ovulating women than in those menstruating.
Similarly, the “emotional” vmPFC is more responsive to men’s faces when women are approaching ovulation than when they
are approaching menses; the higher the ratio of estrogen to progesterone in the bloodstream during that preovulatory phase,
the more vmPFC responsiveness. Finally, women find faces of men judged to look “aggressive” to be more attractive when
they are ovulating.

929

* The broad question of what this book’s avalanche of information says about criminal justice will be considered in chapter
16. I thank Dylan Alegria, a research assistant of mine, for superb assistance in reviewing the PMS/criminality literature.

930

* For real aficionados: In recent years “homeostasis” has been expanded and fancified into the new, elegant concept of
“allostasis.” Most basically, it incorporates the fact that an ideal homeostatic set point in the body varies dramatically
depending on the circumstance.

931

* More info for aficionados: The suppression of immunity and inflammation during chronic stress is caused by
glucocorticoids. This is the reason why glucocorticoids are used to suppress the immune system in people with an overactive
immune system (i.e., an autoimmune disease), to prevent rejection of a transplanted organ, or to suppress an overactive
inflammatory response. This is what happens when people are put on immunosuppressive/anti-inflammatory “steroids” like
cortisone or prednisone (two synthetic glucocorticoids).

932

* How does the brain pull off an inverted U, where a moderate rise in glucocorticoid levels enhances memory (for example),
while a bigger rise does the opposite? One solution that the brain has evolved is to have two receptor systems for
glucocorticoids. One (the “MR”) is responsive to small increases in glucocorticoid levels above baseline and mediates the
stimulatory effects. The other (“GR”) receptors respond only to big, prolonged increases and mediate the adverse effects.
Predictably, levels of the two types of receptors vary by brain region, person, and circumstance.

933

* As just stated, stress increases overall excitability in the amygdala. This involves the inhibition of particular neurons—
namely the inhibitory GABA interneurons. Inhibiting the inhibitors in the circuit causes the activity of the big, excitatory
glutamate-releasing neurons to increase.

934

* Plus, more obscurely, via the sympathetic nervous system indirectly activating the amygdala by way of that norepinephrinereleasing projection into it from the locus coeruleus (the brain-stem region that was mentioned briefly in chapter 2—its
activation leads to arousal throughout the brain).

935

* And the underlying neurobiology is probably similar to what is going on in those other realms of poor decision making
during stress, e.g., eating or drinking more.

936

* The test is a standard in the field called the Trier Social Stress Test, which is a fifteen-minute combination of a mock job
interview and a mental arithmetic task, both carried out in front of a panel of stone-faced evaluators.

937

* Note that these are studies about what people say they would do, not what they actually do. The difference between the two
will be considered in chapter 13, when considering moral reasoning versus moral action.

938

* Okay, that was a juvenile cheap shot thrown in merely to increase the number of moose buying copies of this book.

939

* Although nothing was known about NMDA and non-NMDA receptors at the time.

940

* Where do more copies of the receptors come from? Miles away from that dendritic spine, in the center of that neuron, is the
nucleus, containing the DNA, which includes genes coding for glutamate receptors. Somehow the nucleus needs to hear that
a calcium wave occurred in one dendritic spine in the boondocks. The nucleus then directs the synthesis of more copies of the
receptor, which are then shipped to that specific spine, out of the neuron’s ten thousand. That’s insanely hard. Typically,
instead, there are extra glutamate receptors mothballed inside dendritic spines, and the calcium tidal wave is the signal that
pulls them onto the spine’s membrane.

941

* For aficionados, the non-NMDA receptors are “phosphorylated,” which causes their sodium channels to stay open longer.

942

* Actually, LTP in the spinal cord has more to do with “neuropathic” pain, syndromes where a severe injury causes all sorts
of nonnoxious stimuli to start hurting chronically—in effect, your spine has “learned” to always feel pain. Interestingly, such
LTP arises in part from the inflammation that accompanies the initial injury.

943

* The mechanisms underlying LTP elsewhere in the nervous system often differ from those of hippocampal LTP—some
involve a third class of glutamate receptors; some may not even involve glutamate. The LTP old guard has generally coped
with the indignity of LTP outside the hippocampus by viewing the hippocampal kind as classical, canonical, textbook, divine,
etc., and the rest as chintzy knockoffs.

944

* Equally remarkably, over the course of the menstrual cycle in humans, the amount of myelin in the corpus callosum, the
massive bundle of axons that connects the two hemispheres, fluctuates as well.

945

* Not all remapping is logical; some is just plain weird. A few years back, during an extremely stressed period, I developed a
tic—when I’d be acutely upset about something, the second and third fingers on my left hand would rhythmically contract for
a few seconds. What the hell was that about? No idea, but I marvel at the randomness of the remapping, at how unpleasant
tumult in limbic circuitry somehow tapped into this motor circuit.

946

* Nottebohm, interviewed in an excellent New Yorker piece recounting this history, said, “Pasko has taken on the role of hardnosed defender of standards. And that’s fine—it’s even warranted. . . . [But] as much as I hate to say this, I think Pasko Rakic
single-handedly held the field of neurogenesis back by at least a decade.”

947

* The fact that brain injury, such as a stroke, triggers neurogenesis created huge excitement—wow, the brain has a means to
try to repair itself after an injury, how cool is that? What was obvious from the start is that whatever compensatory
neurogenesis there is, there isn’t a ton, since so many neurological insults leave the nervous system an irreparable mess
afterward. But to add insult to injury, work in that area began to show that sometimes the new neurons actually made things
worse, migrating where they shouldn’t, integrating into circuits the wrong way, making those circuits seizure prone. To
metaphorically appropriate a concept from chapter 1, this seems a case of neuronal pathological altruism—beware when
freshly minted neurons that may not yet know feces from Shinola want to lend a helping hand.

948

* Listing these various factors that “enhance” or “inhibit” neurogenesis glosses over lots of detail. The number of new
neurons that are integrated into circuits reflects (a) the number of new cells that are formed from stem cells in the brain; (b)
the percentage of new cells that differentiate into neurons (as opposed to glial cells); and (c) the rate at which new neurons
survive and form functional synapses. Each of these manipulations—learning, exercise, stress, etc.—targets different steps.
Complicating things further is the fact that not all stressors are equal. If a rodent secretes glucocorticoids because it thinks
there is a predator around and the fight-or-flight sirens are going off, neurogenesis is inhibited. But if it secretes
glucocorticoids while voluntarily running in a running wheel, it enhances neurogenesis (in other words, the contrast between
“bad” and “good” stress).

949

* As one additional, grim piece of this picture of neural plasticity, extremes of chronic stress and glucocorticoid overexposure
can also kill hippocampal neurons. While this is probably pertinent to nightmare extremes of stress, it is unclear how relevant
it might be to more garden-variety sustained stress.

950

* For example, the phenomenon where experience can turn the on/off switch on a gene in a particular direction used to be
considered permanent; that is turning out not to be the case. Similarly, the hippocampal atrophy in Cushing’s syndrome
appears to reverse within a year or so after the tumor is removed. As one disturbing exception to this theme, most studies
suggest that the atrophy of the hippocampus with long-term major depression persists after the depression is successfully
treated. Moreover, the reversibility of some of these effects (for example, of stress-induced retraction of dendritic processes)
decreases with age.

951

* The delayed attainment of legal adulthood in the West also sometimes reflected something as mundane as muscle mass. In
thirteenth-century England the age of legal majority was raised from fifteen to twenty-one years—protective armor was
getting heavier, and it wasn’t until the older age that males were typically strong enough to comport themselves in armor on
the battlefield. There is no mention as to whether the age of majority of the horses carrying these heavier weights was raised
as well. But sometimes technological advancements have made it possible for younger adolescents to join the ranks of adult
occupations—it has been pointed out that the development of lightweight automatic weapons has been a boon for the
usefulness of the estimated 300,000 child soldiers on earth.

952

* Not to mention the idea that adults should aspire to still be adolescent in many ways—to retain or regain adolescent tastes
for novelty and sociality, adolescent levels of hair on the head and cellulite in the thighs, and adolescent refractory periods.
Hunter-gatherers aren’t interested in “Look ten years younger!” They want to look like elders, so they can boss everyone
around.

953

* Not surprisingly, the peak of frontal cortical gray matter comes earlier in girls than in boys. Beyond that, what is most
striking is the lack of major sex differences in the trajectory of adolescent brain development.

954

* An interesting exception is that adolescents do not have particularly strong responses to disgusting stimuli, either on a
subjective level or on the level of insular cortex activation.

955

* With frontal regulation of emotions emerging later in males than females.

956

* With the peak of sensation seeking coming and going earlier in females than in males.

957

* What this doesn’t explain is why, for example, it’s males who leave among baboons and females who do among chimps,
nor does it explain why novelty seeking varies among humans. That will be touched on obliquely in chapter 10.

958

* Studies using this Cyberball paradigm typically have an important control group: The subject is in the same three-way
game of virtual catch when they are told, “Oops, there is a computer glitch. We’ve lost contact with the other two players.
Hang out in there while we fix this.” While things are being “fixed,” the other two players toss the ball. In other words, the
person is left out, but because of technical problems, not for social reasons. And none of those brain regions activate. (Mind
you, if it were me when in a less secure state of mind, it would certainly cross my mind that by the time that computer glitch
was fixed, the other two would have already bonded and realized they were happier without me as part of the game and
would continue to exclude me or, if they started throwing the ball back to me, would be doing so out of sheer condescension,
thereby causing my mesolimbic dopamine system to instantly atrophy.)

959

* The inventory requires the person to indicate the extent to which various statements tapping into social conformity apply to
them—“Some people go along with their friends just to keep their friends happy,” “Some people say things they don’t really
believe because they think it will make their friends respect them more,” and so on.

960

* Some readers will recognize that those premotor neurons that start to imitate the movement being observed are “mirror
neurons.” As will be seen in a later chapter, the mirror neuron system is fascinating, amid enormous amounts of hype.

961

* I have not seen any studies that look at maturational sophistication about circumstances where harm to an object produces
enormous emotional harm to individuals—for example, the destruction of religious relics. As will be covered in a later
chapter, there is vast power to such symbolic objects.

962

* How do you demonstrate object permanence in a preverbal infant? Show a child who is not yet at this stage a stuffie, which
you then place in a box. For her, the stuffie no longer exists. Now take it out, and she thinks, “OMG, where’d that stuffie
come from?” Her heart rate increases. Once the kid masters object permanence, pull the stuffie out of the box and (yawn) “Of
course that’s where you put the stuffie”—no heart-rate increase. Even better: put the stuffie in a box and then pull something
different (say, a ball) out of the box. Pre-object-permanence kid isn’t surprised—the stuffie stopped existing, and the ball just
came into existence. Older kid with object permanence: “Wait, that stuffie turned into a ball!”—heart rate increases.

963

* How would you test this? Two humans stand in front of a monkey, one blindfolded. A treat for the monkey is hidden
somewhere. Blindfold is removed; monkey chooses which human goes to look for the treat. “Don’t choose the one who was
blindfolded. They don’t know where the treat is,” thinks the ToM Master of the Universe monkey.

964

* This “sensory motor resonance” might bring “mirror neurons” to mind. Chapter 14 examines what mirror neurons do (often
in sharp contrast to what they’ve been speculated to do). The involvement of the PAG also brings to mind sociopaths, with
their lack of capacity for empathy; as discussed in chapter 2, such individuals have atypically blunted pain perception.

965

* The paper by Decety mentioned in the previous chapter had another interesting finding: For acts that harm people, the
typical adult pattern is to advocate greater punishment for intentional acts. There is far less distinction made between
intentional and unintentional when it comes to harm to objects. “Damn, I don’t care if he meant to Krazy Glue the fan belt or
not—we have to buy a new one.”

966

* “Greater good” for kids, as at any age, is in the eye of the beholder. In psychologist Robert Coles’s classic The Moral Life
of Children (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1986), he describes his fieldwork in the American South during
desegregation, and how older children on both sides of the divide were willing to undergo sacrifice for the good of their
ideological group.

967

* I once received a lesson in kids’ private world of rule making from my then-four-year-old son. We had gone to a public
bathroom together; we stood side by side at two urinals, and I finished a bit earlier than he did. “I wish we had finished at the
same time,” he said. Why? “We get more points that way.”

968

* The callous aggression speaks to another childhood predictor of adult sociopathy, namely abuse of animals.

969

* I haven’t a clue whether that should apply to Floyd, the Depression-era bank robber (and murderer) who nonetheless
became somewhat of a folk hero to the poor, and whose Oklahoma funeral was attended by somewhere between twenty
thousand and forty thousand people.

970

* A recent study adds an important twist to this story. There are the kids with problems with impulse control—“I’m
absolutely going to hold out for two marshmallow”—who then instantly eat that first one. That profile is a statistical predictor
of adult violent crime. In contrast, there are kids with steep time-discounting curves—“Wait fifteen minutes for two
marshmallows when I can have one right now? What kind of fool waits fifteen minutes?” That is a predictor of adult property
crime.

971

* Bowlby, unlike most Freudians and behaviorists, actually had extensive experience with children, including children in the
1940s separated from their mothers—London children sent to the countryside during the Blitz, Central European Jewish
children shipped to England in the Kindertransport rescues one step ahead of Hitler, and of course war orphans. BTW, what
was Bowlby’s childhood like? He was the son of Sir Anthony Bowlby, the king’s own surgeon, and was raised by nannies.

972

* Naturally, by now Bowlby’s offspring, the school of “attachment parenting,” is so established as to have generated endless
misconceptions, fads, cults, lunatic fringes, and crazy-making senses of neurotic inadequacy or self-righteous superiority
among parents. To open a can of worms a smidgen, there is no scientific support for concluding that a woman has irreparably
damaged her child if she does not breast-feed, breast-feeds for less than the first decade of the child’s life, can’t successfully
breast-feed her child within seconds after birth, or ever leaves the child alone for more than two seconds, let alone works
outside of the house. And nothing about the science says that the same good effects of attachment can’t be provided by a
man, a working single mother, two mommies, or two daddies.

973

* The iconic nature of this study is such that I’ve heard psychologists sardonically reference Harlow, as in, “I had a pretty
crappy childhood; my father was never around and my mother was a chicken-wire mom.”

974

* Interestingly, Bowlby’s first published paper reported that thieves had an increased rate of extended maternal separation in
childhood. Related to that, a 1994 study showed that individuals who suffered the combination of birth complications and
maternal rejection at age one had a markedly increased likelihood of committing violent (but not nonviolent) crimes eighteen
years later.

975

* The brutality of these studies helped spawn the animal-rights movement. I’ve been deeply conflicted about Harlow’s work
since I was first moved to tears reading about it as a teenager. He was appallingly callous, readily admitted that he felt
nothing for the monkeys, and did too many of the deprivation studies. But at the same time, the work helped, among other
things, lay the groundwork for understanding the biology of how early-life loss predisposes toward adult depression. Given
the prevailing wisdom at the time concerning child rearing and the perceived irrelevance of features of parenting that we now
view as vital, the irony is that it was Harlow’s pioneering work that most clearly demonstrated the immorality of doing such
research.

976

* For example, early-childhood lead exposure—a strong correlate of living in a poor neighborhood—impairs brain
development and predicts poor cognitive and emotional regulatory skills and increased incidence of criminality in adulthood.

977

* What’s anhedonia like in a rat? Give a normal rat two water bottles to choose from, one with water, the other with water
sweetened with sucrose. The rat prefers the sucrose water. But a stressed, anhedonic rat shows no preference. Same result for
other pleasurable things.

978

* Remarkably, exposure to multiple incidents of violence even accelerates the aging of children’s chromosomes.

979

* I want to thank a really excellent undergrad, Dylan Alegria, who helped me tread water in this voluminous literature.

980

* I thank another superb undergrad, Ali Maggioncalda, for help with this topic.

981

* A shocking part of the story: Roma children were regularly abandoned at orphanages and left there until they were
adolescents—and could work.

982

* An irresistible irony: In the aftermath of the book’s publication, Harris received a major award from the august American
Psychological Association, an award named in honor of . . . the man who, decades before, as chairman of the psychology
department at Harvard, had thrown Harris out of the PhD program for her lack of potential.

983

* All of these differences are typical in fathers as well but have been studied far more in mothers.

984

* I’ve experienced a manifestation of such parenting in my decades of fieldwork in Kenya, where my nearest neighbors have
been highly un-Westernized members of the Maasai tribe. Sometimes I’d run into someone I hadn’t seen in a while who had
had a baby in the interim, and it took me years to get out of my ridiculous Western reflex—“A new baby! That’s wonderful!
Mazel tov! What’s her name?” Awkward silence—you don’t give a baby a name (or perhaps aren’t willing to utter it) until
she’s survived her first malarial rainy season and hungry dry season.

985

* Which, as noted by Kusserow, included the largest percentage of fathers who were willing to be interviewed.

986

* I once got a poignant reminder of just how permeating the consequences of lack of privilege are in my professional world. I
was interviewing candidates for a position in my lab. In the process, I’d ask each person about how they handled
interpersonal conflict, looking for people who promptly addressed a social tension, rather than letting it fester into passiveaggressiveness. I was interviewing a guy whose background was in Queens, rather than the Upper East Side. And when
asked, instead of giving the Upper East Side answer I hoped for (“Yeah, I know how bad things get when you don’t
communicate; I’d be pretty good at just asking the person to be considerate and please return my pipette when they borrow
it”), I got the correct answer from Queens: “Nope, no problems there. I know that a lab is no place for fighting; you take it
outside. You’ve got nothing to worry about with me.”

987

* In contrast, newborns recognize but show no preference for their father’s voice.

988

* This view held in most medical circles for many years afterward. For an example of how wrong that approach can be, see
John Colapinto, As Nature Made Him: The Boy Who Was Raised as a Girl (New York: Harper Perennial, 2006).

989

* Remarkably, studies have examined brains of transgender individuals, concentrating on brain regions that, on the average,
differ in size between men and women. And consistently, regardless of the desired direction of the sex change and, in fact,
regardless of whether the person had undergone a sex change yet, the dimorphic brain regions in transgender individuals
resembled the sex of the person they had always felt themselves to be, not their “actual” sex. In other words, it’s not the case
that transgender individuals think they’re a different gender than they actually are. It’s more like they got stuck with the
bodies of a different sex from who they actually are.

990

* Prenatal screening for CAH is now possible, and the fetal masculinization can be prevented to some extent with fetal
hormone treatments. This has been framed by some clinicians as a means to increase the odds of a CAH female having a
heterosexual orientation, something that has drawn the ire of bioethicists and the LGBTQ community.

991

* Meanwhile, there is no consistent evidence that the extent of androgen exposure in the hours to weeks after birth predicts
anything about subsequent behavior.

992

* Why not “determines” instead of “influences”? Because the female’s body can convert one nutrient into another before
passing it to the fetus.

993

* Third-trimester malnutrition also alters aspects of physiology, so that the fetus has a lifelong increased risk of diabetes,
obesity, and metabolic syndrome, something known as the “Dutch Hunger Winter effect.”

994

* FYI, the gene that codes for the glucocorticoid receptor.

995

* The next chapter discusses how this nongenetic but rather epigenetic transmission of traits multigenerationally resembles a
long-discredited idea about acquired inheritance proposed by the eighteenth-century scientist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck.

996

* Note: This does not mean that every neuron in the frontal cortex had the regulation of a thousand-odd genes changed.
Instead, there are glial cells in addition to neurons, and the neurons are of a variety of types. So in reality the average number
of changes within any given cell was probably far less than a thousand. Note about note: which doesn’t make any of this less
interesting, just harder to study.

997

* The strongest ideological criticisms of genetics have typically been leftist in flavor. Despite that, and to my surprise, the one
study I know of that has examined the subject showed no Left/Right ideological differences in the tendency to attribute
individual differences to genetics. Where they differ concerns what sorts of differences are attributed. Thus right-wing
ideology is more associated with genetic interpretations for race or class differences, while left-wing ideology is more
associative when it comes to sexual orientation.

998

* My own personal experience with extreme essentialism: During 1976 and 1977 the New York City area was terrorized by
the string of “Son of Sam” murders (I was home from college in Brooklyn during the summer of 1977 and can attest that the
psychological impact of the murder spree was enormous). In August 1977 it ended with the arrest of David Berkowitz, a
twenty-three-year-old petty criminal and arsonist who claimed that he killed under the command of a neighbor’s dog, said
dog ostensibly being demonically possessed. A month later, back at college, the phone rang. My roommate answered and
handed me the phone, looking a bit puzzled. “It’s your mother; she seems kind of excited.” “Hi, Mom, what’s new?” And in a
euphoric, relieved, triumphant tone, she shouted: “David Berkowitz! He’s adopted. Adopted! HE’S NOT REALLY
JEWISH!” Ironic ending department for my mother: The biological mother of Berkowitz, born Richard David Falco, was
Jewish. As was his biological father, who was not Falco.

999

* Terminology: A gene is “transcribed” when the RNA template of its DNA sequence is made, which is then used to generate
the protein that it codes for.

1000

* Note that “junk” DNA may be junk or, more likely, DNA whose function hasn’t been discovered yet. There are reasons to
go with the latter interpretation.

1001

* There are related stretches of noncoding DNA that are part of on/off switches called enhancers and operators. For our
purposes, we’ll just use the term promoters.

1002

* Or to use other jargon in the field, when it is “activated” or “expressed”—I’ll use these terms interchangeably.

1003

* For those who care, the number of unique transcriptional profiles for n number of genes is (2n)−1, not counting the state
where no genes are being transcribed. So plug the approximately 20,000 human genes into the equation, and you get a
gargantuan number of possible transcriptional profiles.

1004

* “Epigenetic” technically refers to altering the regulation of genes, rather than the sequence of genes. Therefore a
transcription factor activating some gene for ten minutes counts as epigenetic as well. When neuroscientists talk of the
“epigenetics revolution,” however, they’re almost always referring to the long-lasting mechanisms discussed here.

1005

* Note that Lamarck was talking about the concept of species evolution long before Darwin and Wallace. The latter two
didn’t invent the idea of evolution; rather, they figured out how evolution works, namely by natural selection.

1006

* And as a brilliant counterstrategy, some parasites use transposons to shuffle the DNA coding for their surface proteins every
few weeks. In other words, just as the infected host is building up stocks of antibody to recognize the surface protein, the
parasite switches identities, making the host immune system start all over.

1007

* There have even been reports of heritability of intelligence in chimpanzees.

1008

* I was pleased to see this study. Numerous studies, stretching back decades, have attempted to uncover the biological roots
of sexual orientation; the earlier literature overwhelmingly came with the political agenda of trying to figure out what is
biologically “wrong” with homosexuals. Thus, it was about time for people to study what’s wrong with homophobes.

1009

* Yeah, I’m shorter than average.

1010

* Historically, the most hyperoxygenated criticisms of behavioral genetics as a discipline have come from nongeneticists
questioning the motives and hidden sociopolitical agendas behind behavior genetics findings. It is historically justified to
conclude this at many junctures; however, it’s utterly inapplicable to the behavior geneticists I know. The next chapter will
look at a related version of a “there’s a hidden agenda” controversy.

1011

* And roughly similar conclusions can be reached concerning end points like weight, height, BMI, and various metabolic
measures.

1012

* Whether MZ twins wind up as mono- or dichorionic depends on when the new embryo divides.

1013

* Not always—there are some truly weird mechanisms of gene transmission involving “imprinted genes” that violate this, but
we’re ignoring that.

1014

* I thank an excellent student assistant, Katrina Hui, for help in this area.

1015

* Although many purists in the field would say that we don’t actually inherit a trait; we inherit the material needed to
construct a trait.

1016

* This next section has been heavily influenced by the writings of the geneticists Richard Lewontin of Harvard and David
Moore of Pitzer College and the science writer Matt Ridley.

1017

* Genetics savants will note that I’ve simplified things here by ignoring heterozygosity; it doesn’t matter.

1018

* Here’s a cool example pointed out to me by a colleague, Bud Ruby. All those twin studies generate heritability scores,
indicating the strength of genes in explaining individual variation. But those studies, by definition, have eliminated an
important nongenetic source of variation—birth order.

1019

* There has been some controversy about the replicability of this immensely important observation, and I’ve followed it
closely. When considering only the carefully done studies with adequate sample sizes and clearly and narrowly defined end
points, I believe that it’s been amply replicated.

1020

* A subtle point for which I thank Stephen Manuck of the University of Pittsburgh: This example represents an exception to
the rule that heritability scores go down as you study a trait in more environments. If you started by studying only low-SES
individuals, you’d generate a very low heritability score (~10 percent). Thus, if one studies both low- and high-SES subjects
(the latter with a high heritability score of about 70 percent), the score will rise.

1021

* Harking back to how the noncoding regulatory regions of the genome are at least as important as regions that code for
genes themselves, the 5HTT variants do not differ in the DNA sequence of the gene but rather in the sequence of a promoter
for the gene. As a result, the two variants differ in their sensitivity to a transcription factor, and thus in the amount of
transporter protein made.

1022

* Again, the variation in the DNA sequence was not in the MAO-A gene but in its promoter.

1023

* Part of what may explain the “warrior gene” frothiness is the “aggressive” variant being found at a high rate among Maori
populations and traditional Maori culture having very high rates of warfare. Nonetheless, it is far from the case that every
Maori individual with the “warrior” variant is highly aggressive, or that every highly aggressive Maori has the warrior
variant.

1024

* Control subjects had the task of unscrambling jumbled strings of words into coherent phrases. The religion-prime group did
the same with word strings that contained religious terms.

1025

* For aficionados: The testosterone receptor contains what is called a polyglutamine repeat—a stretch of the protein where
the same amino acid, called glutamine, is repeated. Importantly, there is tremendous variability among people as to how many
glutamine repeats there are; the fewer, the more potently the androgen receptor works. Recall that receptors for steroid
hormones like testosterone work as transcription factors, and proteins that have polyglutamine repeats are often transcription
factors.

1026

* And, following that logic, if a trait associates with a particular version of an SNP in the promoter of a gene, you’ve just
gotten a hint that the regulation of the gene (as opposed to the gene itself) may be involved in that trait. As an example, the
gene for one type of serotonin receptor contains an SNP in the third base of the codon coding for the thirty-fourth amino acid
in the protein, and one of the variants of that SNP is associated with responsiveness to a particular drug in schizophrenics.

1027

* For lovers of details: Note that the GWAS and microarray approaches are usually telling different things. In the former you
are looking for genes that have a variant that is associated with whatever disease or behavior you’re studying. In microarray
studies you’re looking for genes whose expression profiles are associated with the disease or behavior.

1028

* More scientific lingo—pass a big fishing net through a stretch of the ocean, and see what you wind up catching.

1029

* This would be if there is a gene that has an SNP that is unbelievably powerfully associated with something, but the alternate
letter only occurs in a thousand humans. That will be missed with current GWAS.

1030

* Note that the other reliable sex difference in cognition, namely better reading performance by girls than by boys, doesn’t
disappear in more gender-equal societies. It gets bigger.

1031

* In reading about Americans versus East Asians in this section, and Americans versus other cultures in later sections, you’ll
realize that in some ways it’s Americans (and Western Europeans) versus the rest of the world in many cultural ways. They
are just plain “WEIRD”—Westernized, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic.

1032

* These are tough studies to pull off, as neuroimaging is a bit of an art in addition to a science, and being able to
quantitatively compare data derived from two scanners and scanning protocols on opposite sides of the globe is challenging.
The alternative—having subjects from both cultures studied in the same scanner—is challenging as well; those aren’t going
to be representative subjects, since half of them are probably international students—connected, well off, and adventurous
enough to be in an American college town, volunteering for a Psych 101 study.

1033

* The United States was not without labor-intensive agriculture historically. But rather than solving that with collectivism, it
solved it with slavery.

1034

* I have no idea if rice roots actually run deep, but the metaphor was begging to be written.

1035

* Obviously, no individual actually migrated that far—the slow creep of migration southward in the Western Hemisphere
took millennia.

1036

* For genetics fans with more of a background than chapter 8, the near-zero incidence of 7R means that in these cultures
there isn’t even any benefit to heterozygous versions of 7R.

1037

* As noted earlier, within a few generations of immigration, East Asian Americans are typically as individualist as European
Americans. This raises the question of whether East Asians who chose to immigrate had a higher frequency of 7R than East
Asians in general (one might also wonder whether there is a higher incidence of 7R in the wheat-growing regions of China
than in the rice districts). Unfortunately, according to Kenneth Kidd, no one knows about either.

1038

* Another striking difference in gene variant frequencies concerns the gene coding for the serotonin transporter, which
removes serotonin from the synapse and which, as we saw in the last chapter, is associated with impulsive aggression in
vastly confusing ways. One variant of the gene is associated with negative emotion, an attentional bias toward negative
stimuli, anxiety, and depression risk when coupled with stressful risk factors. Its incidence is less than 50 percent worldwide
but 70 to 80 percent in East Asian populations.

1039

* I once got to experience what this looks like for an extended stretch, as I traveled with a group of Somalis who were driving
empty gasoline tankers back from Sudan to the Indian Ocean in Kenya for refilling. At the end of each day of driving through
the desert, we’d sit around a campfire between the trucks, cooking a pot of spaghetti and camel’s milk. (Why that particular
combo? That’s a whole other story. . . .) And inevitably one of the six Somalis would do something that was perceived as
insulting by someone. There would be snarling, angry words, knives drawn from boots, two guys circling and lunging at each
other until everyone else roused themselves to get the two to settle down. And then, the hospitality flip side of the culture on
display, everyone would hurry over to make sure I got the best of the spaghetti/milk glob. “Eat, eat. You are our brother,”
they’d say, including whichever two had just been slashing at each other.

1040

* Well, whether the feud actually ended in the 1890s is open to interpretation. While the families declared a truce and stopped
the killings in 1891, their descendants battled for a week in 1979 on the game show Family Feud. The McCoys won three of
the five games, while the Hatfields won more money.

1041

* What’s antisocial punishment about? The general interpretation is that people are being punished for being generous
because they make everyone else look bad and increase the expectation of generosity from everyone else.

1042

* Ironic footnote: when coach passengers board through first class, the rate of air rage related to a sense of entitlement
increases even more among the first-class passengers.

1043

* The paper generated an astonishing number of articles in the lay press whose titles were variants on “Stress and the City.”

1044

* The online world is now undergoing cultural evolution, wrestling with how to deal with the toxic behavior of some people
online when they are shielded behind anonymity. Psychologists are even doing experiments, gifted with mammoth databases,
to see how best to curb such behavior with top-down approaches (e.g., being banned by authorities) and interventions driven
by peers (i.e., other players).

1045

* And there are remarkable similarities among such moralizing religions.

1046

* The authors used math straight out of chemistry for analyzing the extent of mixing between different types of solutions,
plus some math from physics usually used to disentangle the contributions made by overlapping waves. I understood exactly
zero of any of this and am putting faith in the vetting process of the journal, Science, the most selective science journal in the
country.

1047

* I was in San Francisco for the quake, and much was made of the fact that fancy downtown hotels opened their doors to
house people needing shelter. It’s worth noting that this generosity was for people made homeless by the quake, not people
who were already homeless. For them the earthquake was just another day of scrabbling. The hotels supposedly required a
credit card from people, not because they’d be charged for the room, but as evidence that this was the sort of person whose
homelessness mattered. This well could have been apocryphal; it’s hard to imagine that the staff at reception needed to see
someone’s plastic to tell the difference.

1048

* What were the “tightest” countries? Pakistan, Malaysia, India, Singapore, and South Korea. The least tight? Ukraine,
Estonia, Hungary, Israel, and the Netherlands.

1049

* As a counter to this, though, people in the tropics also have to foresee annual fluctuations in weather, and no Swede has
ever had to plan ahead for the monsoon season.

1050

* Pinker’s response to the cherry-picking charge is as follows: “Better Angels reports all the published estimates of per capita
rates of violent death in the archaeological and anthropological literature I could find.” S. Pinker, “Violence: Clarified,” Sci
338 (2012): 327. If I understand what he is saying accurately, this feels a bit facile. To be facetious, this would be like not
including Quakers in one’s analysis of violence because no one studying them had published something along the lines of
“Estimated per-capita rates of death in Quaker communities due to gangland-style executions in nightclubs: zero; due to
targeted drone missile strikes: zero; due to dirty bombs made with stolen plutonium: zero . . .”

1051

* When Chagnon was a guest lecturer in an anthro class of mine when I was an undergrad, students dressed up as Yanomamö
in a salute to him (hell no, I didn’t—I’m too inhibited); apparently it was standard fare for anthro students to crash his roadtrip lectures that way, which was probably totally irksome after a while, as he’d have to act all surprised and then pose for
pictures with them. Chagnon was at the center of a firestorm of controversy in 2000 when the journalist Patrick Tierney, in
his book Darkness in El Dorado: How Scientists and Journalists Devastated the Amazon, accused Chagnon and a
collaborator of causing a genocidal measles epidemic among the Yanomamö, along with other ethical abuses of them as
research subjects. The American Anthropological Association initially condemned Chagnon, which was generally interpreted
as his being convicted as much for being an abrasive, anti–old boy enfant terrible as for the factuality of the charges.
Eventually both the AAA and independent investigators exonerated Chagnon entirely, showing Tierney’s charges to range
from the sloppy to the fraudulent. Chagnon’s most recent book, a memoir, is entitled Noble Savages: My Life Among Two
Dangerous Tribes—the Yanomamö and the Anthropologists.

1052

* A distinction somehow reminiscent of Charlie the Tuna, back in those TV ads from my youth, being told that StarKist
wants tuna that taste good, not tuna with good taste.

1053

* !Kung speak a click language, with the exclamation mark in their name the notation for the click sound. Informally known
as “Bushmen,” they are part of the larger cultural group of Khoisan San found in Botswana, Namibia, Angola, and South
Africa. As orientation, the movie The Gods Must Be Crazy featured the !Kung. Of note, while “!Kung” is the most familiar
term most often used for these people, both they and most contemporary anthropologists use the term “Ju/’hoansi” instead.

1054

* I was raised in an anthropology department that was a major stronghold of !Kung fandom and generalized this to a huge
fondness for all things African HG (probably in part because they’re all short). A tiny remnant HG tribe alternately called the
Ndorobo or Okiek lives in forests north of the Serengeti in Kenya. They have an oddly symbiotic relationship with the
neighboring Maasai, emerging from the forest to trade things or to serve a shamanistic role in some Maasai ceremony. They
are short and silent, dressed in animal skins, and I’ve taken great pleasure in seeing how they unnerve tall, spear-toting
Maasai. My Maasai friends would make fun of me for how obsessed I was with the Ndorobo.

1055

* Boehm emphasizes that anthropologists never really know what truly is going on among their research subjects until
they’re privy to gossip. In doing my baboon research, I spent many seasons sharing camp with Maasai guys whom I knew
relatively well and would hear about big goings-on in their community. Eventually, my soon-to-be wife started joining me in
the field, and it was only then that we started to hear about the good stuff, via her becoming friends with some of the women
—the usual of who was or wasn’t sleeping with whom.

1056

* We’ll soon see an exception to that, involving the nonreproducing individual helping relatives to reproduce.

1057

* That is, the heterozygotic state. I made the tough decision to bypass homozygosity and heterozygosity in the main text, in
the interest of simplicity for the newcomer, and to instead exile the subject to footnotes. A brief primer: A point that I blithely
ignored in the genetics chapter is that most species, including humans, are “diploid,” which means that there are actually two
sets of chromosomes in each cell, with the same variety of genes. Eggs and sperm are specialized cells, being haploid (i.e.,
containing only a single copy of a chromosome). Put them together, and the egg that is destined to make you you is now
fertilized (i.e., diploid). Thus you actually have two copies of each gene, one from each parent. (Footnote to a footnote: the
exception is a specialized collection of genes in mitochondria, which come almost entirely from the mother). If both copies of
the gene have sequences that code for identical copies of a protein, the gene is “homozygotic.” If there are two different
versions, the gene is “heterozygotic.” What sort of trait is specified by the heterozygotic mixing of a gene? Some of the time,
the result is a trait that is intermediate between the two possible forms of homozygosity. More often the heterozygotic form
produces a trait that is identical to one of the two homozygotic forms. In other words, one of the versions “wins” out over the
other and is called a “dominant” version of the gene. In contrast, versions of genes that produce a trait only when in the
homozygotic form are “recessive.” If this is vastly confusing, I promise that you’ll be okay reading the rest of the book,
nonetheless.

1058

* Poor Wynne-Edwards was actually a major figure in evolution and behavior but, thanks to shallow and superficial people,
he is remembered only for having blown it with group selection. I, for example, haven’t a clue what else the guy ever did. His
full name was Vero Copner Wynne-Edwards, which probably explains why he’s always called “V. C. Wynne-Edwards,” no
doubt even as an infant.

1059

* The unique feature of the eusocial insect genetic system is that a sterile worker passes on more copies of her genes by
helping the queen to reproduce than by reproducing herself. Meanwhile, the eusocial insect world has been shaken up by the
fact that in some species (e.g., termites) there is a more conventional genetic system in place. People are still sorting that one
out.

1060

* Note: No one is claiming that a langur monkey is thinking this through, any more than would be some brine shrimp who
has evolved some sort of optimal behavioral reproductive strategy. An animal has the “goal” of “wanting” to pass on copies
of their genes and thus “decides” to do X. This is just shorthand for saying something like “Over the course of millennia,
individuals who do X have passed on copies of their genes at a higher rate, and this has become a common behavioral feature
of this species.” Animals don’t know about evolutionary biology, just as prototypes of airplane wings in a wind tunnel don’t
know about aerodynamics.

1061

* Or, more correctly, for each gene there’d be a 50 percent chance you’d share the same variant.

1062

* Also known as “inclusive fitness,” because a gene-based focus includes not only direct reproductive success (Darwinian
fitness) but also payoffs derived from the success of other relatives, weighted by their degree of relatedness.

1063

* Note the term used—“invest”—reflecting a quasi-economic orientation to some of the analyses in this field.

1064

* Such fraternal polyandry occurs in resource-poor regions, basically acting as a means to decrease population growth and
prevent family plots from winding up being below subsistance level when subdivided and inherited among all the sons in a
family. Instead, all the brothers are married to the one woman, who has equal sexual access to all of them; the brothers
“believe” that all of them, down to their infant brother, are equally biologically responsible for the children.

1065

* There is good evidence that inbreeding was responsible for the demise of the Spanish branch of the Habsburg dynasty. G.
Alvarez et al., “The Role of Inbreeding in the Extinction of a European Royal Dynasty,” PLoS ONE 4 (2009): e5174.

1066

* Note: not all olfactory kin recognition is based on MHC proteins; there are numerous other sources of an individual
olfactory signature. Note also how this can explain the kin-selection phenomenon mentioned earlier, where sperm form
cooperative swimming aggregates only with sperm from the same individual or a close relative. How to pull this off? Use the
MHC proteins on the surface of the sperm as Velcro—if two sperm have identical proteins (i.e., they’re from the same
person), they aggregate very tightly; close relative, not as tightly but still pretty tightly; more distant relative, less tightly, etc.

1067

* Antisocial behavior in the name of kin selection reaches its apogee in the animal kingdom, as far as I’m concerned, with a
phenomenon reported in a 2008 article in the Wall Street Journal. What restaurant/fast-food chain has the highest rate of
fights among clientele, nationwide? Yup, you guessed it—Chuck E. Cheese’s, where the fighting is among parents on edge
about anything that would detract from the perfection of their child’s birthday party. A particularly common scenario might
be where a parent takes exception to some kid hogging a video game and forcefully intervenes to allow their own child to
play, leading to an altercation between the parents—Cheney and Seyfarth’s monkeys would have no trouble following that
one. As reported in another journalistic exposé, such incidents can also involve attacks on the Chuck E. Cheese’s mascot,
including a case of a father accusing Chuck of having pinned his boy against a wall, while the mouse said he was just trying
to squeeze by a crowd of overexcited kids: “The man ripped the mouse’s head off and yelled at him in front of said rowdy
children, who probably were forever traumatized by the sight of the frightened 19-year-old kid’s head sticking out of the giant
mouse’s neck.”

1068

* This one is a bit controversial, in that the bat colonies are often made up of somewhat related females, making way for a
kin-selection argument.

1069

* To rein in the length of this chapter, I’ve had to force myself to relegate to this footnote a description of a system of
reciprical altruism found in single-cell amoeba called Dictyostelium discoideum (aka slime mold). In order to reproduce,
individual cells join in a structured colony in which about 80 percent of the cells reproduce and the rest play nonreproductive
supporting roles. When the colony consists of two different genetic lines of amoebas, there is cooperation in that each line
contributes about 20 percent of its cells to the unfun supporting role. Except that lines evolve to try to cheat by sneaking all
their cells into the reproductive pool, and other lines evolve to detect cheaters and refuse to interact with them. For example,
the amoebas express a cell-surface protein “adhesion molecule” that lets cells adhere to one another, forming the colony; an
anticheater mechanism is to express an adhesion molecule that doesn’t recognize (i.e., attach to) the adhesion protein of a
cheater line.

1070

* Some years ago a game show called Golden Balls ran in Britain. As the final step in a series of competitions, two
competitors would face each other and play a modified version of the PD. There’d be a pot of money (potentially tens of
thousands of pounds); each player would have to independently choose either “Split” or “Steal.” If both chose Split, they split
the money. If one chose Split and the other Steal, the sucker got zero and the defector got everything. If they both chose Steal,
they got nothing. YouTube is full of clips from various episodes, and they’re embarrassingly addictive. Also, see this
Radiolab analysis of the show: www.youtube.com/watch?
annotation_id=annotation_1155372699&feature=iv&src_vid=S0qjK3TWZE8&v=zUdBd7BDNu8.

1071

* The 1962 geopolitical thriller Fail-Safe, by Eugene Burdick and Harvey Wheeler, was premised on a Tit for Tat solution to
a signal error. An electronic glitch causes an air force squadron of bombers with nuclear weapons to believe that the United
States is under nuclear attack by the USSR; they are to destroy Moscow. The Americans and Soviets see what is happening,
and the U.S. military unsuccessfully tries to get the planes to turn back; the Soviets assume the American “Oops, sorry” is a
ruse and prepare an all-out counterattack. The American president (modeled on JFK) tries to show his sincerity and stop the
attack by sending up fighters to help Soviet jets shoot down the bomber squadron. A few are shot down, but a few get
through, and most of the Soviet brass are still convinced it is a ruse. Finally, as the only means to prevent an all-out nuclear
exchange, the president does a Tit for Tat, ordering a bomber to drop an equivalent bomb on New York City. Bummer of a
signal error. This book scared the willies out of me when I was a kid. I’d regularly scan the skies over my hometown, New
York, waiting to see the inevitable bomber.

1072

* I.e., “Oops, sorry, our bad taking out St. Petersburg. We thought we’d sorted out that bug after that Moscow snafu.”

1073

* A particularly clever exploitative strategy is called Pavlov. If you’re playing PD, the most advantageous outcomes for you,
in rank order, are: (a) you defect while the other person is a sucker who cooperates; (b) you both cooperate; (c) you both
defect; (d) you’re the sucker who cooperates while the other defects. Pavlov’s basic temperament is to cooperate, but every so
often, randomly, it defects, and the rule is that, independent of those occasional random actions, if your play resulted in one of
the two better outcomes, you do the same thing again next time; if the result was one of the two worse outcomes, you switch
your behavior the next time. What that means is that if you are playing against Always Cooperate or a highly forgiving
version of Forgiving Tit for Tat, your occasional random defections are either never or rarely punished, allowing you to
exploit the other player at length.

1074

* This doesn’t begin to scratch the surface of the weirdness of the naked mole rat. They live underground, have giant incisors
and no body hair so that they look like saber-toothed sausages, have remarkably little need for oxygen, have next to no pain
receptors in their skin, live about ten times longer than other rodents (up to around thirty years), and are remarkably resistant
to cancer. For this reason the prestigious science journal Nature named the naked mole rat its Vertebrate of the Year a few
years ago, which is much cooler and more impressive than making People magazine’s list of the Fifty Most Beautiful People
in the World.

1075

* The importance of founder populations was something championed by one of the giants of evolutionary biology, Ernst
Mayr of Harvard; in his view, small founder populations were the driving force for new species forming; it is an extension of
his thinking to view transient founder populations as a means to establish cooperation in a larger population. Remarkably,
Mayr published four well-received books when he was over age ninety, the last one (What Makes Biology Unique?) in 2004
at age one hundred, shortly before his death. Inspirational guy, for a bunch of reasons.

1076

* Two technical notes. Social monogamy of pair-bonding species doesn’t always translate into sexual monogamy.
“Tournament” is used by some solely to describe species in which the male-male competition literally takes the form of all
the males gathering for competitive displays (as in sage grouse or some ungulate species) but is also used by many, as here, to
more broadly describe multimale, multifemale promiscuous mating systems.

1077

* Goodall, in her chimp fieldwork, reported the case of Flint, the youngest child of the very aged Flo; she never fully weaned
him, and he remained highly dependent on her, even into adolescence. When she died of old age, Flint underwent what can
only be described as a reactive depression, failing to forage or socially interact; he died a month later.

1078

* What is an extreme version of such insulin resistance called by doctors? Gestational diabetes. In other words, we’re back to
disciplinary buckets—if you’re an OB/GYN, we’re talking about a disease. If you’re an evolutionary biologist, we’re talking
about a particularly tumultuous struggle between mom and fetus.

1079

* This arms race is revealed in two classes of diseases. Normal development represents a balancing of paternally derived
progrowth genes and maternally derived ones doing the opposite. What if there is a mutation in a paternally derived
imprinted gene, removing it from the equation? The counteracting maternal genes, unopposed, greatly inhibit fetal growth,
and the fetus doesn’t implant. And what if the opposite occurs, with a mutation incapacitating the female gene, leaving the
progrowth paternal genes working unopposed? Out-of-control growth of the placenta, resulting in an aggressive cancer,
choriocarcinoma.

1080

* Neuroscientists often use the term “endophenotype,” which basically means “a trait that we used to be unable to detect at
the phenotypic level but now can, thanks to some invention, so we’re going to call it an endophenotype, meaning a newly
observable trait that is kind of inside you.” Your blood type is an endophenotype, detectable with an assay on a blood sample;
the size of your amygdala is an endophenotype, detectable with a brain scanner.

1081

* By now it should be clear how often thinking about evolution is helped by metaphors and analogies. This prompted a great
meta-analogy that everyone attributes to the biologist Steve Jones of University College London: “Evolution is to analogy as
statues are to birdshit.”

1082

* Pääbo, who is a stunningly good scientist, pioneered the sequencing of ancient DNA, being the first to sequence the
genomes of mammoths and Neanderthals.

1083

* A great analysis of this can be found in The Myth of Monogamy (New York: Henry Holt, 2002), by University of
Washington psychologist David Barash and psychiatrist Judith Lipton.

1084

* I recently read in the Kenya Daily Nation about a case that takes one’s breath away, in its challenge not just to kin-selection
thinking but to our notion of what boundaries of inhumanity would never be crossed. In parts of Tanzania there is the
widespread belief that the organs of albinos have magical healing powers, and a shocking number of albino individuals are
murdered there for that purpose. The story reports on a five-year-old albino girl in neighboring Kenya and the plot to smuggle
her into Tanzania to sell her to a shaman to be sacrificed for her organs. The plotters? The girl’s stepfather and father.

1085

* For example, !Kung bushmen from the Kalahari in Botswana, aboriginal Australian groups, Mbuti Pygmies from the
Congo, northern Canadian Inuits, and Amazonian populations.

1086

* Related to this was the notion that most of the evolution of behavior was not about dealing with the social complexities of
fellow species members but about dealing with abiotic (i.e., nonbiological) pressures. In other words, that behavior evolved
mostly for dealing with the environment, rather than for competing with other individuals. Again, the main implication of that
for our purposes is that it would be another way in which the gradualist importance of interindividual competition was less
than the sociobiologists thought. This emphasis on the importance of abiotic selective pressures was common among Soviet
evolutionary biologists, probably reflecting not only the Marxist ideology but also the awful winters.

1087

* Who says a scientist can’t be the life of the party?

1088

* Something fascinating about the foxes and Moscow dogs: Both were selected primarily or exclusively for behavioral traits.
But along with those traits came changes in appearance: The foxes are cute—shorter snouts, rounder ears and foreheads, curly
tails, more varied coloration than standard foxes. And the Moscow dogs, exactly the opposite. If you want to domesticate a
species, breed it for arrested development—a dog is basically a baby wolf, interacting with humans as if they’re all Mommy,
and with the cute baby features. Same with the foxes, and just the opposite with the Moscow dogs. There is evidence that
domestication mostly works on genes disproportionately related to brain development.

1089

* Apparently there has been a brouhaha over the fact that San Marco’s arches don’t quite fit the technical architectural
definition of a spandrel. Whatever.

1090

* Considerable debate and speculation have gone into the question of whether female orgasm is a spandrel, carried along as
baggage by the selection that gave rise to it in males. Enough said; fools rush in. . . .

1091

* Well, maybe not all that dramatically—someone poured a pitcher of water on his head. But still.

1092

* This easy picture was complicated by Trivers being a friend and coauthor of Black Panther Party founder Huey Newton.

1093

* By great fortune, I arrived at Harvard as a freshman bio/anthropology major the season when Wilson published
Sociobiology and all hell broke loose. And while it was fantastic, giddying fun for me, watching the fireworks, the personal
nature of the attacks was clearly devastating to some of the principals—for example, protestors at Wilson’s talks regularly
and absurdly chanted about his being a genocidal racist. Those years afforded me the chance to observe some of the players
up close, to even get to know a few of them slightly, and both camps had roughly equal distributions of terrific, admirable
role models and arrogant, insufferable egotists. My favorite story from this period: Many sociobiologists favored a macho,
hard-edged persona. One day I rushed into the office of one of them, Professor X, holding a new paper I had just read. This
guy was famed for a sociobiological model about some behavior, and this paper, by his adversary Professor Z, ripped apart
the model with page after page of statistical analyses. “Wow, did you see this paper? Whaddya think?” I stupidly asked.
Professor X flipped through the paper backward, glancing at the equations now and then. Finally he dismissively tossed the
paper on his desk and delivered the ultimate sociobiological putdown: “Professor Z has a slide rule instead of a penis.”

1094

* I have no idea what it is that I just wrote. . . .

1095

* Ditto.

1096

* Two important points: This intergroup bias effect was demonstrable in males but not females and was most pronounced
when males were looking at pictures of other males. Second, shortly after publication the paper was retracted; apparently a
data-coding error called into question some of the findings; however, those described here were unaltered by this error, and I
think they are perfectly valid. Out of commendable cautiousness, the authors, all top researchers, retracted the paper.

1097

* A powerful example of this is seen in the first war of Indian independence, also known as the Sepoy Mutiny, of 1857.
Indian soldiers—sepoys—serving in the British East India Company’s army rebelled when it became known that the bullets
they were issued were greased in either tallow, derived from cows, or lard, from pigs—major offenses to the Hindu and
Muslim soldiers, respectively. Mind you, this was not the British colonial overlords doing something offensive to the core
cultural values of either group—for example, declaring Allah a false prophet or banning polytheistic worship. Virtually every
culture on earth has food prohibitions, often pretty arbitrary ones meant to merely signal core values (kosher laws for
Orthodox Jews, for example, revolve around zoological arcana about whether a species has a cloven hoof) but that eventually
gain a huge power. Before it was over, the Sepoy Mutiny killed more than 100,000 Indians.

1098

* Animate too, in ways that no doubt make historical sense, but still. For example, in French the kidney is masculine but the
bladder feminine; the trachea is feminine, the esophagus masculine.

1099

* This study, of avid Yankees and Red Sox fans, also showed that this neuroimaging pattern was strongest among individuals
who self-reported the highest likelihood of feeling aggressive toward a fan from the other side (after controlling for the
person’s general level of aggression).

1100

* I heard a brutally cynical joke years ago built around the zero-sum notion that anything that is bad for Them is
automatically good for Us: So God appears to all the leaders on earth and announces that he is destroying the world because
of human sinfulness. The American president assembles his cabinet and says, “I have good news and bad news. God exists,
but he is going to destroy earth.” The premier of the Soviet Union (this was told during the atheistic days of the USSR) pulls
together his advisers and says, “I have bad news and worse news. God exists, and he’s going to destroy earth.” And the prime
minister of Israel tells his cabinet, “I have good news and great news. God exists, and he’s going to destroy the Palestinians
for us.”

1101

* These scenarios of members of ethnic, religious, or racial groups eager to publicly punish a shameful in-group member can
cut both ways—which behavior constitutes acting shamefully? During the 1969 Chicago Seven trial, presided over by a
Jewish judge, Julius Hoffman, the chief provocateur of the defendants, the Jewish Abbie Hoffman (no relation), would insult
and taunt the judge by yelling, “You are a shanda fur die goyim [Yiddish for “disgrace in front of the gentiles”]. You would
have served Hitler better.”

1102

* This plays out currently with the deep resentment of many in the Muslim American community that they are especially
obligated to condemn Islamic fundamentalist terrorism and will be under a cloud of suspicion if they do not. “I refuse to
condemn, not because I don’t condemn, but . . . because doing so would mean that I agree that I deserve to be asked,” states
the Arab American writer Amer Zahr.

1103

* Examples of “good alien” movies include The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951), Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977),
Cocoon (1985), Avatar (2009), and, of course, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982). Meanwhile, the numerous “bad alien”
movies include The Blob (1958), Liquid Sky (1982), Devil Girl from Mars (1954), and, naturally, Alien (1979). The bad/good
alien ratio is consistent over the decades (in other words, it’s not the case that the 1950s were disproportionately filled with
scary alien movies so that the directors weren’t called by the House Un-American Activities Committee, and the 1960s filled
with good-alien efforts of stoned directors just back from Kathmandu). I thank Katrina Hui, a student research assistant, who
did this analysis.

1104

* Interestingly, research has shown a similar pattern with conspiracy theorists. People who believe that aliens landed in New
Mexico way back when have a higher-than-chance likelihood of also believing that Princess Di was murdered at the behest of
the other royals. And just to show how irrational this all is, as long as you don’t ask them about both scenarios too close in
time to each other, people who believe that Di was murdered . . . also . . . believe at a higher-than-chance level that she faked
her own death and is, say, living under an assumed name in Wisconsin.

1105

* How is such priming done? The subject is given a series of scrambled sentences and has to scramble them. In one group
most of the sentences discuss things that tap into the concept of loyalty (“teammates helps Jane her”), while the other group’s
sentences are about equality (“fairness advocates Chris for”).

1106

* In a follow-up study, one that, incongruously, I was involved in, similar issues were examined concerning one target
individual—Barack Obama—during the 2008 election season. Subjects were presented with swatches of different shades of
brown and were asked which most accurately matched Obama’s skin color. Women who viewed him as more white were
more likely to vote for him at their time of ovulation; women who viewed him as more black showed the opposite. Of note,
these are small effects. Electability is in the eye, and the hormone status, of the beholder.

1107

* As a historical oddity, Nazi Germany had the strictest laws in the world concerning the humane treatment and euthanizing
of animals. The dogs went with far less suffering than their owners.

1108

* Just to subtly hint at what I thought of the debacle.

1109

* This one puzzles me intensely. When I was a kid, I decided that bullies would be nicer to me if I knew vast amounts about
football. This was during the glory days of the Packers in the Vince Lombardi era; thus I decided that they were the team I
favored. I memorized and irritatingly spouted every pointless bit of trivia I could find on them, watched my first (and pretty
much only) football game, which turned out to be the Packers legendarily defeating the Cowboys for the 1967 championship
with a fourth-down touchdown from the one-yard line, with sixteen seconds remaining, played in minus-fifteen-degree
weather. And that’s it. My football obsession faded when I decided that knowing baseball factoids would be more
advantageous (this was fortuitous, living in Brooklyn—soon after came the miraculous 1969 championship season for the
hapless Mets). I’ve never been to a professional football game, can’t tell you anything about the Packers since (I don’t even
know if Bart Starr is still their quarterback, but it wouldn’t surprise me one bit if he’s retired by now), basically ignore
football. Yet almost fifty years later, if I happen to hear once every few years that the Packers are having a good or bad
season, my mood is briefly influenced by the news; if I see a photograph of people playing football and they include the
Packers, I’m sure I preferentially look at them versus the other team, am made fleetingly happy by it being them; I felt
excited the one time I met someone from Green Bay and, after thirty seconds of chatting pointlessly with them about the
Packers of the sixties, felt a near-spiritual connection with them. It’s just plain weird. And sure demonstrates the unlikely
power that “belonging” can have.

1110

* I once got pulled into this silly, fun venture. There is a diner called Buck’s near Stanford that is famed as a place where
venture capitalists come to make deals over power breakfasts; apparently, legendary Silicon Valley companies have been born
at its tables. A Silicon Valley newspaper persuaded me, as a primatologist, to tag along with a reporter and do ethological
observations of venture capitalist dominance interactions in their natural habitat at Buck’s. We monitored one table with two
opposing pairs of business guys negotiating something. Each side had a tanned, fit alpha male, presumably the boss; each
side had a subaltern toady, weighed down with folders and spreadsheets. The toadies interacted with each other constantly,
pushing papers at each other, jabbing fingers in the air, grimacing. The two bosses floated above it, their chairs angled to
conspicuously ignore each other, their cell phones miraculously ringing each time the other side attempted to talk to them—
they’d wave an imperious, dismissive hand at the opponent and take the call. Occasionally, the toadie would ask his boss
something privately and, with a display of Mandarin minimalism, the boss would briefly nod his head and change the course
of history. Negotiations concluded, seemingly to everyone’s satisfaction, hands were shaken, breakfast was left ritualistically
untouched, and everyone departed. The reporter and I scrambled over to the window to observe them in the parking lot.
Adversarial interactions over with, the Us/Them-ing shifted—the subalterns scurried off to their sensible little Priuses while
the two Masters of the Universe remained chatting, each retrieving a tennis racket from his SUV, amiably comparing them,
each trying out a swing or two with the other’s. At that moment the face of each one’s faithful toady probably wouldn’t have
even activated the fusiform face area in his boss; instead, the most important Us concerned the enjoyable presence of
someone else who could commiserate about the hassles of alimony for a third ex-wife.

1111

* Such heterogeneity is hard to appreciate in the United States, where most African Americans descend from a few West
African tribes that constitute 1 to 2 percent of the total tribal variability in Africa. One of the consequences of this, the fact
that drugs are now marketed that preferentially target hypertension among African Americans, seemingly reifies the
biological race concept but actually tells you more about the biology of descendants of a small subset of West Africans than
about race as a whole.

1112

* This is not always the case, though. Much analysis went into the acquittal of O. J. Simpson by a jury that included eight
African American women. Would their most pertinent group identification be one of gender—and thus responsive to
Simpson’s history of domestic violence—or of race—yet another African American man potentially being framed by the
criminal justice system? The rest, as they say, is history.

1113

* The story has a double layer of poignancies. Prior to the war, one of Armistead’s closest friends was Winfield Scott
Hancock, commanding a brigade at the battle . . . on the Union side. The dying Armistead asked after Hancock’s well-being
and requested that Bingham send his warm greetings to his old friend.

1114

* The punch line here is how such individuals barely register with us as people—as we’ll see, neuroimaging supports this. A
recent finding highlights the opposite concerning the weird American legal notion of “corporate personhood”—when people
contemplate the morality of corporate actions, they activate Theory of Mind networks, just as when contemplating the
morality of actions of fellow humans.

1115

* With the reminder that “competence” is used not in the everyday sense where “low competence” would seem pejorative but
simply as a measure of agency.

1116

* With “competence” here not being skill at being rocket scientists but rather the efficacy those people had when they got it
into their heads to, say, steal your ancestral lands.

1117

* In my experience in East Africa, the charge by African men that the “Hindis” (i.e., Indo-Pakistanis, most of whose families
have lived in East Africa for generations) are not “real Africans” is often code for “They won’t sleep with us.”

1118

* Here’s an example of how things, naturally, are more complicated than this simple matrix. Insofar as we view lowwarmth/low-competence individuals as dehumanized objects, we objectify them. But “objectify” more frequently denotes
sexualization of women. In one study men with high degrees of hostile sexism showed less activation of the medial PFC
(along with other brain regions associated with Theory of Mind and perspective taking) when looking at pictures of women.
But only if the pictures were particularly sexualized. And there was a world of difference between how a hostilely sexist male
viewed a sexually provocative picture of a woman versus a picture of a homeless person. In the words of the authors, the
study shows that “diminished mental state attribution is not unique to targets that people prefer to avoid.”

1119

* As I write, the Shiite/Sunni dichotomy dominates, producing the profound incongruity of both Iranian and American forces
battling ISIS fighters in Iraq. The enemy of my enemy is my friend.

1120

* To see how little has changed, see the 2005 documentary A Girl Like Me, by the then seventeen-year-old filmmaker Kiri
Davis: www.youtube.com/watch?v=z0BxFRu_Sow.

1121

* Where activation is, I think, an appropriate marker for negative Them-ing.

1122

* An extensive health psychology literature shows that “poor but happy” is mostly nonsense—poverty gives rise to higher
rates of major depressive and anxiety disorders, suicide, and stress-related disease. As we’ll see in a later chapter, “poor but
honest” has more truth to it.

1123

* My apologies for how baboon-centric the examples in the coming pages will be; it reflects my thirty-plus years hanging
around them.

1124

* Nice evidence that we’re not always just like other animals: Those antihierarchical Buddhists have a text, the Vinaya
Pitaka, that instructs monks to defecate not in the order of seniority but in the order of arrival at the toilet. There is hope for
this planet.

1125

* Implicit in this is the fact these males and females have separate hierarchies. In general, females of the highest-ranking
family can push around the lowest-quartile rankings of males, though males otherwise dominate females.

1126

* Note: The correlation between neocortex size and group size across primate species probably reflects each trait influencing
the other, i.e., coevolution of the two traits. The neuroimaging study shows that a bigger social group can cause interesting
parts of the brain to expand (in ways having far more to do with the neural plasticity of chapter 5 than with genes and
evolution).

1127

* An example of this that I found to be excruciatingly uncomfortable: I used to play in a regular pickup soccer game at
Stanford. I was terrible, which was widely and tolerantly recognized by all. One of the best, most respected players was a
Guatemalan guy who happened to be a janitor in my building. At soccer he’d call me Robert (on the rare occasion when
anything I did was relevant to play). And when he came to empty the garbage from my office and lab, no matter how much I
tried to get him to stop, it would be “Dr. Sapolsky.”

1128

* Given how unlikely it is that those soon-to-be-dominant individuals with the largest-of-the-large PFC/STCs just happened
to be placed in the largest groups.

1129

* Probably to speed things along, using animals that would learn the shock/bar-pressing relationship the fastest.

1130

* This applies to more global periods of duress as well; it turns out that despite the image of such periods as increasing
polarization, it is the rare leftist who becomes more implicitly leftist at such times (stay tuned).

1131

* Interestingly, Haidt does not characterize himself as conservative, although recent interviews suggest that this is shifting.

1132

* While it is debatable whether McCarthy actually felt threatened (or even believed a word of what he spewed), he certainly
knew how to exploit others with that tendency.

1133

* Importantly, while conservatives may be more sensitive to feeling threatened, they’re not necessarily more empathic to
threat to someone else—conservatives are more likely to be skeptical about the validity of someone else’s physical pain, more
likely to frame it as malingering and dependent manipulation..

1134

* Negative images included someone eating worms, excrement floating in a toilet, a bloody wound, and an open sore teeming
with maggots. Fun.

1135

* This has even been shown to involve formal transitive logic. Animal A loses a dominance interaction with animal B.
Animal A then observes animal B losing a dominance interaction to animal C. Animal A then, on his first encounter with
animal C, gives a subordination signal. This has been shown in various primate species, rats, birds, and even fish.

1136

* The study also showed, with nice ethological logic, that the same conforming did not occur in orangutans, who are solitary
primates.

1137

* Chimp yawning is most readily evoked by watching yawning by another familiar chimp, next-most readily by watching a
familiar human yawning, followed by an unfamiliar human yawning; however, contagious yawning is not evoked by an
unfamiliar chimp or an unfamiliar primate species (a baboon).

1138

* I’d love to know what is going on in the heads of chimps when they abandon their alternative method. Are they activating
the amygdala, initiating a stress response? What is a chimp’s equivalent of worrying about seeming like a dork?

1139

* Social identity theory is most associated with the Polish/French/British psychologist Henri Tajfel. As will be seen, Tajfel,
pondering why normal people join the herd in doing awful things, was but one of the many scientists in this field whose lives
had been personally scorched by the Holocaust.

1140

* What, if anything, such mimicry has to do with “mirror neurons” will await the discussion in chapter 14 as to what, if
anything, mirror neurons have to do with empathy.

1141

* As a slick part of the design, it wasn’t the actor in the next room doing this emoting. Instead, pressing the shock button of
each particular intensity triggered the playing of a particular recording of sounds commensurate with that shock intensity.
This would standardize the supposed agony of the learner from one subject to the next.

1142

* E.g., “So, the scientists found that 65 percent of the subjects were willing to shock the learner to death and then eat his
heart. And in the prison study, get this, 65 percent of the guards also became cannibals. It’s, like, freaky that they got the
same number.”

1143

* Cool real-life coincidence that isn’t coincidental—Milgram and Zimbardo knew each other as classmates in their high
school in the Bronx.

1144

* One study inspired by Milgram was the Hofling hospital experiment, in which nurses, unaware that they were in an
experiment, would be ordered by an unknown doctor to give a dangerously high dose of a medication to a patient. Despite
their knowing of the danger, twenty-one out of twenty-two nurses were willing to comply.

1145

* Ironic Beginning Department: the SPE was funded by the U.S. military, which was interested in making military prisons
run better.

1146

* Remember, these were predominantly psychologically sound college students. In the SPE nearly all of them had indicated
at the beginning that they would rather be a prisoner than a guard, and a number indicated that they had volunteered in order
to learn what prison would be like, expecting to be jailed at some point for civil-rights or antiwar activity. And as is often
underemphasized in accounts of the SPE, many of the prisoners, as well as the guards, were deeply distressed afterward,
having seen how readily they were broken into passivity.

1147

* One teacher, for example, became a conscientious objector during Vietnam, prompted by his horror at his behavior in the
study.

1148

* And reflecting this, Zimbardo’s recent work examines defiance of unjust authority.

1149

* The authors of the study also included a category of repellent acts that were nevertheless not moral transgressions, once
again matched for a sibling involvement—drinking your sibling’s urine, eating your sibling’s scab.

1150

* And to demonstrate how much this is tapping into the social brains of these kids, this works only if the shapes are
personified with eyes.

1151

* Dogs differed from primates in two interesting ways that make sense, both dogwise and primatewise. Primates would get
pissed and stop working if there was a difference in the quality of the reward (grape versus cucumber); in contrast, dogs
didn’t distinguish quality (bread versus sausage), only whether one was rewarded and the other not. Second, while many
monkeys refused to accept an eventual reward and would never cooperate again, dogs all eventually came around, after
enough entreaties to “shake” by the human.

1152

* But what if the monkey chooses the two-marshmallow option over the marshmallow/celery one because, well, having any
sort of situation with two marshmallows on the scene was just so much more exciting? The authors did a nice control—when
there was no monkey in the adjacent space, the choice would be random as to what food was deposited in the second space.

1153

* Actually, the trolley problem was invented by the British philosopher Philippa Foot in 1967.

1154

* And as alluded to earlier, people with vmPFC damage are strongly and equally willing to pull the lever or push the person.
You see the same if you give people a benzodiazepine (a tranquilizer like Valium). The vmPFC and amygdala are calmed
down (both by direct actions of the drug and secondarily via damping of the sympathetic nervous system), and people are
more willing to push.

1155

* I kind of wish the authors had indicated the name of the bank, just in case I’m ever considering depositing money in a
Swiss bank and want to be able to immediately check one candidate off my list of possible banks.

1156

* And recall from the last chapter how Haidt has shown that liberals place more of an emphasis than conservatives do on
harm and fairness issues, while conservatives disproportionately value loyalty, respect, and purity. Haidt drolly refers to these
studies as his “cross-cultural” research, conjuring images of him with pith helmet and mosquito net, trekking through the
likes of Berkeley and Provo.

1157

* Just as an off-the-cuff example, if I were to find myself in the middle of a religious service and suddenly suffer from
hideously loud, malodorous flatulence, I’d sure hope I was hanging out with Quakers rather than, say, a bunch of the boys
from the Taliban at Friday prayer.

1158

* Just to bring another term into the mix, most in the field seem to categorize embarrassment as a transient, low-rent version
of shame. Its regulatory power is shown by the Semai people of the Malay Peninsula, who say, “There is no authority here
but embarrassment.”

1159

* Which, to emphasize something that we all truly know but have trouble remembering, is not synonymous with happiness.
Extensive research on happiness, ranging from longitudinal studies of the same individuals over time to huge cross-cultural
studies of tens of thousands of subjects in dozens of countries, all show the same thing: when people rise out of abject
poverty, they most definitely tend to become happier. But above the level of struggling to eke out an existence, there is
remarkably little relationship between income and happiness.

1160

* Bowles cites a great example of this, where sanctions decrease in-group prosociality: Some parents are habitually late
picking up their kids at their preschool. “Please don’t do it,” the school e-mails all parents. “It delays our wonderful staff
from being able to leave work.” This helps, but still there are some parents who are habitually late. So the school institutes a
sanctions program—each time you’re late, we add a charge to your bill. And the rate of parental tardiness worsens. Why?
Because the transgression has been moved from the realm of in-group social intuition (“Hey, I shouldn’t be selfish toward
members of our school community”) to a more calculated realm (“Okay, I’m willing to incur an increased cost for my
convenience”). This might also be a way to frame the explanation for why, in that cross-cultural study of small-scale societies
discussed above, those with the most market integration had the most prosocial game play—what markets and cash
economies do is shift a world of reciprocal altruism from the realm of social intuition to social calculation.

1161

* These themes bear a strong resemblance to those of the economics Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman, in his best seller,
Thinking, Fast and Slow—rather than framing things in a moral arena, his analysis is of the differing strengths and
weaknesses of fast intuitive thinking and slow analytical thinking in the realm of economics.

1162

* Although the neuroscientist Sam Harris, in his book Lying, argues that all lying—even white lies, lies to spare someone’s
feelings, lies accomplishing the proverbial heroics of, say, hiding a runaway slave—are wrong.

1163

* Just to reiterate, starting with those social yeast, deception is not limited to primates. Deception along similar lines to that
observed in capuchins has been reported in those brilliant corvid birds; moreover, behaviors such as plover birds feigning
injury to lure a predator away from its nest have been interpreted as tactical deception. (“Don’t eat the babies. Look, come
after me! I’ve got more meat and I can’t get away because I’m injured.”) Similar deception has also been reported in other
birds, some ungulates, and cuttlefish.

1164

* Prompting two great quotes, one generally attributed to the politician Sam Rayburn (“Son, always tell the truth. Then you’ll
never have to remember what you said the last time.”) and the other from eighteenth-century Swiss philosopher Johann
Lavater (“He who is passionate and hasty is generally honest; it is your cool dissembling hypocrite of whom you should be
beware.”).

1165

* As assessed by scores on a subpart of a psychopathy questionnaire or by a history of successfully conning people.
Importantly, the studies included not only a control group of normal individuals but also a control group of psychopaths who
just happened not to be compulsive liars.

1166

* The amygdaloid involvement is probably pertinent to a case report from some French neurologists concerning a man who
had a seizure every time he lied during business negotiations. He was found to have a tumor pressing on his amygdala; once
it was removed, the seizures went away (there was no mention of whether the guy was still lying at work). The authors called
this “Pinocchio syndrome.”

1167

* Or stated another way, the chimps were less susceptible to superstitious behavior than were the humans.

1168

* They gave up more readily in a difficult task and experienced less pleasure—showing less of a preference for sucroseflavored water.

1169

* This is determined with a “hot-plate test.” A mouse is placed on a room-temperature hot plate; the temperature of the plate
is gradually raised. You can tell the instant when the heat first becomes uncomfortable—the mouse lifts a paw (at which point
the mouse is removed). What was the plate’s temperature at that point? That’s the mouse’s pain threshold.

1170

* Reading about these animals experiencing this sure induces an empathic state.

1171

* “Is associated with”—that’s pretty uninformative. For simplicity, I’ve ignored there being all sorts of subparts to the ACC;
depression is associated with increased activation in some and decreased in others. Overall, it fits a picture of ACC
dysfunction being centrally involved in the suffocating, permeating sadness of depression.

1172

* With that truly important proviso that this applies only to within-group interactions. When dealing with a Them, as we saw,
oxytocin makes people more hostile and xenophobic.

1173

* It can be an informative political litmus test to consider whose pain you readily feel (e.g., a fetus versus a homeless person).
“What it means to be liberal or conservative became ideologically solidified around the problem of [empathy for only certain
types of] pain,” writes one political scientist.

1174

* For those who care, it’s the premotor cortex, along with the supplementary motor area and primary somatosensory cortex.

1175

* Back to Keltner’s work—when comparing the wealthy and the poor, guess whose hearts speed up when they’re forced to
pay attention to someone else’s suffering?

1176

* I am on astonishingly thin ice writing about Buddhist thought, which is why we’re now going to quickly transition to the
terra firma of considering what neuroscientists have found out about Buddhists.

1177

* With the hope that the distancing thoughts are along the lines of “This is how I do good,” rather than, say, “I think I’ll have
a chicken salad sandwich for lunch.”

1178

* A colleague of mine used to sardonically talk about his hope that the spouse of some senator would come down with the
neurological disease that he studied—then, finally, someone powerful would empathize with sufferers of that disease and
steer more grant money in the direction of research.

1179

* I once benefited in a Maimonides-esque scenario when I, sitting on a toilet in a Starbucks, discovered much too late that
there was no toilet paper. Soon someone else entered; hearing him rummaging around one of the urinals, I tentatively begged
for a charitable act—“Uh, hey, when you’re done, could you tell the people at the counter that there is no toilet paper here?”
“Sure,” answered the anonymous voice, and soon a barista’s hand appeared underneath the toilet stall door offering, if not
alms for the poor, TP for the stranded. The trick now is how to re-create this scenario with subjects in brain scanners. This
may not, in fact, have been the perfect anonymous interaction. While the Good Samaritan who carried my message and I
were anonymous to each other, he wasn’t to the baristas. And for all I know, they promptly gave him a free latte or praised
him in song or offered to mate with him. So now we need to know whether the guy expected any/all of these things to happen
when he agreed to help me. More research is needed.

1180

* Lest we get carried away with ourselves, there is good evidence that some of the most impressive cave paintings were done
by Neanderthals rather than humans. But by now, who cares about those silly species designations, what with all the
human/Neanderthal mating now shown to have been going on?

1181

* Let alone being so much inside said groove as to be grooved yourself, i.e., groovy.

1182

* Just consider what is inherent in the fact that numerous languages worldwide have grammatical genders, with some nouns
designated as masculine, others as feminine. The cognitive scientist Lera Boroditsky has shown how grammatical gender can
influence thought. In one study she showed that German speakers tend to associate the word “bridge” (which is feminine in
German) with attributes such as “beautiful,” “elegant,” or “slender,” while Spanish speakers (for whom “bridge” is
masculine) tend toward associations with “big,” “strong,” “towering,” and “sturdy.”

1183

* Interestingly, harking back to earlier chapters on hierarchy and status, the authors also found that being of lower
socioeconomic status predicted a greater degree of moralizing purity, but not moralizing justice or harm avoidance.

1184

* Which harks back to our confusing goodness with beauty (thus giving lesser jail sentences to those people with symmetrical
faces, etc.). As first introduced in chapter 3, we use similar brain circuits, activating the medial orbitofrontal cortex, when
contemplating whether an act is moral as when contemplating whether a face is beautiful.

1185

* Habyarimana’s plane also carried Cyprien Ntaryamira, the Hutu president of neighboring Burundi, an equally small,
impoverished nation with the same history of Hutu/Tutsi conflict. It soon had its own ethnic civil war.

1186

* And continue to. In the aftermath of the predominantly Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic Front rebel army’s victory, approximately
two million Rwandan Hutus fled the country, fearing reprisals (of which there have been remarkably few under the
government of rebel leader Paul Kagame). The massive refugee camps formed in the eastern Congo by the fleeing Hutus
were soon under the control of the defeated Hutu militias and became a breeding ground for attacks on Rwanda and the two
subsequent Congo wars, which killed millions.

1187

* I’ve been mighty interested in the history of the Rwandan genocide. I spent time in Rwanda a few years before it occurred,
looking at mountain gorillas on its border with the Congo. Predictably, pathetically, stupidly, poignantly, something-ly, I came
away thinking of the people there as kind and generous. I assume that most everyone I encountered wound up dead, killers,
and/or refugees. At moments when I wonder why anyone should bother writing a book like this, I taunt myself by thinking,
“Golly gee, if only I’d teamed up with the Tooth Fairy and the Easter Bunny to give some lectures in Rwanda about the
biology of pseudospeciation, all of this could have been prevented.”

1188

* As a sacred-values issue that either does or doesn’t seem ironic, depending on your politics, the authors cite how the
newborn State of Israel in 1948, in a terrible economic state, nonetheless refused compensation money from Germany for
property of Jews murdered by the Nazis—until Germany publicly expressed contrition.

1189

* The coming of peace to Northern Ireland was laden with other instances of sacred values and symbolism. For example,
around the time that the Reverend Ian Paisley, as bloody-handed a Unionist as there was, became first minister in Northern
Ireland, the Catholic president of the Republic of Ireland, Bertie Ahern, sent Paisley and his wife a fiftieth weddinganniversary gift—a wooden bowl. This was rife with meaning, as it was crafted from a tree at the Irish site of the Battle of the
Boyne, where in 1690 the Protestant William of Orange defeated Catholic James II. That victory was critical to the
subsequent centuries of Protestant domination in Ireland, an endless point of pain for Catholics and pride for Protestants (who
would commemorate the victory every July 12 with provocative marches through Catholic neighborhoods that usually ended
in violence). For Ahern to acknowledge the sacred historical significance of the site for Unionists was enormous. Paisley
soon reciprocated by visiting the site with Ahern, bringing him a 1685 musket as a gift and talking about the significance of
the site for all the Irish people.

1190

* How did Viljoen and Mandela come to meet secretly on that couch? It was catalyzed by a leading antiapartheid
theologian . . . Viljoen’s twin brother Abraham. The two had been long estranged, although the general intervened on more
than one occasion to prevent his brother from being assassinated by a right-wing death squad. The twins are teaching tools for
chapter 8—same genes, radically opposite politics and worldviews. Same genes, and both charismatic leaders who devoted
and risked their lives for what they viewed as a sacred cause.

1191

* See the actual event at www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ncwee9IAu8I. South Africa’s national anthem is now a hybrid of the
two songs, with some Zulu, Sesotho, and English thrown in for good measure. While its existence is intensely moving, it
must be hell on wheels to sing right, modulating all over the place.

1192

* I’m hugely grateful to Josh Greene and Owen Jones for closely vetting this chapter.

1193

* Namely keeping dangerous people far away from everyone else—just to get this one out of the way early in the chapter.

1194

* And one thing that I’m not going anywhere near is this New Age–y notion: “Of course we have free will. You can’t say that
our behaviors are determined by a mechanistic universe, because the universe is indeterminate, because of quantum
mechanics.” Argh. What anyone sensible who has thought about this will point out is that (a) the consequences of the
subatomic indeterminacy of quantum mechanics (about which I understand zero) don’t ripple upward enough to influence
behavior, and (b) if they did, the result wouldn’t be the freedom to will your behavior. It would be the utter randomization of
behavior. In the words of philosopher/neuroscientist Sam Harris, a free will trasher, if quantum mechanics actually played a
role in any of this, “Every thought and action would seem to merit the statement ‘I don’t know what came over me.’” Except
you wouldn’t actually be able to make that statement, since you’d just be making gargly sounds because the muscles in your
tongue would be doing all sorts of random things.

1195

* And just to show what a bleeding heart everyone thought Weyer was, his book was banned by both the Catholic Church
and leading Reformation clergy.

1196

* I thank an excellent undergrad, Tom McFadden (now a superb biology teacher at my kids’ school!), for background
research on M’Naghten.

1197

* I just love the use of the word “reform” in this context.

1198

* And I mean truly thinking that way, rather than backing into it because the alternative view would demand overwhelming
changes in how society works.

1199

* I’m obviously confused by Gazzaniga’s stance, and I suspect his conclusions reflect his attempts to reconcile his worldview
as a neuroscientist with his being a religious man, something he discusses in his memoir, Tales from Both Sides of the Brain:
A Life in Neuroscience (New York: Ecco, 2016).

1200

* Many chapters ago I made reference to the “Son of Sam” murder spree in 1976 and the arrest of David Berkowitz. In his
defense Berkowitz claimed that he was demonically possessed and had been commanded to murder—not by Satan, Hitler, Al
Capone, or Genghis Khan but, instead, by . . . his neighbor’s dog. He was convicted and given six consecutive life sentences.

1201

* And also a very nice guy. Along with a Stanford colleague, law professor and bioethicist Hank Greely, I once got to debate
against Morse and a colleague at a law school. It was both really fun, because Morse is insanely smart, and really terrifying,
because he’s insanely smart.

1202

* Because cross-cultural psychiatry research shows that in individualist cultures, when depressed people talk to a friend for
relief, they’re likely to talk about their problems, whereas in collectivist cultures they’re likely to ask about the friend’s
problems.

1203

* Just to give a sense of how few baby steps we’ve taken, the maximal number of contributing variables identified in
predicting depression is serotonin transporter status + childhood adversity status + adult social support status. That’s it, that’s
about how far the literature has gotten. For frontal damage and antisocial violence, it’s neurological status of frontal cortex +
D4 dopamine receptor subtype + ADHD status.

1204

* I thank an excellent student, Katrina Hui, for bringing my attention to Malleus Maleficarum.

1205

* I specify “in the West” because this is by no means a universal interpretation even today.

1206

* Cars may soon be entering discussions of moral decision making—when having to do one or the other, should a selfdriving car smash itself into a wall, killing the passenger, in order to save five pedestrians? Most people think that is how
such cars should be programmed but, predictably, would prefer that one that they used make the opposite choice. Perhaps
more expensive models will work that way, while the hoi polloi have more utilitarian cars. Or maybe the car will decide,
based on how frequently you clean it and change its oil.

1207

* The full list (figures in deaths per year, approximate): (1) World War II, 11 million; (2) An Lushan Rebellion, 4.5 million;
(3) World War I, 3 million; (4) and (5) Taiping Rebellion and Tamerlane, each 2.8 million; (6) fall of the Ming dynasty, 2.5
million; (7) and (8) Mongol conquests and Rwandan genocide, each 2.4 million; (9) Russian Civil War, 1.8 million; (10)
Russia’s sixteenth/seventeenth-century Time of Troubles, 1.5 million; (11) Mao-induced Chinese famines, 1.4 million.

1208

* This has always been the classic interpretation of Friedman’s idea. It’s quite possible, however, that people don’t go to war
in those circumstances because they’re too busy going to the doctor for their adult-onset diabetes.

1209

* An exception is Lawrence Keeley of chapter 9, who argued that the net result of trade, with its inevitable disagreements, is
more, rather than less, intergroup tension.

1210

* To be fair, Richard Nixon was raised as an Evangelical Quaker; they are not pacifists.

1211

* Although it is fascinating that over the last century, while Scandinavian countries developed their enlightened and farreaching system of governmental support of people’s social needs, religiosity there plummeted dramatically; today only a
small minority of Scandinavians are devoutly religious. So religiosity may not be as robust in the future as one would think,
and as we saw in chapter 9, as secular institutions become better at caring for people’s needs, religiosity declines. Probably
more important, this is a good demonstration that religion sure isn’t the only route for highly inclusive in-group prosociality.

1212

* Another limitation of the approach is that by definition there is self-selection for participants willing to entertain the
possibility of détente with Thems. Moreover, participants often come from privileged socioeconomic backgrounds, limiting
their ability to go and transform the masses afterward.

1213

* The British eventually crushed the rebellion, at the cost of approximately 150 British lives and 10,000 to 20,000 Kikuyu
lives, and then handed over power to handpicked, über-Westernized Kenyans rather than Mau Mau guerrilla fighters; as a
measure of how successful the Anglicized handoff was, more than fifty years later, black Kenyan judges still wear powdered
wigs when presiding.

1214

* I thank a really excellent undergrad, Dawn Maxey, for her research assistance regarding TRCs and for the bulk of these
insights.

1215

* And, it should be noted, there’s enormous controversy as to what percentage of kills are accidents, collateral damage to
innocent bystanders; estimates range from 2 to 20 percent.

1216

* Yes, yes, I know this isn’t necessarily everyone’s list, but the point is the singularity, rather than the specifics of their acts.

1217

* Two who participated in the killings eventually committed suicide. One, Lieutenant Stephen Brooks, did so for unknown
reasons while in Vietnam. The other, PFC Varnado Simpson, did so years later, after, among other things, seeing his ten-yearold son killed by a stray bullet fired by neighborhood teens. He said, “He died in my arms. And when I looked at him, his
face was like the same face of the child that I had killed. And I said: This is the punishment for killing the people that I
killed.” He suffered from severe PTSD, sequestered himself in his home with windows shuttered for years, and succeeded on
his third suicide attempt.

1218

* Thompson radioed fellow helicopter pilots to evacuate survivors to hospitals; Andreotta waded through the dead in the
ditch to rescue a miraculously unharmed four-year-old. Thompson reported what he had seen to his commanding officers,
who sent word of the events further up the chain. As a result, the senior officer who had commanded the search-and-destroy
mission canceled the ones planned for subsequent days in neighboring villages and began the process of covering up what
had occurred. Andreotta was dead within three weeks, killed in battle. Colburn and, even more so, Thompson, attempted to
inform every military, governmental, and media source available about the events and played key roles in making the My Lai
Massacre public. Representative Mendel Rivers, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, attempted to block the
prosecution of Calley and to have Thompson prosecuted instead as a traitor; Thompson testified against Calley at his trial and
received death threats for years. It took thirty years for him and Colburn to be honored by the military for their actions.
Thompson died in 2006, with Colburn at his bedside.

1219

* I thank two great undergrads, Elena Bridgers and Wyatt Hong, for help with the research throughout this section.

1220

* Which, among other things, is why the nervous system is so vulnerable to injury. Someone has a cardiac arrest. Their heart
stops for a few minutes before it is shocked into beating again, and during those few minutes the entire body is deprived of
blood, of oxygen and glucose. And at the end of those few minutes of “hypoxia-ischemia,” every cell in the body is miserable
and queasy. Yet it is preferentially brain cells (and a consistent subset of them) that are now destined to die over the next few
days.

1221

* For chemists, in other words, the distribution of charged ions inside and out balance each other.

1222

* Jargon: that little bit of “depolarization.”

1223

* Ironic footnote: Cajal was the chief exponent of the neuron doctrine. And the leading voice in favor of synctitiums? Golgi;
the technique he invented showed that he was wrong. He apparently moped the entire way to Stockholm to receive his Nobel
Prize in 1906—shared with Cajal. The two loathed each other, didn’t even speak. In his Nobel address, Cajal managed to
muster the good manners to praise Golgi. Golgi, in his, attacked Cajal and the neuron doctrine. Jerk.

1224

* More with the keys in locks—the reuptake pumps have a shape that is complementary to the shape of the neurotransmitter,
so that the latter is the only thing taken back up into the axon terminal.

1225

* What that also implies is that if a neuron is getting axonal projections to five thousand of its spines from a neurotransmitter
A–releasing neuron and five thousand from a neurotransmitter B–releasing one, it expresses different receptors on those two
populations of its spines.

1226

* This makes sense only after introducing an additional fact. Thanks to random, probabilistic hiccups in the ion channels now
and then, neurons will occasionally have a random, spontaneous action potential from out of nowhere. So neuron A
intentionally fires off ten action potentials, followed soon after by two random ones. That might make it hard to tell if neuron
A meant to yell ten, eleven, or twelve times. By calibrating the circuit so that the inhibitory feedback signal shows up right
after the tenth action potential, the two random ones afterward are prevented, and it is easier to tell what neuron A meant. The
signal has been sharpened by damping the noise.

1227

* Thanks to the wisdom of Dale, we know that the same neurotransmitter(s) is coming out of every axon terminal of neuron
C. In other words, the same neurotransmitter can be excitatory at some synapses and inhibitory at others. This is determined
by what type of ion channel the receptor is coupled to in the dendritic spine.

1228

* Similar circuitry is also seen in the olfactory system, which has always puzzled me. What’s just to the side of the smell of
an orange? A tangerine?

1229

* As an aside, there has been incredibly interesting work concerning emergent properties of the brain that helps explain how
the different regions wire up in the developing brain in an optimal way that minimizes the amount (and thus “cost”) of axonal
projections needed. For aficionados, the things the developing brain does bear some resemblance to some approaches used
for the Traveling Salesman Problem.

1230

* An implication of these definitions is that the same molecule can serve as either a neurotransmitter or a hormone in
different parts of the body. Also (minutia warning), sometimes hormones have “paracrine” effects, influencing cells in the
gland in which they were secreted.

1231

* Just to make sure we have this sorted out, here’s a second example, namely the hypothalamic/pituitary/ovarian axis: the
hypothalamus releases GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone), which triggers the pituitary to release LH (luteinizing
hormone), which triggers the ovaries to release estrogen.

1232

* And just to head off a potential misunderstanding at the pass, a zillionth of a percent of the cholesterol in your body is used
for hormone synthesis, so changes in levels of cholesterol in the diet won’t impact the amount of such steroids made—the
body synthesizes enough cholesterol on its own for steroid synthesis.

1233

* Actually typically more than one, but let’s not go there.

1234

* Naturally, the picture is more complicated than this, as is the case for most everything in this primer. Not all enzymes are
made of proteins.

1235

* And as a clarification, there are millions of copies of a particular hormone molecule (e.g., insulin) in the circulation, all
sharing that same shape.

1236

* Actually, I haven’t a clue how many atoms there are in the universe, but you’re required to say stuff like this.

1237

* The names of which I’m omitting, to avoid inundating the newcomer.

1238

* The central dogma of “information flows from DNA to RNA to protein” can be wrong. There are circumstances where
RNA can determine the sequence of DNA. This has lots to do with how some viruses work but isn’t relevant to us. Another
bit of revisionism, one that garnered two Nobel Prizes in 2006, is that a huge percentage of RNA does not then specify the
construction of some protein. Instead it can target and destroy other sequences of RNA, a phenomenon known as “RNA
interference.” Still other RNAs are created simply to render some segments of DNA itself “unreadable.”

1239

* There are other, rarer types of mutations. One class of them, for example, involves the codon coding for an amino acid
called glutamine being repeated over and over in the gene, even dozens of times, producing what are called “polyglutamine
expansion diseases,” the most famous being Huntington’s disease. They are extremely rare mutations, though.

1240

* As do a parent and child, while half siblings share 25 percent of their genes, as do grandparents and grandchildren, and so
on.

1241

1242

What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.

1243

Table of Contents
Also by Robert M. Sapolsky
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Contents
INTRODUCTION
One: THE BEHAVIOR
Two: ONE SECOND BEFORE
Three: SECONDS TO MINUTES BEFORE
Four: HOURS TO DAYS BEFORE
Five: DAYS TO MONTHS BEFORE
Six: ADOLESCENCE; OR, DUDE, WHERE’S MY
FRONTAL CORTEX?
Seven: BACK TO THE CRIB, BACK TO THE
WOMB
Eight: BACK TO WHEN YOU WERE JUST A
FERTILIZED EGG
Nine: CENTURIES TO MILLENNIA BEFORE
Ten: THE EVOLUTION OF BEHAVIOR
Eleven: US VERSUS THEM
Twelve: HIERARCHY, OBEDIENCE, AND
RESISTANCE
Thirteen: MORALITY AND DOING THE RIGHT
THING, ONCE YOU’VE FIGURED OUT WHAT
THAT IS
Fourteen: FEELING SOMEONE’S PAIN,
UNDERSTANDING SOMEONE’S PAIN,
ALLEVIATING SOMEONE’S PAIN
1244

1
2
3
4
5
7
20
25
82
98
134
151
172
225
265
330
390
427
477
519

Fifteen: METAPHORS WE KILL BY
Sixteen: BIOLOGY, THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM, AND (OH, WHY NOT?) FREE WILL
Seventeen: WAR AND PEACE
EPILOGUE
Acknowledgments
Appendix 1: Neuroscience 101
Appendix 2: The Basics of Endocrinology
Appendix 3: Protein Basics
Glossary of Abbreviations
Abbreviations in the Notes
Notes
Illustration Credits
Index
About the Author

1245

551
581
615
671
676
679
707
711
717
720
721
805
806
835

