MED




1. The Minimum effective dose or MED is the smallest dose that will produce a desired outcome
2. The decent method you follow is better than the perfect method you quit
3. Recreation is for fun. Exercise is for producing changes. Don't confuse the 2, recognize faults in your body and exercise to improve them
4. Eat a protein high breakfast 30 minutes after waking up. Protein kick starts the fat burning process ( eggs with sea salt are ideal )
5. Eat until you are full! High protein meals and the proscribed legumes below should suffice to avoid snacking




Why Calorie isn't Calorie


1. It's not what you put in your mouth that matters, it's what makes it to your bloodstream. If it passes through, it doesn't count
2. The hormonal responses to carbohydrates ( CHO ), protein and fat are different.
3. Different sources of calorie = different result


Things that affect calorie allocation ( and that can be modified for fat loss and muscle gain ) include digestion, the ratio of protein -to carb-to fat, and timing




Slow carb diet: Better fat loss through simplicity




The rules to live by:


1. AVOID white Carbs: Bread, rice ( including brown ), cereal, potatoes, pasta, ... ( chlorine dioxide reacts to protein by forming Alloxan, and Alloxan is used, for example, to give lab rats diabetes )
2. Eat the same few meals over and over again
Main Proteins: Eggs / Chicken brest or thigh / Beef ( grass fed ) / Fish / Pork
Legumes: Lentils / Black beans / Borlotti beans / Red beans / Soya beans
Vegetables: Spinach, popeye was right, this is the strongest muscle builder found in nature, best eaten cooked / Mixed vegetable like broccoli, cauliflower / Sauerkraut, Kimchi, Yoghurt ( high bacterial culture ), cheese, Natto, Kefir/ Aspergus / Peas / Green beans
People that eat less carbs often complain they don't have enoguh energy, but that is only because they don't eat as many calories, that is what the legumes add
3. Don't drink calories: Drink massive amounts of water, tea and/or coffee ( 2 glasses of red wine in the evening is 100% ok, if white is preffered, stick to dry wine ) - Stay away from soda's and fruit juices
4. Don't eat fruit 6 days per week: The only exceptions are tomatoes and Avocado's ( not more than half an avocado per day ). If your ancestors were from Europe, chances are they only ate fruit in the summer ( and even then, limited amounts ). Fruit contains fructose, which is turned into glycerol phosphate, the liver turn it into trglycerides and that leads to fat storage.
5. Take 1 day OFF per week: That's right, eating pure crap can help you lose fat, welcome to Utopia. Dramatically spiking caloric intake in this way once per week increases fat loss by ensuring that your metabloc rate ( thyroid function and conversion of T4 to T3, etc ) doesn't downshift from extended caloric restriction.




Effortless Superhuman


The effortless Superhuman Protocol: Maximum strength


Do as little as needed, not as much as possible
Following is performed 3x a week


   1. Dynamic Stretching before each session ( over-under, no more than 5 minutes - I think animal movements would suffice)
   2. One of the following with 5 minutes rest between sets ( time under tension should be less than 15 seconds per set ):
A) Bench Press: 1 set of 2-3 reps followed by 1 set of 5 ( 95% of max weight )
B) Puch-ups: 10-12 reps ( if 12 is easy, elevate your legs to increase resistance )
   3. Convential ( or sumo ) Deadlift to knees ( or full pull-ups ) 2-3 sets of 2-3 reps at 85-95%. Bar does not go higher than the knee
A) Plyometrics are performed immediately after the end of each set ( box jumps of various heigts x 4-6 reps - Jumping rope or short runs )
Five minutes rest betweens sets 
   4. Core Exercise 3-5 sets of 3-5 reps ( isometric holds or prefferably, torture twists. 30 seconds rest betweens sets )
   5. Static Stretching


Lift the heaviest loads first, then downgrade the weight if needed. Do not exceed 10 seconds of tension


To become a faster runner, walk 7m30s as fast as possible


Torture twist: Sit on a bench, lock the fet and move body parrallel to the ground. 
      1. Turn fully to the right side, hold 3 seconds
      2. Turn fully to the left side, hold 3 seconds
      3. Repeat 2 more time for 3x each side 
      4. Sit up and rest 30 sec
      5. Repeat 2 more sets


Progression: Gradually increase up to 5 sets of 3 second holds, then  increase time up to maximum of 15 second holds for 5 sets ( each set, 3 holds per side )


Strength training cannot interfere with the practice of your sport. Lift heavy, but not hard. This is where the rule of 10 reps applies


Lift 3 times a week. Do your conditioning and supplementary work on seperate days, practice your sport skills 6 days a week and take 1 day off completely
Focus on sets of 2-3 reps, completing each workout with around 10 reps in total. Never train to failure, leave at least 1-2 reps in the bank
Finish the workout feeling stronger than when you started