Chapter One
A better today: the unprecedented present
On what principle is it, that when we see nothing but improvement
behind us, we are to expect nothing but deterioration before us?
THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY
Review of Southey’s Colloquies on Society

By the middle of this century the human race will have expanded in ten
thousand years from less than ten million to nearly ten billion people. Some
of the billions alive today still live in misery and dearth even worse than the
worst experienced in the Stone Age. Some are worse off than they were just
a few months or years before. But the vast majority of people are much
better fed, much better sheltered, much better entertained, much better
protected against disease and much more likely to live to old age than their
ancestors have ever been. The availability of almost everything a person
could want or need has been going rapidly upwards for 200 years and
erratically upwards for 10,000 years before that: years of lifespan,
mouthfuls of clean water, lungfuls of clean air, hours of privacy, means of
travelling faster than you can run, ways of communicating farther than you
can shout. Even allowing for the hundreds of millions who still live in
abject poverty, disease and want, this generation of human beings has
access to more calories, watts, lumen-hours, square feet, gigabytes,

megahertz, light-years, nanometres, bushels per acre, miles per gallon, food
miles, air miles, and of course dollars than any that went before. They have
more Velcro, vaccines, vitamins, shoes, singers, soap operas, mango slicers,
sexual partners, tennis rackets, guided missiles and anything else they could
even imagine needing. By one estimate, the number of different products
that you can buy in New York or London tops ten billion.
This should not need saying, but it does. There are people today who
think life was better in the past. They argue that there was not only a
simplicity, tranquillity, sociability and spirituality about life in the distant
past that has been lost, but a virtue too. This rose-tinted nostalgia, please
note, is generally confined to the wealthy. It is easier to wax elegiac for the
life of a peasant when you do not have to use a long-drop toilet. Imagine
that it is 1800, somewhere in Western Europe or eastern North America.
The family is gathering around the hearth in the simple timber-framed
house. Father reads aloud from the Bible while mother prepares to dish out
a stew of beef and onions. The baby boy is being comforted by one of his
sisters and the eldest lad is pouring water from a pitcher into the
earthenware mugs on the table. His elder sister is feeding the horse in the
stable. Outside there is no noise of traffic, there are no drug dealers and
neither dioxins nor radioactive fall-out have been found in the cow’s milk.
All is tranquil; a bird sings outside the window.
Oh please! Though this is one of the better-off families in the village,
father’s Scripture reading is interrupted by a bronchitic cough that presages
the pneumonia that will kill him at 53 – not helped by the wood smoke of
the fire. (He is lucky: life expectancy even in England was less than 40 in
1800.) The baby will die of the smallpox that is now causing him to cry; his
sister will soon be the chattel of a drunken husband. The water the son is
pouring tastes of the cows that drink from the brook. Toothache tortures the
mother. The neighbour’s lodger is getting the other girl pregnant in the
hayshed even now and her child will be sent to an orphanage. The stew is
grey and gristly yet meat is a rare change from gruel; there is no fruit or
salad at this season. It is eaten with a wooden spoon from a wooden bowl.
Candles cost too much, so firelight is all there is to see by. Nobody in the
family has ever seen a play, painted a picture or heard a piano. School is a
few years of dull Latin taught by a bigoted martinet at the vicarage. Father
visited the city once, but the travel cost him a week’s wages and the others
have never travelled more than fifteen miles from home. Each daughter

owns two wool dresses, two linen shirts and one pair of shoes. Father’s
jacket cost him a month’s wages but is now infested with lice. The children
sleep two to a bed on straw mattresses on the floor. As for the bird outside
the window, tomorrow it will be trapped and eaten by the boy.
If my fictional family is not to your taste, perhaps you prefer statistics.
Since 1800, the population of the world has multiplied six times, yet
average life expectancy has more than doubled and real income has risen
more than nine times. Taking a shorter perspective, in 2005, compared with
1955, the average human being on Planet Earth earned nearly three times as
much money (corrected for inflation), ate one-third more calories of food,
buried one-third as many of her children and could expect to live one-third
longer. She was less likely to die as a result of war, murder, childbirth,
accidents, tornadoes, flooding, famine, whooping cough, tuberculosis,
malaria, diphtheria, typhus, typhoid, measles, smallpox, scurvy or polio.
She was less likely, at any given age, to get cancer, heart disease or stroke.
She was more likely to be literate and to have finished school. She was
more likely to own a telephone, a flush toilet, a refrigerator and a bicycle.
All this during a half-century when the world population has more than
doubled, so that far from being rationed by population pressure, the goods
and services available to the people of the world have expanded. It is, by
any standard, an astonishing human achievement.
Averages conceal a lot. But even if you break down the world into bits,
it is hard to find any region that was worse off in 2005 than it was in 1955.
Over that half-century, real income per head ended a little lower in only six
countries (Afghanistan, Haiti, Congo, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Somalia),
life expectancy in three (Russia, Swaziland and Zimbabwe), and infant
survival in none. In the rest they have rocketed upward. Africa’s rate of
improvement has been distressingly slow and patchy compared with the rest
of the world, and many southern African countries saw life expectancy
plunge in the 1990s as the AIDS epidemic took hold (before recovering in
recent years). There were also moments in the half-century when you could
have caught countries in episodes of dreadful deterioration of living
standards or life chances – China in the 1960s, Cambodia in the 1970s,
Ethiopia in the 1980s, Rwanda in the 1990s, Congo in the 2000s, North
Korea throughout. Argentina had a disappointingly stagnant twentieth
century. But overall, after fifty years, the outcome for the world is
remarkably, astonishingly, dramatically positive. The average South Korean

lives twenty-six more years and earns fifteen times as much income each
year as he did in 1955 (and earns fifteen times as much as his North Korean
counter part). The average Mexican lives longer now than the average
Briton did in 1955. The average Botswanan earns more than the average
Finn did in 1955. Infant mortality is lower today in Nepal than it was in
Italy in 1951. The proportion of Vietnamese living on less than $2 a day has
dropped from 90 per cent to 30 per cent in twenty years.
The rich have got richer, but the poor have done even better. The poor in
the developing world grew their consumption twice as fast as the world as a
whole between 1980 and 2000. The Chinese are ten times as rich, one-third
as fecund and twenty-eight years longer-lived than they were fifty years
ago. Even Nigerians are twice as rich, 25 per cent less fecund and nine
years longer-lived than they were in 1955. Despite a doubling of the world
population, even the raw number of people living in absolute poverty
(defined as less than a 1985 dollar a day) has fallen since the 1950s. The
percentage living in such absolute poverty has dropped by more than half –
to less than 18 per cent. That number is, of course, still all too horribly high,
but the trend is hardly a cause for despair: at the current rate of decline, it
would hit zero around 2035 – though it probably won’t. The United Nations
estimates that poverty was reduced more in the last fifty years than in the
previous 500.
Affluence for all
Nor was 1955 a time of deprivation. It was in itself a record – a moment
when the world was richer, more populous and more comfortable than it
had ever been, despite the recent efforts of Hitler, Stalin and Mao (who was
then just starting to starve his people so that he could use their grain to buy
nuclear weapons from Russia). The 1950s were a decade of extraordinary
abundance and luxury compared with any preceding age. Infant mortality in
India was already lower than it had been in France and Germany in 1900.
Japanese children had almost twice as many years in education in 1950 as at
the turn of the century. World income per head had almost doubled in the
first half of the twentieth century. In 1958 J.K. Galbraith declared that the
‘affluent society’ had reached such a pitch that many unnecessary goods
were now being ‘overprovided’ to consumers by persuasive advertisers.
He was right that Americans were especially well off compared with
others: they were three inches taller in 1950 than they had been at the turn
of the century and spent twice as much on medicine as funerals – the

reverse of the ratio in 1900. Roughly eight out of ten American households
had running water, central heating, electric light, washing machines and
refrigerators by 1955. Almost none had these luxuries in 1900. In his 1890
classic How the Other Half Lives, Jacob Riis encountered a family of nine
in New York living in a ten-foot-square room plus a tiny kitchen, and
women earning 60 cents a day for sixteen hours’ work in sweatshops and
unable to afford more than one meal a day. This would have been
unthinkable by mid-century.
Yet looking back now, another fifty years later, the middle class of
1955, luxuriating in their cars, comforts and gadgets, would today be
described as ‘below the poverty line’. The average British working man in
1957, when Harold Macmillan told him he had ‘never had it so good’, was
earning less in real terms than his modern equivalent could now get in state
benefit if unemployed with three children. Today, of Americans officially
designated as ‘poor’, 99 per cent have electricity, running water, flush
toilets, and a refrigerator; 95 per cent have a television, 88 per cent a
telephone, 71 per cent a car and 70 per cent air conditioning. Cornelius
Vanderbilt had none of these. Even in 1970 only 36 per cent of all
Americans had air conditioning: in 2005 79 per cent of poor households
did. Even in urban China 90 per cent of people now have electric light,
refrigerators and running water. Many of them also have mobile phones,
inter net access and satellite television, not to mention all sorts of improved
and cheaper versions of everything from cars and toys to vaccines and
restaurants.
Well all right, says the pessimist, but at what cost? The environment is
surely deteriorating. In somewhere like Beijing, maybe. But in many other
places, no. In Europe and America rivers, lakes, seas and the air are getting
cleaner all the time. The Thames has less sewage and more fish. Lake Erie’s
water snakes, on the brink of extinction in the 1960s, are now abundant.
Bald eagles have boomed. Pasadena has few smogs. Swedish birds’ eggs
have 75 per cent fewer pollutants in them than in the 1960s. American
carbon monoxide emissions from transport are down 75 per cent in twentyfive years. Today, a car emits less pollution traveling at full speed than a
parked car did in 1970 from leaks.
Meanwhile, average life expectancy in the longest-lived country
(Sweden in 1850, New Zealand in 1920, Japan today) continues to march
upwards at a steady rate of a quarter of a year per year, a rate of change that

has altered little in 200 years. It still shows no sign of reaching a limit,
though surely it must one day. In the 1920s demographers confidently
asserted that average life span would peak at 65 ‘without intervention of
radical innovations or fantastic evolutionary change in our physiological
make-up’. In 1990 they predicted life expectancy ‘should not exceed … 35
years at age 50 unless major breakthroughs occur in controlling the
fundamental rate of ageing’. Within just five years both predictions were
proved wrong in at least one country.
Consequently the number of years of retirement is rocketing upwards.
Starting from 1901, it took sixty-eight years for the mortality of British men
between 65 and 74 to fall by 20 per cent. Subsequent 20 per cent falls took
seventeen years, ten years and six years – the improvement has accelerated.
That is all very well, say pessimists, but what about quality of life in old
age? Sure, people live longer, but only by having years of suffering and
disability added to their lives. Not so. In one American study, disability
rates in people over 65 fell from 26.2 per cent to 19.7 per cent between
1982 and 1999 – at twice the pace of the decrease in the mortality rate.
Chronic illness before death is if anything shortening slightly, not
lengthening, despite better diagnosis and more treatments – ‘the
compression of morbidity’ is the technical term. People are not only
spending a longer time living, but a shorter time dying.
Take stroke, a big cause of disability in old age. Deaths from stroke fell
by 70 per cent between 1950 and 2000 in America and Europe. In the early
1980s a study of stroke victims in Oxford concluded that the incidence of
stroke would increase by nearly 30 per cent over the next two decades,
mainly because stroke incidence increases with age and people were
predicted to live longer. They did live longer but the incidence of stroke in
fact fell by 30 per cent. (The age-related increase is still present, but it is
coming later and later.) The same is true of cancer, heart disease and
respiratory disease: they all still increase with age, but they do so later and
later, by about ten years since the 1950s.
Even inequality is declining worldwide. It is true that in Britain and
America income equality, which had been improving for most of the past
two centuries (British aristocrats were six inches taller than the average in
1800; today they are less than two inches taller), has stalled since the 1970s.
The reasons for this are many, but they are not all causes for regret. For
example, high earners now marry each other more than they used to (which

concentrates income), immigration has increased, trade has been freed,
cartels have been opened up to entrepreneurial competition and the skill
premium has grown in the work place. All these are inequality-boosting, but
they stem from liberalising trends. Besides, by a strange statistical paradox,
while inequality has increased within some countries, globally it has been
falling. The recent enrichment of China and India has increased inequality
within those countries by making the income of the rich grow faster than
that of the poor – an income gap is an inevitable consequence of an
expanding economy. Yet the global effect of the growth of China and India
has been to reduce the difference between rich and poor worldwide. As
Hayek put it, ‘once the rise in the position of the lower classes gathers
speed, catering to the rich ceases to be the main source of great gain and
gives place to efforts directed towards the needs of the masses. Those forces
which at first make inequality self-accentuating thus later tend to diminish
it.’
In another respect, too, inequality has been retreating. The spread of IQ
scores has been shrinking steadily – because the low scores have been
catching up with the high ones. This explains the steady, progressive and
ubiquitous improvement in the average IQ scores people achieve at a given
age – at a rate of 3 per cent per decade. In two Spanish studies, IQ proved to
be 9.7 points higher after thirty years, most of it among the least intelligent
half of the group. Known as the Flynn effect, after James Flynn who first
drew attention to it, this phenomenon was at first dismissed as an artefact of
changes in tests, or a simple reflection of longer or better schooling. But the
facts do not fit such explanations because the effect is consistently weakest
in the cleverest children and in the tests that relate most to educational
content. It is a levelling-up caused by an equalisation of nutrition,
stimulation or diversity of childhood experience. You can, of course, argue
that IQ may not be truly representative of intelligence, but you cannot argue
that something is getting better – and more equal at the same time.
Even justice has improved thanks to new technology exposing false
convictions and identifying true criminals. To date 234 innocent Americans
have been freed as a result of DNA fingerprinting after serving an average
of twelve years in prison; seventeen of them were on death row. The very
first forensic use of DNA in 1986 exonerated an innocent man and then
helped to catch the real murderer, a pattern that has been repeated many
times since.

Cheap light
These richer, healthier, taller, cleverer, longer-lived, freer people – you
lot – have been enjoying such abundance that most of the things they need
have been getting steadily cheaper. The four most basic human needs –
food, clothing, fuel and shelter – have grown markedly cheaper during the
past two centuries. Food and clothing especially so (a brief rise in food
prices in 2008 notwithstanding), fuel more erratically and even housing has
probably got cheaper too: surprising as it may seem, the average family
house probably costs slightly less today than it did in 1900 or even 1700,
despite including far more modern conveniences like electricity, telephone
and plumbing. If basic needs have got cheaper, then there is more
disposable income to spend on luxuries. Artificial light lies on the border
between necessity and luxury. In monetary terms, the same amount of
artificial lighting cost 20,000 times as much in England in the year 1300 as
it does today.
Enormous as that difference is, in labour terms the change is even more
dramatic and the improvement is even more recent. Ask how much artificial
light you can earn with an hour of work at the average wage. The amount
has increased from twenty-four lumen-hours in 1750 BC (sesame oil lamp)
to 186 in 1800 (tallow candle) to 4,400 in 1880 (kerosene lamp) to 531,000
in 1950 (incandescent light bulb) to 8.4 million lumen-hours today
(compact fluorescent bulb). Put it another way, an hour of work today earns
you 300 days’ worth of reading light; an hour of work in 1800 earned you
ten minutes of reading light. Or turn it round and ask how long you would
have to work to earn an hour of reading light – say, the light of an 18-watt
compact-fluorescent light bulb burning for an hour. Today it will have cost
you less than half a second of your working time if you are on the average
wage: half a second of work for an hour of light. In 1950, with a
conventional filament lamp and the then wage, you would have had to work
for eight seconds to get the same amount of light. Had you been using a
kerosene lamp in the 1880s, you would have had to work for about fifteen
minutes to get the same amount of light. A tallow candle in the 1800s: over
six hours’ work. And to get that much light from a sesame-oil lamp in
Babylon in 1750 BC would have cost you more than fifty hours’ of work.
From six hours to half a second – a 43,200-fold improvement – for an hour
of lighting: that is how much better off you are than your ancestor was in

1800, using the currency that counts, your time. Do you see why my
fictional family ate by firelight?
Much of this improvement is not included in the cost-of-living
calculations, which struggle to compare like with unlike. The economist
Don Boudreaux imagined the average American time-travelling back to
1967 with his modern income. He might be the richest person in town, but
no amount of money could buy him the delights of eBay, Amazon,
Starbucks, Wal-Mart, Prozac, Google or BlackBerry. The lighting numbers
cited above do not even take into account the greater convenience and
cleanliness of modern electric light compared with candles or kerosene – its
simple switching, its lack of smoke, smell and flicker, its lesser fire hazard.
Nor is the improvement in lighting finished yet. Compact fluorescent bulbs
may be three times as efficient as filament bulbs in turning electrons’
energy into photons’ energy, but light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are rapidly
overtaking them (as of this writing LEDs with ten times the efficiency of
incandescent bulbs have been demonstrated) and have the added benefit of
working at a portable scale. A cheap LED flashlight, powered by a solarcharged battery, will surely soon transform the life of some of the 1.6
billion people who do not have mains electricity, African peasants
prominent among them. Admittedly, LEDs are still far too expensive to
replace most light bulbs, but that might change.
Think what these improvements in lighting efficiency mean. You can
either have a lot more light, or do a lot less work, or acquire something else.
Devoting less of your working week to earning your lighting means
devoting more of it to doing something else. That something else can mean
employment for somebody else. The improved technology of lighting has
liberated you to make or buy another product or service, or do a charitable
act. That is what economic growth means.
Saving time
Time: that is the key. Forget dollars, cowrie shells or gold. The true
measure of something’s worth is the hours it takes to acquire it. If you have
to acquire it for yourself, it usually takes longer than if you get it readymade by other people. And if you can get it made efficiently by others, then
you can afford more of it. As light became cheaper so people used more of
it. The average Briton today consumes roughly 40,000 times as much
artificial light as he did in 1750. He consumes fifty times as much power

and 250 times as much transport (measured in passenger-miles travelled),
too.
This is what prosperity is: the increase in the amount of goods or
services you can earn with the same amount of work. As late as the mid1800s, a stagecoach journey from Paris to Bordeaux cost the equivalent of a
clerk’s monthly wages; today the journey costs a day or so and is fifty times
as fast. A half-gallon of milk cost the average American ten minutes of
work in 1970, but only seven minutes in 1997. A three-minute phone call
from New York to Los Angeles cost ninety hours of work at the average
wage in 1910; today it costs less than two minutes. A kilowatt-hour of
electricity cost an hour of work in 1900 and five minutes today. In the
1950s it took thirty minutes work to earn the price of a McDonald’s
cheeseburger; today it takes three minutes. Healthcare and education are
among the few things that cost more in terms of hours worked now than
they did in the 1950s.
Even the most notorious of capitalists, the robber barons of the late
nineteenth century, usually got rich by making things cheaper. Cornelius
Vanderbilt is the man for whom the New York Times first used the word
‘robber baron’. He is the very epitome of the phrase. Yet observe what
Harper’s Weekly had to say about his railways in 1859:
The results in every case of the establishment of opposition lines
by Vanderbilt has been the permanent reduction of fares. Wherever he
‘laid on’ an opposition line, the fares were instantly reduced, and
however the contest terminated, whether he bought out his opponents,
as he often did, or they bought him out, the fares were never again
raised to the old standard. This great boon – cheap travel – this
community owes mainly to Cornelius Vanderbilt.
Rail freight charges fell by 90 per cent between 1870 and 1900. There is
little doubt that Vanderbilt sometime bribed and bullied his way to success,
and that he sometimes paid his workers lower wages than others – I am not
trying to make him into a saint – but there is also no doubt that along the
way he delivered to consumers an enormous benefit that would otherwise
have eluded them – affordable transport. Likewise, Andrew Carnegie, while
enormously enriching himself, cut the price of a steel rail by 75 per cent in
the same period; John D. Rockefeller cut the price of oil by 80 per cent.

During those thirty years, the per capita GDP of Americans rose by 66 per
cent. They were enricher-barons, too.
Henry Ford got rich by making cars cheap. His first Model T sold for
$825, unprecedentedly cheap at the time, and four years later he had cut the
price to $575. It took about 4,700 hours of work to afford a Model T in
1908. It takes about 1,000 hours today to afford an ordinary car – though
one that is brimming with features that Model Ts never had. The price of
aluminium fell from $545 a pound in the 1880s to 20 cents a pound in the
1930s, thanks to the innovations of Charles Martin Hall and his successors
at Alcoa. (Alcoa’s reward for this price cut was to be sued by the
government on 140 counts of criminal monopoly: the rapid decrease in the
price of its product being used as evidence of a determination to deter
competition. Microsoft suffered the same allegation later in the century.)
When Juan Trippe sold cheap tourist-class seats on his Pan Am airline in
1945, the other airlines were so insulted that they petitioned their
governments to ban Pan Am: Britain, shamefully, agreed, so Pan Am flew
to Ireland instead. The price of computing power fell so fast in the last
quarter of the twentieth century that the capacity of a tiny pocket calculator
in 2000 would have cost you a lifetime’s wages in 1975. The price of a
DVD player in Britain fell from £400 in 1999 to £40 just five years later, a
decline that exactly matched the earlier one of the video recorder, but
happened much faster.
Falling consumer prices is what enriches people (deflation of asset
prices can ruin them, but that is because they are using asset prices to get
them the wherewithal to purchase consumer items). And, once again, notice
that the true metric of prosperity is time. If Cornelius Vanderbilt or Henry
Ford not only moves you faster to where you want to go, but requires you to
work fewer hours to earn the ticket price, then he has enriched you by
granting you a dollop of free time. If you choose to spend that spare time
consuming somebody else’s production then you can enrich him in turn; if
you choose to spend it producing for his consumption then you have also
further enriched yourself.
Housing, too, is itching to get cheaper, but for confused reasons
governments go to great lengths to prevent it. Where it took sixteen weeks
to earn the price of 100 square feet of housing in 1956, now it takes
fourteen weeks and the housing is of better quality. But given the ease with
which modern machinery can assemble a house, the price should have come

down much faster than that. Governments prevent this by, first, using
planning or zoning laws to restrict supply (especially in Britain); second,
using the tax system to encourage mortgage borrowing (in the United States
at least – no longer in Britain); and third, doing all they can to stop property
prices falling after a bubble. The effect of these measures is to make life
harder for those who do not yet have a house and massively reward those
who do. To remedy this, governments then have to enforce the building of
more affordable housing, or subsidise mortgage lending to the poor.
Happiness
As necessities and luxuries get cheaper, do people get happier? A small
cottage industry grew up at the turn of the twenty-first century devoted to
the subject of the economics of happiness. It started with the paradox that
richer people are not necessarily happier people. Beyond a certain level of
per capita income ($15,000 a year, according to Richard Layard), money
did not seem to buy subjective well-being. As books and papers cascaded
out of the academy, Schadenfreude set in on a grand scale among
commentators happy to see the unhappiness of the rich confirmed.
Politicians latched on and governments from Thailand to Britain began to
think about how to maximise gross national happiness instead of gross
national product. British government departments now have ‘well-being
divisions’ as a result. King Jigme Singye Wangchuck of Bhutan is credited
with having been the first to get there in 1972 when he declared economic
growth a secondary goal to national well-being. If economic growth does
not produce happiness, said the new wisdom, then there was no point in
striving for prosperity and the world economy should be brought to a soft
landing at a reasonable level of income. Or, as one economist put it: ‘The
hippies were right all along’.
If true, this rather punctures the rational optimist’s balloon. What is the
point of celebrating the continuing defeat of death, dearth, disease and
drudgery, if it does not make people happier? But it is not true. The debate
began with a study by Richard Easterlin in 1974, which found that although
within a country rich people were generally happier than poor people, richer
countries did not have happier citizens than poor countries. Since then the
‘Easterlin paradox’ has become the central dogma of the debate. Trouble is,
it is wrong. Two papers were published in 2008 analysing all the data, and
the unambiguous conclusion of both is that the Easterlin paradox does not
exist. Rich people are happier than poor people; rich countries have happier

people than poor countries; and people get happier as they get richer. The
earlier study simply had samples too small to find significant differences. In
all three categories of comparison – within countries, between countries and
between times – extra income does indeed buy general well-being. That is
to say, on average, across the board, on the whole, other things being equal,
more money does make you happier. In the words of one of the studies, ‘All
told, our time-series comparisons, as well as evidence from repeated
international cross-sections, appear to point to an important relationship
between economic growth and growth in subjective well-being’.
There are some exceptions. Americans currently show no trend towards
increasing happiness. Is this because the rich had got richer but ordinary
Americans had not prospered much in recent years? Or because America
continually draws in poor (unhappy) immigrants, which keeps the
happiness quotient low? Who knows? It was not because the Americans are
too rich to get any happier: Japanese and Europeans grew steadily happier
as they grew richer despite being often just as rich as Americans. Moreover,
surprisingly, American women have become less happy in recent decades
despite getting richer.
Of course, it is possible to be rich and unhappy, as many a celebrity
gloriously reminds us. Of course, it is possible to get rich and find that you
are unhappy not to be richer still, if only because the neighbour – or the
people on television – are richer than you are. Economists call this the
‘hedonic treadmill’; the rest of us call it ‘keeping up with the Joneses’. And
it is probably true that the rich do lots of unnecessary damage to the planet
as they go on striving to get richer long after the point where it is having
much effect on their happiness – they are after all endowed with instincts
for ‘rivalrous competition’ descended from hunter-gatherers whose relative,
not absolute, status determined their sexual rewards. For this reason a tax
on consumption to encourage saving for investment instead is not
necessarily a bad idea. However, this does not mean that anybody would be
necessarily happier if poorer – to be well off and unhappy is surely better
than to be poor and unhappy. Of course, some people will be unhappy
however rich they are, while others manage to bounce back cheerful even in
poverty: psychologists find people to have fairly constant levels of
happiness to which they return after elation or disaster. Besides, a million
years of natural selection shaped human nature to be ambitious to rear

successful children, not to settle for contentment: people are programmed to
desire, not to appreciate.
Getting richer is not the only or even the best way of getting happier.
Social and political liberation is far more effective, says the political
scientist Ronald Ingleheart: the big gains in happiness come from living in a
society that frees you to make choices about your lifestyle – about where to
live, who to marry, how to express your sexuality and so on. It is the
increase in free choice since 1981 that has been responsible for the increase
in happiness recorded since then in forty-five out of fifty-two countries.
Ruut Veenhoven finds that ‘the more individualized the nation, the more
citizens enjoy their life.’
Crunch
And yet, good as life is, today life is not good. Happy statistics of recent
improvement sound as hollow to a laid-off car worker in Detroit or an
evicted house owner in Reykjavik as they would to a cholera victim in
Zimbabwe or a genocide refugee in Congo. War, disease, corruption and
hate still disfigure the lives of millions; nuclear terrorism, rising sea levels
and pandemic flu may yet make the twenty-first century a dreadful place.
True, but assuming the worst will not avert these fates; striving to continue
improving the human lot may. It is precisely because so much human
betterment has been shown to be possible in recent centuries that the
continuing imperfection of the world places a moral duty on humanity to
allow economic evolution to continue. To prevent change, innovation and
growth is to stand in the way of potential compassion. Let it never be for
gotten that, by propagating excessive caution about genetically modified
food aid, some pressure groups may have exacerbated real hunger in
Zambia in the early 2000s. The precautionary principle – better safe than
sorry – condemns itself: in a sorry world there is no safety to be found in
standing still.
More immediately, the financial crash of 2008 has caused a deep and
painful recession that will generate mass unemployment and real hardship
in many parts of the world. The reality of rising living standards feels to
many today to be a trick, a pyramid scheme achieved by borrowing from
the future.
Until he was rumbled in 2008, Bernard Madoff offered his investors
high and steady returns of more than 1 per cent a month on their money for
thirty years. He did so by paying new investors’ capital out to old investors

as revenue, a chain-letter con trick that could not last. When the music
stopped, $65 billion of investors’ funds had been looted. It was roughly
what John Law did in Paris with the Mississippi Company in 1719, what
John Blunt did in London with the South Sea company in 1720, what
Charles Ponzi did in Boston in 1920 with reply coupons for postage stamps,
what Ken Lay did with Enron’s stock in 2001.
Is it possible that not just the recent credit boom, but the entire postwar
rise in living standards was a Ponzi scheme, made possible by the gradual
expansion of credit? That we have in effect grown rich by borrowing the
means from our children and that a day of reckoning is now at hand? It is
certainly true that your mortgage is borrowed (via a saver somewhere else,
perhaps in China) from your future self, who will pay it off. It is also true
on both sides of the Atlantic that your state pension will be funded by your
children’s taxes, not by your payroll contributions as so many think.
But there is nothing unnatural about this. In fact, it is a very typical
human pattern. By the age of 15 chimpanzees have produced about 40 per
cent and consumed about 40 per cent of the calories they will need during
their entire lives. By the same age, human hunter-gatherers have consumed
about 20 per cent of their lifetime calories, but produced just 4 per cent.
More than any other animal, human beings borrow against their future
capabilities by depending on others in their early years. A big reason for this
is that hunter-gatherers have always specialised in foods that need
extraction and processing – roots that need to be dug and cooked, clams that
need to be opened, nuts that need to be cracked, carcasses that need to be
butchered – whereas chimpanzees eat things that simply need to be found
and gathered, like fruit or termites. Learning to do this extraction and
processing takes time, practice and a big brain, but once a human being has
learnt, he or she can produce a huge surplus of calories to share with the
children. Intriguingly, this pattern of production over the lifespan in huntergatherers is more like the modern Western lifestyle than it is like the
farming, feudal or early industrial lifestyles. That is to say, the notion of
children taking twenty years even to start to bring in more than they
consume, and then having forty years of very high productivity, is common
to hunter-gatherers and modern societies, but was less true in the period in
between, when children could and did go to work to support their own
consumption.

The difference today is that intergenerational transfers take a more
collective form – income tax on all productive people in their prime pays
for education for all, for example. In that sense, the economy (like a chain
letter, but unlike a shark, actually) must keep moving forward or it
collapses. The banking system makes it possible for people to borrow and
consume when they are young and to save and lend when they are old,
smoothing their family living standards over the decades. Posterity can pay
for its ancestors’ lives because posterity can be richer through innovation. If
somebody somewhere takes out a mortgage, which he will repay in three
decades’ time, to invest in a business that invents a gadget that saves his
customers time, then that money, brought forward from the future, will
enrich both him and those customers to the point where the loan can be
repaid to posterity. That is growth. If, on the other hand, somebody takes
out a loan just to support his luxury lifestyle, or to speculate on asset
markets by buying a second home, then posterity will be the loser. That is
what, it is now clear, far too many people and businesses did in the 2000s –
they borrowed more from posterity than their innovation rate would
support. They misallocated the resources to unproductive ends. Most past
bursts of human prosperity have come to naught because they allocated too
little money to innovation and too much to asset price inflation or to war,
corruption, luxury and theft.
In the Spain of Charles V and Philip II, the gigantic wealth of the
Peruvian silver mines was wasted. The same ‘curse of resources’ has
afflicted countries with windfalls ever since, especially those with oil
(Russia, Venezuela, Iraq, Nigeria) that end up run by rent-seeking autocrats.
Despite their windfalls, such countries experience lower economic growth
than countries that entirely lack resources but get busy trading and selling –
Holland, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea. Even the
Dutch, those epitomes of seventeenth-century enterprise, fell under the
curse of resources in the late twentieth century when they found too much
natural gas: the Dutch disease, they called it, as their inflated currency hurt
their exporters. Japan spent the first half of the twentieth century jealously
seeking to grab resources and ended up in ruins; it spent the second half of
the century trading and selling without resources and ended up topping the
lifespan league. In the 2000s the West misspent much of the cheap windfall
of Chinese savings that the United States Federal Reserve sluiced our way.

So long as somebody allocates sufficient capital to innovation, then the
credit crunch will not in the long run prevent the relentless upward march of
human living standards. If you look at a graph of world per capita GDP, the
Great Depression of the 1930s is just a dip in the slope. By 1939 even the
worst-affected countries, America and Germany, were richer than they were
in 1930. All sorts of new products and industries were born during the
Depression: by 1937, 40 per cent of DuPont’s sales came from products that
had not even existed before 1929, such as rayon, enamels and cellulose
film. So growth will resume – unless prevented by the wrong policies.
Somebody, somewhere, is still tweaking a piece of software, testing a new
material, or transferring a gene that will make your and my life easier in the
future. I cannot know who or where he is for sure, but let me give you a
candidate. In the week I wrote this paragraph, a small company called
Arcadia Biosciences in northern California signed an agreement with a
charity working in Africa to license, royalty-free to smallholders, new
varieties of rice that can be grown with less nitrogen fertiliser for the same
yield, thanks to the over-expression in the roots of a version of a gene called
alanine aminotransferase borrowed from barley. Assuming the varieties
work in Africa as well as they do in California, some African will one day
grow and sell more food (for less pollution), which in turn means that he
will have more money to spend, earning the cost of, say, a mobile phone,
which he will buy from a Western company, and which will help him find a
better market for his rice. An employee of that Western company will get a
pay rise, which she will spend on a new pair of jeans, which were made
from cotton woven in a factory that employs the smallholder’s neighbour.
And so on.
As long as new ideas can breed in this way, then human economic
progress can continue. It may be only a year or two till world growth
resumes after the current crisis, or it may for some countries be a lost
decade. It may even be that parts of the world will be convulsed by a
descent into autarky, authoritarianism and violence, as happened in the
1930s, and that a depression will cause a great war. But so long as
somewhere somebody is incentivised to invent ways of serving others’
needs better, then the rational optimist must conclude that the betterment of
human lives will eventually resume.
The declaration of interdependence

Imagine you are a deer. You have essentially only four things to do
during the day: sleep, eat, avoid being eaten and socialise (by which I mean
mark a territory, pursue a member of the opposite sex, nurse a fawn,
whatever). There is no real need to do much else. Now imagine you are a
human being. Even if you only count the basic things, you have rather more
than four things to do: sleep, eat, cook, dress, keep house, travel, wash,
shop, work … the list is virtually endless. Deer should therefore have more
free time than human beings, yet it is people, not deer, who find the time to
read, write, invent, sing and surf the net. Where does all this free time come
from? It comes from exchange and specialisation and from the resulting
division of labour. A deer must gather its own food. A human being gets
somebody else to do it for him, while he or she is doing something for them
– and both win time that way.
Self-sufficiency is therefore not the route to prosperity. ‘Which would
have advanced the most at the end of a month,’ Henry David Thoreau
asked: ‘the boy who had made his own jack-knife from the ore which he
had dug and smelted, reading as much as would be necessary for this – or
the boy who had attended the lectures on metallurgy at the Institute in the
meanwhile, and had received a Rodgers’ penknife from his father?’ Contra
Thoreau, it is the latter, by a mile, because he has far more spare time to
learn other things. Imagine if you had to be completely self-sufficient (not
just pretending, like Thoreau). Every day you must get up in the morning
and supply yourself entirely from your own resources. How would you
spend your day? The top four priorities would be food, fuel, clothing and
shelter. Dig the garden, feed the pig, fetch water from the brook, gather
wood from the forest, wash some potatoes, light a fire (no matches), cook
lunch, repair the roof, fetch fresh bracken for clean bedding, whittle a
needle, spin some thread, sew leather for shoes, wash in the stream, fashion
a pot out of clay, catch and cook a chicken for dinner. No candle or book for
reading. No time for smelting metal, drilling oil, or travel. By definition,
you are at subsistence level and frankly, though at first you mutter, Thoreaulike, ‘how marvellous to get away from all the appalling hustle and bustle’,
after a few days the routine is pretty grim. If you wish to have even the
most minimal improvement in your life – say metal tools, toothpaste or
lighting – you are going to have to get some of your chores done by
somebody else, because there just is not time to do them yourself. So one

way to raise your standard of living would be to lower somebody else’s:
buy a slave. That was indeed how people got rich for thousands of years.
Yet, though you have no slaves, today when you got out of bed you
knew that somebody would provide you with food, fibre and fuel in a most
convenient form. In 1900, the average American spent $76 of every $100
on food, clothing and shelter. Today he spends $37. If you are on an average
wage you knew that it would take you a matter of tens of minutes to earn
the cash to pay for your food, some more tens of minutes to earn the cash to
buy whatever new clothing you need and maybe an hour or two to earn the
cash to pay for the gas, electricity and oil you might need today. Earning the
rent or mortgage payment that ensures you have a roof over your head
might take rather more time. But still, by lunchtime, you could relax in the
knowledge that food, fuel, fibre and shelter were taken care of for the day.
So it was time to earn something more interesting: the satellite television
subscription, the mobile phone bill, the holiday deposit, the cost of new toys
for the children, the income tax. ‘To produce implies that the producer
desires to consume’ said John Stuart Mill; ‘why else should he give himself
useless labour?’
In 2009, an artist named Thomas Thwaites set out to make his own
toaster, of the sort that he could buy from a shop for about £4. He needed
only a few raw materials: iron, copper, nickel, plastic and mica (an
insulating mineral around which the heating elements are wrapped). But
even to get these he found almost impossible. Iron is made from iron ore,
which he could probably mine, but how was he to build a sufficiently hot
furnace without electric bellows? (He cheated and used a microwave oven.)
Plastic is made from oil, which he could not easily drill for himself, let
alone refine. And so on. More to the point, the project took months, cost a
lot of money and resulted in an inferior product. Yet to buy a £4 toaster
would cost him less than an hour’s work at the minimum wage. To
Thwaites this illustrated his helplessness as a consumer so divorced from
self-sufficiency. It also illustrates the magic of specialisation and exchange:
thousands of people, none of them motivated by the desire to do Thwaites a
favour, have come together to make it possible for him to acquire a toaster
for a trivial sum of money. In the same vein, Kelly Cobb of Drexel
University set out to make a man’s suit entirely from materials produced
within 100 miles of her home. It took twenty artisans a total of 500
manhours to achieve it and even then they had to get 8 per cent of the

materials from outside the 100-mile radius. If they worked for another year,
they could get it all from within the limit, argued Cobb. To put it plainly,
local sourcing multiplied the cost of a cheap suit roughly a hundred-fold.
As I write this, it is nine o’clock in the morning. In the two hours since I
got out of bed I have showered in water heated by North Sea gas, shaved
using an American razor running on electricity made from British coal,
eaten a slice of bread made from French wheat, spread with New Zealand
butter and Spanish marmalade, then brewed a cup of tea using leaves grown
in Sri Lanka, dressed myself in clothes of Indian cotton and Australian
wool, with shoes of Chinese leather and Malaysian rubber, and read a
newspaper made from Finnish wood pulp and Chinese ink. I am now sitting
at a desk typing on a Thai plastic keyboard (which perhaps began life in an
Arab oil well) in order to move electrons through a Korean silicon chip and
some wires of Chilean copper to display text on a computer designed and
manufactured by an American firm. I have consumed goods and services
from dozens of countries already this morning. Actually, I am guessing at
the nationalities of some of these items, because it is almost impossible to
define some of them as coming from any country, so diverse are their
sources.
More to the point, I have also consumed minuscule fractions of the
productive labour of many dozens of people. Somebody had to drill the gas
well, install the plumbing, design the razor, grow the cotton, write the
software. They were all, though they did not know it, working for me. In
exchange for some fraction of my spending, each supplied me with some
fraction of their work. They gave me what I wanted just when I wanted it –
as if I were the Roi Soleil, Louis XIV, at Versailles in 1700.
The Sun King had dinner each night alone. He chose from forty dishes,
served on gold and silver plate. It took a staggering 498 people to prepare
each meal. He was rich because he consumed the work of other people,
mainly in the form of their services. He was rich because other people did
things for him. At that time, the average French family would have prepared
and consumed its own meals as well as paid tax to support his servants in
the palace. So it is not hard to conclude that Louis XIV was rich because
others were poor.
But what about today? Consider that you are an average person, say a
woman of 35, living in, for the sake of argument, Paris and earning the
median wage, with a working husband and two children. You are far from

poor, but in relative terms, you are immeasurably poorer than Louis was.
Where he was the richest of the rich in the world’s richest city, you have no
servants, no palace, no carriage, no kingdom. As you toil home from work
on the crowded Metro, stopping at the shop on the way to buy a ready meal
for four, you might be thinking that Louis XIV’s dining arrangements were
way beyond your reach. And yet consider this. The cornucopia that greets
you as you enter the supermarket dwarfs anything that Louis XIV ever
experienced (and it is probably less likely to contain salmonella). You can
buy a fresh, frozen, tinned, smoked or pre-prepared meal made with beef,
chicken, pork, lamb, fish, prawns, scallops, eggs, potatoes, beans, carrots,
cabbage, aubergine, kumquats, celeriac, okra, seven kinds of lettuce,
cooked in olive, walnut, sunflower or peanut oil and flavoured with
cilantro, turmeric, basil or rosemary … You may have no chefs, but you can
decide on a whim to choose between scores of nearby bistros, or Italian,
Chinese, Japanese or Indian restaurants, in each of which a team of skilled
chefs is waiting to serve your family at less than an hour’s notice. Think of
this: never before this generation has the average person been able to afford
to have somebody else prepare his meals.
You employ no tailor, but you can browse the internet and instantly
order from an almost infinite range of excellent, affordable clothes of
cotton, silk, linen, wool and nylon made up for you in factories all over
Asia. You have no carriage, but you can buy a ticket which will summon the
services of a skilled pilot of a budget airline to fly you to one of hundreds of
destinations that Louis never dreamed of seeing. You have no woodcutters
to bring you logs for the fire, but the operators of gas rigs in Russia are
clamouring to bring you clean central heating. You have no wick-trimming
footman, but your light switch gives you the instant and brilliant produce of
hardworking people at a grid of distant nuclear power stations. You have no
runner to send messages, but even now a repairman is climbing a mobilephone mast somewhere in the world to make sure it is working properly just
in case you need to call that cell. You have no private apothecary, but your
local pharmacy supplies you with the handiwork of many thousands of
chemists, engineers and logistics experts. You have no government
ministers, but diligent reporters are even now standing ready to tell you
about a film star’s divorce if you will only switch to their channel or log on
to their blogs.

My point is that you have far, far more than 498 servants at your
immediate beck and call. Of course, unlike the Sun King’s servants, these
people work for many other people too, but from your perspective what is
the difference? That is the magic that exchange and specialisation have
wrought for the human species. ‘In civilized society,’ wrote Adam Smith, an
individual ‘stands at all times in need of the cooperation and assistance of
great multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient to gain the
friendship of a few persons.’ In Leonard Read’s classic 1958 essay ‘I,
Pencil’, an ordinary pencil describes how it came to be made by millions of
people, from loggers in Oregon and graphite miners in Sri Lanka to coffee
bean growers in Brazil (who supplied the coffee drunk by the loggers).
‘There isn’t a single person in all these millions,’ the pencil concludes,
‘including the president of the pencil company, who contributes more than a
tiny, infinitesimal bit of know-how.’ The pencil stands amazed at ‘the
absence of a master mind, of anyone dictating or forcibly directing these
countless actions which bring me into being.’
This is what I mean by the collective brain. As Friedrich Hayek first
clearly saw, knowledge ‘never exists in concentrated or integrated form but
solely as the dispersed bits of incomplete and frequently contradictory
knowledge which all the separate individuals possess’.
The multiplication of labour
You are not just consuming the labour and resources of others. You are
consuming others’ inventions, too. A thousand entrepreneurs and scientists
devised the intricate dance of photons and electrons by which your
television works. The cotton you wear was spun and woven by machines of
a type whose original inventors are long-dead heroes of the industrial
revolution. The bread you eat was first cross-bred by a Neolithic
Mesopotamian and baked in a way that was first invented by a Mesolithic
hunter-gatherer. Their knowledge is enduringly embodied in machines,
recipes and programmes from which you benefit. Unlike Louis, you number
among your servants John Logie Baird, Alexander Graham Bell, Sir Tim
Berners-Lee, Thomas Crapper, Jonas Salk and myriad assorted other
inventors. For you get the benefit of their labours, too, whether they are
dead or alive.
The point of all this cooperation is to make (Adam Smith again) ‘a
smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work’. It is a
curious fact that in return for this cornucopia of service, you produce only

one thing. That is to say, having consumed the labour and embodied
discoveries of thousands of people, you then produce and sell whatever it is
you do at work – haircuts, ball bearings, insurance advice, nursing, dog
walking. But each of those thousands of people who work ‘for’ you is
equally monotonously employed. Each produces one thing. That is what the
word ‘job’ means: it refers to the simplified, singular production to which
you devote your working hours. Even those who have several paying jobs –
say,
freelance
short-story
writer/neuroscientist,
or
computer
executive/photographer – have only two or three different occupations at
most. But they each consume hundreds, thousands, of things. This is the
diagnostic feature of modern life, the very definition of a high standard of
living: diverse consumption, simplified production. Make one thing, use
lots. The self-sufficient gardener, or his self-sufficient peasant or huntergatherer predecessor (who is, I shall argue, partly a myth in any case), is in
contrast defined by his multiple production and simple consumption. He
makes not just one thing, but many – his food, his shelter, his clothing, his
entertainment. Because he only consumes what he produces, he cannot
consume very much. Not for him the avocado, Tarantino or Manolo
Blahnik. He is his own brand.
In the year 2005, if you were the average consumer you would have
spent your after-tax income in roughly the following way:
20 per cent on a roof over your head
18 per cent on cars, planes, fuel and all other forms of
transport
16 per cent on household stuff: chairs, refrigerators,
telephones, electricity, water
14 per cent on food, drink, restaurants etc
6 per cent on health care
5 per cent on movies, music and all entertainment
4 per cent on clothing of all kinds
2 per cent on education
1 per cent on soap, lipstick, haircuts, and such like
11 per cent on life insurance and pensions (i.e., saved to
secure future spending)
and, alas from my point of view, only 0.3 per cent on reading

An English farm labourer in the 1790s spent his wages roughly as
follows:
75 per cent on food
10 per cent on clothing and bedding
6 per cent on housing
5 per cent on heating
4 per cent on light and soap
A rural peasant woman in modern Malawi spends her time roughly as
follows:
35 per cent farming food
33 per cent cooking, doing laundry and cleaning
17 per cent fetching water
5 per cent collecting firewood
9 per cent other kinds of work, including paid employment
Imagine next time you turn on the tap, what it must be like to walk a
mile or more to the Shire River in Machinga province, hope you are not
grabbed by a crocodile when filling your bucket (the UN estimates three
crocodile deaths a month in the Machinga province, many of them of
women fetching water), hope you have not picked up a cholera dose in your
bucket, then walk back carrying the 20 litres that will have to last your
family all day. I am not trying to make you feel guilty: I am trying to tease
out what it is that makes you well off. It is having the hard work of living
made easy by markets and machines and other people. There is probably
nothing to stop you fetching free water from the nearest river in your home
town, but you would rather pay something from your earnings to get it
delivered clean and convenient from your tap.
So this is what poverty means. You are poor to the extent that you
cannot afford to sell your time for sufficient price to buy the services you
need, and rich to the extent that you can afford to buy not just the services
you need but also those you crave. Prosperity, or growth, has been
synonymous with moving from self-sufficiency to interdependence,
transforming the family from a unit of laborious, slow and diverse
production to a unit of easy, fast and diverse consumption paid for by a
burst of specialised production.

Self-sufficiency is poverty
It is fashionable these days to decry ‘food miles’. The longer food has
spent travelling to your plate, the more oil has been burnt and the more
peace has been shattered along the way. But why single out food? Should
we not protest against T-shirt miles, too, and laptop miles? After all, fruit
and vegetables account for more than 20 per cent of all exports from poor
countries, whereas most laptops come from rich countries, so singling out
food imports for special discrimination means singling out poor countries
for sanctions. Two economists recently concluded, after studying the issue,
that the entire concept of food miles is ‘a profoundly flawed sustainability
indicator’. Getting food from the farmer to the shop causes just 4 per cent
of all its lifetime emissions. Ten times as much carbon is emitted in
refrigerating British food as in air-freighting it from abroad, and fifty times
as much is emitted by the customer travelling to the shops. A New Zealand
lamb, shipped to England, requires one-quarter as much carbon to get on to
a London plate as a Welsh lamb; a Dutch rose, grown in a heated
greenhouse and sold in London, has six times the carbon footprint of a
Kenyan rose grown under the sun using water recycled through a fish farm,
using geothermal electricity and providing employment to Kenyan women.
In truth, far from being unsustainable, the interdependence of the world
through trade is the very thing that makes modern life as sustainable as it is.
Suppose your local laptop manufacturer tells you that he already has three
orders and then he is off on his holiday so he cannot make you one before
the winter. You will have to wait. Or suppose your local wheat farmer tells
you that last year’s rains means he will have to cut his flour delivery in half
this year. You will have to go hungry. Instead, you benefit from a global
laptop and wheat market in which somebody somewhere has something to
sell you so there are rarely shortages, only modest price fluctuations.
For example, the price of wheat approximately trebled in 2006–8, just
as it did in Europe in 1315–18. At the earlier date, Europe was less densely
populated, farming was entirely organic and food miles were short. Yet in
2008, nobody ate a baby or pulled a corpse from a gibbet for food. Right up
until the railways came, it was cheaper for people to turn into refugees than
to pay the exorbitant costs of importing food into a hungry district.
Interdependence spreads risk.
The decline in agricultural employment caused consternation among
early economists. François Quesnay and his fellow ‘physiocrats’ argued in

eighteenth-century France that manufacturing produced no gain in wealth
and that switching from agriculture to industry would decrease a country’s
wealth: only farming was true wealth creation. Two centuries later the
decline in industrial employment in the late twentieth century caused a
similar consternation among economists, who saw services as a frivolous
distraction from the important business of manufacturing. They were just as
wrong. There is no such thing as unproductive employment, so long as
people are prepared to buy the service you are offering. Today, 1 per cent
works in agriculture and 24 per cent in industry, leaving 75 per cent to offer
movies, restaurant meals, insurance broking and aromatherapy.
Arcadia redux
Yet, surely, long ago, before trade, technology and farming, human
beings lived simple, organic lives in harmony with nature. That was not
poverty: that was ‘the original affluent society’. Take a snapshot of the life
of hunter-gathering human beings in their heyday, say at 15,000 years ago
well after the taming of the dog and the extermination of the woolly
rhinoceros but just before the colonisation of the Americas. People had
spear throwers, bows and arrows, boats, needles, adzes, nets. They painted
exquisite art on rocks, decorated their bodies, traded foods, shells, raw
materials and ideas. They sang songs, danced rituals, told stories, prepared
herbal remedies for illnesses. They lived into old age far more frequently
than their ancestors had done.
They had a way of life that was sufficiently adaptable to work in almost
any habitat or climate. Where every other species needed its niche, the
hunter-gatherer could make a niche out of anything: seaside or desert, arctic
or tropical, forest or steppe.
A Rousseauesque idyll? The hunter-gatherers certainly looked like
noble savages: tall, fit, healthy, and (having replaced stabbing spears with
thrown ones) with fewer broken bones than Neanderthals. They ate plenty
of protein, not much fat and ample vitamins. In Europe, with the help of
increasing cold, they had largely wiped out the lions and hyenas that had
both competed with and preyed upon their predecessors, so they had little to
fear from wild animals. No wonder nostalgia for the Pleistocene runs
through many of today’s polemics against consumerism. Geoffrey Miller,
for example, in his excellent book Spent, asks his readers to imagine a CroMagnon mother of 30,000 years ago living ‘in a close-knit clan of family
and friends … gathering organic fruits and vegetables … grooming,

dancing, drumming and singing with people she knows, likes and trusts …
the sun rising over the six thousand acres of verdant French Riviera coast
that her clan holds.’
Life was good. Or was it? There was a serpent in the hunter-gatherer
Eden – a savage in the noble savage. Maybe it was not a lifelong camping
holiday after all. For violence was a chronic and ever-present threat. It had
to be, because – in the absence of serious carnivore predation upon human
beings – war kept the population density below the levels that brought on
starvation. ‘Homo homini lupus’, said Plautus. ‘Man is a wolf to man.’ If
hunter-gatherers appeared lithe and healthy it was because the fat and slow
had all been shot in the back at dawn.
Here is the data. From the !Kung in the Kalahari to the Inuit in the
Arctic, two-thirds of modern hunter-gatherers have proved to be in a state
of almost constant tribal warfare, and 87 per cent to experience annual war.
War is a big word for dawn raids, skirmishes and lots of posturing, but
because these happen so often, death rates are high – usually around 30 per
cent of adult males dying from homicide. The warfare death rate of 0.5 per
cent of the population per year that was typical of many hunter-gatherer
societies would equate to two billion people dying during the twentieth
century (instead of 100 million). At a cemetery uncovered at Jebel Sahaba,
in Egypt, dating from 14,000 years ago, twenty-four of the fifty-nine bodies
had died from unhealed wounds caused by spears, darts and arrows. Forty
of these bodies were women or children. Women and children generally do
not take part in warfare – but they are frequently the object of the fighting.
To be abducted as a sexual prize and see your children killed was almost
certainly not a rare female fate in hunter-gatherer society. After Jebel
Sahaba, forget the Garden of Eden; think Mad Max.
It was not just warfare that limited population growth. Hunter-gatherers
are often vulnerable to famines. Even when food is abundant, it might take
so much travelling and trouble to collect enough food that women would
not maintain a sufficient surplus to keep themselves fully fertile for more
than a few prime years. Infanticide was a common resort in bad times. Nor
was disease ever far away: gangrene, tetanus and many kinds of parasite
would have been big killers. Did I mention slavery? Common in the Pacific
north-west. Wife beating? Routine in Tierra del Fuego. The lack of soap,
hot water, bread, books, films, metal, paper, cloth? When you meet one of
those people who go so far as to say they would rather have lived in some

supposedly more delightful past age, just remind them of the toilet facilities
of the Pleistocene, the transport options of Roman emperors or the lice of
Versailles.
The call of the new
None the less, you do not have to be starry-eyed about the Stone Age to
find aspects of modern consumer society obscenely wasteful. Why, asks
Geoffrey Miller, ‘would the world’s most intelligent primate buy a Hummer
H1 Alpha sport-utility vehicle’, which seats four, gets ten miles to the
gallon, takes 13.5 seconds to reach 60 mph, and sells for $139,771?
Because, he answers, human beings evolved to strive to signal social status
and sexual worth. What this implies is that far from being merely
materialist, human consumption is already driven by a sort of pseudospiritualism that seeks love, heroism and admiration. Yet this thirst for
status then encourages people to devise recipes that rearrange the atoms,
electrons or photons of the world in such a way as to make useful
combinations for other people. Ambition is transmuted into opportunity. It
was allegedly a young Chinese imperial concubine in 2600 BC who thought
up the following recipe for rearranging beta pleated sheets of glycine-rich
polypeptides into fine fabrics: take a moth caterpillar, feed it mulberry
leaves for a month, let it spin a cocoon, heat it to kill it, put the cocoon in
water to unstick the silk threads, carefully draw out the single kilometrelong thread from which the cocoon is made by reeling it on to a wheel, spin
the thread and weave a fabric. Then dye, cut and sew, advertise and sell for
cash. Rough guide on quantities: it takes about ten pounds of mulberry
leaves to make 100 silkworm cocoons to make one necktie.
The cumulative accretion of knowledge by specialists that allows us
each to consume more and more different things by each producing fewer
and fewer is, I submit, the central story of humanity. Innovation changes the
world but only because it aids the elaboration of the division of labour and
encourages the division of time. Forget wars, religions, famines and poems
for the moment. This is history’s greatest theme: the metastasis of
exchange, specialisation and the invention it has called forth, the ‘creation’
of time. The rational optimist invites you to stand back and look at your
species differently, to see the grand enterprise of humanity that has
progressed – with frequent setbacks – for 100,000 years. And then, when
you have seen that, consider whether that enterprise is finished or if, as the

optimist claims, it still has centuries and millennia to run. If, in fact, it
might be about to accelerate to an unprecedented rate.
If prosperity is exchange and specialisation – more like the
multiplication of labour than the division of labour – then when and how
did that habit begin? Why is it such a peculiar attribute of the human
species?
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Two
The collective brain: exchange and
specialisation after 200,000 years ago
He steps under the shower, a forceful cascade pumped down from the
third floor. When this civilisation falls, when the Romans, whoever they are
this time round, have finally left and the new dark ages begin, this will be
one of the first luxuries to go. The old folk crouching by their peat fires will
tell their disbelieving grandchildren of standing naked mid-winter under jet
streams of hot clean water, of lozenges of scented soaps and of viscous
amber and vermilion liquids they rubbed into their hair to make it glossy
and more voluminous than it really was, and of thick white towels as big as
togas, waiting on warming racks.
IAN MCEWAN
Saturday

One day a little less than 500,000 years ago, near what is now the
village of Boxgrove in southern England, six or seven two-legged creatures
sat down around the carcass of a wild horse they had just killed, probably
with wooden spears. Each took up a block of flint and began to fashion it
into a hand axe, skilfully using hammers of stone, bone or antler to chip off
flakes until all that remained was a symmetrical, sharp-edged, teardropshaped object in size and thickness somewhere between an iPhone and a

computer mouse. The debris they left that day is still there, leaving eerie
shadows of their own legs as they sat and worked. You can tell that they
were right-handed. Notice: each person made his own tools.
The hand axes they made to butcher that horse are fine examples of
‘Acheulean bifaces’. They are thin, symmetrical and razor-sharp along the
edge, ideal for slicing through thick hide, severing the ligaments of joints
and scraping meat from bones. The Acheulean biface is the stereotype of
the Stone Age tool, the iconic flattened teardrop of the Palaeolithic. Because
the species that made it has long been extinct we may never quite know
how it was used. But one thing we do know. The creatures that made this
thing were very content with it. By the time of the Boxgrove horse butchers,
their ancestors had been making it to roughly the same design – hand-sized,
sharp, double-sided, rounded – for about a million years. Their descendants
would continue to make it for hundreds of thousands more years. That’s the
same technology for more than a thousand millennia, ten thousand
centuries, thirty thousand generations – an almost unimaginable length of
time.
Not only that; they made roughly the same tools in south and north
Africa and everywhere in between. They took the design with them to the
Near East and to the far north-west of Europe (though not to East Asia) and
still it did not change. A million years across three continents making the
same one tool. During those million years their brains grew in size by about
one-third. Here’s the startling thing. The bodies and brains of the creatures
that made Acheulean hand axes changed faster than their tools.
To us, this is an absurd state of affairs. How could people have been so
unimaginative, so slavish, as to make the same technology for so long?
How could there have been so little innovation, regional variation, progress,
or even regress?
Actually, this is not quite true, but the detailed truth reinforces the
problem rather than resolves it. There is a single twitch of progress in biface
hand-axe history: around 600,000 years ago, the design suddenly becomes a
little more symmetrical. This coincides with the appearance of a new
species of hominid which replaces its ancestor throughout Eurasia and
Africa. Called Homo heidelbergensis, this creature has a much bigger brain,
possibly 25 per cent bigger than late Homo erectus. Its brain was almost as
big as a modern person’s. Yet not only did it go on making hand axes and
very little else; the hand-axe design sank back into stagnation for another

half a million years. We are used to thinking that technology and innovation
go together, yet here is strong evidence that when human beings became
tool makers, they did not experience anything remotely resembling cultural
progress. They just did what they did very well. They did not change.
Bizarre as this may sound, in evolutionary terms it is quite normal. Most
species do not change their habits during their few million years on earth or
alter their lifestyle much in different parts of their range. Natural selection
is a conservative force. It spends more of its time keeping species the same
than changing them. Only towards the edge of its range, on an isolated
island, or in a remote valley or on a lonely hill top, does natural selection
occasionally cause part of a species to morph into something different. That
different sport sometimes then spreads to conquer a broader ecological
empire, perhaps even returning to replace the ancestral species – to topple
the dynasty from which it sprang. There is constant ferment of change
within the species’ genes as it adapts to its parasites and they to it. But there
is little progressive alteration of the organism. Evolutionary change happens
largely by the replacement of species by daughter species, not by the
changing of habits in species. What is surprising about the human story is
not the mind-bogglingly tedious stasis of the Acheulean hand axe, but that
the stasis came to an end.
The Boxgrove hominids of 500,000 years ago (who were members of
Homo heidelbergensis) had their ecological niche. They had a way of
getting food and shelter in their preferred habitat, of seducing mates and
rearing babies. They walked on two feet, had huge brains, made spears and
hand axes, taught each other traditions, perhaps spoke or signalled to each
other grammatically, almost certainly lit fires and cooked their food, and
undoubtedly killed big animals. If the sun shone, the herds of game were
plentiful, the spears were sharp and diseases kept at bay, they may have
sometimes thrived and populated new land. At other times, when food was
scarce, the local population just died out. They could not change their ways
much; it was not in their natures. Once they had spread all across Africa and
Eurasia, their populations never really grew. On average death rates
matched birth rates. Starvation, hyenas, exposure, fights and accidents
claimed most of their lives before they were elderly enough to get
chronically ill. Crucially, they did not expand or shift their niche. They
remained trapped within it. Nobody woke up one day and said ‘I’m going to
make my living a different way.’

Think of it this way. You don’t expect to get better and better at walking
in each successive generation – or breathing, or laughing, or chewing. For
Palaeolithic hominids, hand-axe making was like walking, something you
grew good at through practice and never thought about again. It was almost
a bodily function. It was no doubt passed on partly by imitation and
learning, but unlike modern cultural traditions it showed little regional and
local variation. It was part of what Richard Dawkins called ‘the extended
phenotype’ of the erectus hominid species, the external expression of its
genes. It was instinct, as inherent to the human behavioural repertoire as a
certain design of nest is to a certain species of bird. A song thrush lines its
nest with mud, a European robin lines its nest with hair and a chaffinch
lines its nest with feathers – they always have and they always will. It’s
innate for them to do so. Making a teardrop-shaped sharp-edged stone tool
takes no more skill than making a bird’s nest and was probably just as
instinctive: it was a natural expression of human development.
Indeed, the analogy with a bodily function is quite appropriate. There is
now little doubt that hominids spent much of those million and a half years
eating a lot of fresh meat. Some time after two million years ago, ape-men
had become more carnivorous. With their feeble teeth and with finger nails
where they should have had claws, they needed sharp tools to cut the skins
of their kills. Because of their sharp tools they could tackle even the
pachydermatous rhinos and elephants. Biface axes were like external canine
teeth. The rich meat diet also enabled erectus hominids to grow a larger
brain, an organ that burns energy at nine times the rate of the rest of the
body. Meat enabled them to cut down on the huge gut that their ancestors
had found necessary to digest raw vegetation and raw meat, and thus to
grow a bigger brain instead. Fire and cooking in turn then released the brain
to grow bigger still by making food more digestible with an even smaller
gut – once cooked, starch gelatinises and protein denatures, releasing far
more calories for less input of energy. As a result, whereas other primates
have guts weighing four times their brains, the human brain weighs more
than the human intestine. Cooking enabled hominids to trade gut size for
brain size.
Erectus hominids, in other words, had almost everything we might call
human: two legs, two hands, a big brain, opposable thumbs, fire, cooking,
tools, technology, cooperation, long childhoods, kindly demeanour. And yet

there was no sign of cultural take-off, little progress in technology, little
expansion of range or niche.
Homo dynamicus
Then there appeared upon the earth a new kind of hominid, which
refused to play by the rules. Without any changes in its body, and without
any succession of species, it just kept changing its habits. For the first time
its technology changed faster than its anatomy. This was an evolutionary
novelty, and you are it.
When this new animal appeared is hard to discern, and its entrance was
low-key. Some anthropologists argue that in east Africa and Ethiopia the
toolkit was showing signs of change as early as 285,000 years ago.
Certainly, by at least 160,000 years ago a new, small-faced ‘sapiens’ skull
was being worn on the top of the spine in Ethiopia. Around the same time at
Pinnacle Point in South Africa, people – yes, I shall call them people for the
first time – were cooking mussels and other shellfish in a cave close to the
sea as well as making primitive ‘bladelets’, small flakes of sharp stone,
probably for hafting on to spears. They were also using red ochre, perhaps
for decoration, implying thoroughly modern symbolic minds.
This was during the ice age before last, when Africa was mostly a
desert. And yet apparently nothing much came of this experiment.
Consistent evidence of smart behaviour and a fancy toolkit peters out again.
Genetic evidence suggests human beings were still rare even in Africa,
eking out a precarious existence in pockets of savannah woodland when it
was dry, or possibly on the margins of lakes and seas. In the Eemian
interglacial period of 130,000–115,000 years ago, the climate grew warmer
and much wetter and sea level rose. Some skulls from what is now Israel
suggest that a few slender-headed Africans did begin to colonise the Middle
East towards the end of the Eemian, before a combination of cold weather
and Neanderthals drove them back again. It was during this mild spell that a
fancy new toolkit first appeared in caves in what is now Morocco: flakes,
toothed scrapers and retouched points. One of the most extraordinary clues
comes in the form of a simple estuarine snail shell called Nassarius. This
little winkle keeps popping up in archaeological sites, with unnatural holes
in its shells. The oldest certain Nassarius find is at Grottes des Pigeons near
Taforalt in Morocco, where forty-seven perforated shells, some smeared
with red ochre, date from certainly more than 82,000 years ago and perhaps
as much as 120,000 years ago. Similar shells, harder to date, have been

found at Oued Djebanna in Algeria and Skhul in Israel, and perforated
shells of the same genus but a different species are found at Blombos cave
in South Africa from about 72,000 years ago along with the earliest bone
awls. These shells were surely beads, probably worn on a string. Not only
do they hint at a very modern attitude to personal ornament, symbolism or
perhaps even money; they also speak eloquently of trade. Taforalt is 25
miles and Oued Djebanna 125 miles from the nearest coast. The beads
probably travelled hand to hand by exchange. Likewise, there are hints from
east Africa and Ethiopia that the volcanic glass known as obsidian may
have begun to move over long distances around this time too, or even
earlier, presumably by trade, but the dates and sources are still uncertain.
Just across the strait of Gibraltar from where these bead-wearing, flakemaking people lived were the ancestors of Neanderthals, whose brains were
just as big but who showed no signs of making beads or flake tools, let
alone doing long-distance trade. There was clearly something different
about the Africans. Over the next few tens of millennia there were sporadic
improvements, but no great explosion. There may have been a collapse of
human populations. The African continent was plagued by ‘megadroughts’
at this time, during which desiccating winds blew the dust of extensive
deserts into Lake Malawi, whose level dropped 600 metres. Only well after
80,000 years ago, so genetic evidence attests, does something big start to
happen again. This time the evidence comes from genomes, not artefacts.
According to DNA scripture, it was then that one quite small group of
people began to populate the entire African continent, starting either in East
or South Africa and spreading north and rather more slowly west. Their
genes, marked by the L3 mitochondrial type, suddenly expanded and
displaced most others in Africa, except the ancestors of the Khoisan and
pygmy people. Yet even now there was no hint of what was to come, no
clue that this was anything but another evolutionary avatar of a precariously
successful predatory ape. The new African form, with its fancy tools, ochre
paint and shell-bead ornaments, might have displaced its neighbours, but it
would now settle down to enjoy its million years in the sun before
gracefully giving way to something new. This time, however, some of the
L3 people promptly spilled out of Africa and exploded into global
dominion. The rest, as they say, is history.
Starting to barter

Anthropologists advance two theories to explain the appearance in
Africa of these new technologies and people. The first is that it was driven
by climate. The volatility of the African weather, sucking human beings into
deserts in wet decades and pushing them out again in dry ones, would have
placed a premium on adaptability, which in turn selected for new
capabilities. The trouble with this theory is first that climate had been
volatile for a very long time without producing a technologically adept ape,
and second that it applies to lots of other African species too: if human
beings, why not elephants and hyenas? There is no evidence from the whole
of the rest of biology that desperate survival during unpredictable weather
selects intelligence or cultural flexibility. Rather the reverse: living in large
social groups on a plentiful diet both encourages and allows brain growth.
The second theory is that a fortuitous genetic mutation triggered a
change in human behaviour by subtly altering the way human brains were
built. This made people fully capable of imagination, planning, or some
other higher function for the first time, which in turn gave them the capacity
to make better tools and devise better ways of making a living. For a while,
it even looked as if two candidate mutations of the right age had appeared –
in the gene called FOXP2, which is essential to speech and language in both
people and songbirds. Adding these two mutations to mice does indeed
seem to change the flexibility of wiring in their brain in a way that may be
necessary for the rapid flicker of tongue and lung that is called speech, and
perhaps coincidentally the mutations even change the way mice pups
squeak without changing almost anything else about them. But recent
evidence confirms that Neanderthals share the very same two mutations,
which suggests that the common ancestor of Neanderthals and modern
people, living about 400,000 years ago, may have already been using pretty
sophisticated language. If language is the key to cultural evolution, and
Neanderthals had language, then why did the Neanderthal toolkit show so
little cultural change?
Moreover, genes would undoubtedly have changed during the human
revolution after 200,000 years ago, but more in response to new habits than
as causes of them. At an earlier date, cooking selected mutations for smaller
guts and mouths, rather than vice versa. At a later date, milk drinking
selected for mutations for retaining lactose digestion into adulthood in
people of western European and East African descent. The cultural horse
comes before the genetic cart. The appeal to a genetic change driving

evolution gets gene-culture co-evolution backwards: it is a top-down
explanation for a bottom-up process.
Besides, there is a more fundamental objection. If a genetic change
triggered novel human habits, why do its effects appear gradually and
erratically in different places at different times but then accelerate once
established? How could the new gene have a slower effect in Australia than
in Europe? Whatever the explanation for the modernisation of human
technology after 200,000 years ago, it must be something that gathers pace
by feeding upon itself, something that is auto-catalytic.
As you can tell, I like neither theory. I am going to argue that the answer
lies not in climate, nor genetics, nor in archaeology, nor even entirely in
‘culture’, but in economics. Human beings had started to do something to
and with each other that in effect began to build a collective intelligence.
They had started, for the very first time, to exchange things between
unrelated, unmarried individuals; to share, swap, barter and trade. Hence
the Nassarius shells moving inland from the Mediterranean. The effect of
this was to cause specialisation, which in turn caused technological
innovation, which in turn encouraged more specialisation, which led to
more exchange – and ‘progress’ was born, by which I mean technology and
habits changing faster than anatomy. They had stumbled on what Friedrich
Hayek called the catallaxy: the ever-expanding possibility generated by a
growing division of labour. This is something that amplifies itself once
begun.
Exchange needed to be invented. It does not come naturally to most
animals. There is strikingly little use of barter in any other animal species.
There is sharing within families, and there is food-for-sex exchange in
many animals including insects and apes, but there are no cases in which
one animal gives an unrelated animal one thing in exchange for a different
thing. ‘No man ever saw a dog make fair and deliberate exchange of a bone
with another dog,’ said Adam Smith.
I need to digress here: bear with me. I am not talking about swapping
favours – any old primate can do that. There is plenty of ‘reciprocity’ in
monkeys and apes: you scratch my back and I scratch yours. Or, as Leda
Cosmides and John Tooby put it, ‘One party helps another at one point in
time, in order to increase the probability that when their situations are
reversed at some (usually) unspecified time in the future, the act will be
reciprocated.’ Such reciprocity is an important human social glue, a source

of cooperation and a habit inherited from the animal past that undoubtedly
prepared human beings for exchange. But it is not the same thing as
exchange. Reciprocity means giving each other the same thing (usually) at
different times. Exchange – call it barter or trade if you like – means giving
each other different things (usually) at the same time: simultaneously
swapping two different objects. In Adam Smith’s words, ‘Give me that
which I want, and you shall have this which you want.’
Barter is a lot more portentous than reciprocity. After all, delousing
aside, how many activities are there in life where it pays to do the same
thing to each other in turn? ‘If I sew you a hide tunic today, you can sew me
one tomorrow’ brings limited rewards and diminishing returns. ‘If I make
the clothes, you catch the food’ brings increasing returns. Indeed, it has the
beautiful property that it does not even need to be fair. For barter to work,
two individuals do not need to offer things of equal value. Trade is often
unequal, but still benefits both sides. This is a point that nearly everybody
seems to miss. In the grasslands of Cameroon, for example, in past
centuries the palm-oil producers, who lived on the periphery of the region
on the poorest soils, worked hard to produce a low-value product that they
exchanged for cereal, livestock and iron with their neighbours. On average
it took them thirty days to afford the price of an iron hoe that had cost its
makers just seven person-days of work. Yet palm oil was still the most
profitable product they could make on their own land and with their own
resources. The cheapest way for them to get an iron hoe was to make more
palm oil. Or imagine a Trobriand island tribe on the coast that has ample
fish and an inland tribe that has ample fruit: as long as two people are living
in different habitats, they will value what each other has more than what
they have themselves, and trade will pay them both. And the more they
trade, the more it will pay them to specialise.
Evolutionary psychologists have assumed that it is rare for conditions to
exist in which two people simultaneously have value to offer to each other.
But this is just not true, because people can value highly what they do not
have access to. And the more they rely on exchange, the more they
specialise, which makes exchange still more attractive. Exchange is
therefore a thing of explosive possibility, a thing that breeds, explodes,
grows, auto-catalyses. It may have built upon an older animal instinct of
reciprocity, and it may have been greatly and uniquely facilitated by
language – I am not arguing that these were not vital ingredients of human

nature that allowed the habit to get started. But I am saying that barter – the
simultaneous exchange of different objects – was itself a human
breakthrough, perhaps even the chief thing that led to the ecological
dominance and burgeoning material prosperity of the species.
Fundamentally, other animals do not do barter.
I still don’t quite know why, but I have a lot of trouble getting this point
across to both economists and biologists. Economists see barter as just one
example of a bigger human habit of general reciprocity. Biologists talk
about the role that reciprocity played in social evolution, meaning ‘do unto
others as they do unto you’. Neither seems to be interested in the distinction
that I think is vital, so let me repeat it here once more: at some point, after
millions of years of indulging in reciprocal back-scratching of gradually
increasing intensity, one species, and one alone, stumbled upon an entirely
different trick. Adam gave Oz an object in exchange for a different object.
This is not the same as Adam scratching Oz’s back now and Oz scratching
Adam’s back later, or Adam giving Oz some spare food now and Oz giving
Adam some spare food tomorrow. The extraordinary promise of this event
was that Adam potentially now had access to objects he did not know how
to make or find; and so did Oz. And the more they did it, the more valuable
it became. For whatever reason, no other animal species ever stumbled
upon this trick – at least between unrelated individuals.
Do not take my word for it. The primatologist Sarah Brosnan tried to
teach two different groups of chimpanzees about barter and found it very
problematic. Her chimps preferred grapes to apples to cucumbers to carrots
(which they liked least of all). They were prepared sometimes to give up
carrots for grapes, but they almost never bartered apples for grapes (or vice
versa), however advantageous the bargain. They could not see the point of
giving up food they liked for food they liked even more. Chimpanzees and
monkeys can be taught to exchange tokens for food, but this is a long way
from spontaneously exchanging one thing for another: the tokens have no
value to the chimpanzees, so they are happy to give them up. True barter
requires that you give up something you value in exchange for something
else you value slightly more.
This is reflected in the ecology of wild chimpanzees. Whereas in human
beings, each sex eats ‘not only from the food items they have collected
themselves, but from their partners’ finds,’ says Richard Wrangham, ‘not
even a hint of this complementarity is found among nonhuman primates.’ It

is true that male chimps hunt monkeys more than females do and that
having killed a monkey, a male sometimes allows others to share it if they
beg to, especially a fertile female or a close partner to whom he owes a
favour. But the one thing you do not see is trade of one food for another.
There is never barter of meat for nuts. The contrast with human beings, who
show an almost obsessive interest not just in sharing food with each other
from an early age, but in swapping one item for another, is striking. Birute
Galdikas reared a young orang-utan in her home alongside her daughter
Binti, and was struck by the contrasting attitudes to food sharing of the two
infants. ‘Sharing food seemed to give Binti great pleasure,’ she wrote. ‘In
contrast, Princess, like any orang-utan would beg, steal and gobble food at
every opportunity’.
My argument is that this habit of exchanging, this appetite for barter,
had somehow appeared in our African ancestors some time before 100,000
years ago. Why did human beings acquire a taste for barter as other animals
did not? Perhaps it has something to do with cooking. Richard Wrangham
makes a persuasive case that control of fire had a far-reaching effect on
human evolution. Beyond making it safe to live on the ground, beyond
liberating human ancestors to grow big brains on high-energy diets, cooking
also predisposed human beings to swapping different kinds of food. And
that maybe got them bartering.
Hunting for gathering
As the economist Haim Ofek has argued, fire itself is hard to start, but
easy to share; likewise cooked food is hard to make but easy to share. The
time spent in cooking is subtracted from the time spent in chewing: wild
chimpanzees spend six hours or more each day just masticating their food.
Carnivores might not chew their meat (they are often in a hurry to eat
before it is stolen), but they spend hours grinding it in muscular stomachs,
which comes to much the same thing. So cooking adds value: the great
advantage of cooked food is that though it takes longer to prepare than raw
food, it takes just minutes to eat, and this means that somebody else can eat
as well as the person who prepares it. A mother can feed her children for
many years. Or a woman can feed a man.
In most hunter-gatherers, women spend long hours gathering, preparing
and cooking staple foods while men are out hunting for delicacies. There is,
incidentally, no hunter-gatherer society that dispenses with cooking.
Cooking is the most female-biased of all activities, the only exceptions

being when men prepare some ritual feasts or grill a few snacks while out
on the hunt. (Does this ring any modern bells? Fancy chefs and barbecuing
are the two most masculine forms of cooking today.) On average, across the
world, each sex contributes similar quantities of calories, though the pattern
varies from tribe to tribe: in Inuits, for example, most food is obtained by
men, whereas in the Kalahari Khoisan people, most is gathered by women.
But – and here is the crucial point – throughout the human race, males and
females specialise and then share food.
In other words, cooking encourages specialisation by sex. The first and
deepest division of labour is the sexual one. It is an iron rule documented in
virtually all foraging people that ‘men hunt, women and children gather’.
The two sexes move ‘through the same habitat, making strikingly different
decisions about how to obtain resources within that habitat, and often
returning to a central location with the results of their labour.’ So, for
example, while Hiwi women in Venezuela travel by foot to dig roots, pound
palm starch, pick legumes and collect honey, their menfolk go hunting,
fishing or collecting oranges by canoe; while Ache men in Paraguay hunt
pigs, deer and armadillos for up to seven hours a day, the women follow
them collecting fruit, digging for roots, gathering insects or pounding starch
– and sometimes catching armadillos, too; while Hadza women in Tanzania
collect tubers, fruit and nuts, men hunt antelope; while Greenland Inuit men
hunt seals, women make stews, tools and clothing from the animals. And so
on, through example after example. Even the apparent exceptions to the
rule, where women do hunt, are instructive, because there is still a division
of labour. Agta women in the Philippines hunt with dogs; men hunt with
bows. Martu women in western Australia hunt goanna lizards; men hunt
bustards and kangaroos. As one anthropologist put it after living with the
Khoisan, ‘Women demand meat as their social right, and they get it –
otherwise they leave their husbands, marry elsewhere or make love to other
men.’
What is true of extant hunter-gatherers was equally true of extinct ways
of life, as far as can be ascertained. Cree Indian women hunted hares; men
hunted moose. Chumash women in California gathered shellfish; men
harpooned sea lions. Yahgan Indians (in Tierra del Fuego) hunted otters and
sea lions; women fished. In the Mersey estuary near Liverpool are
preserved dozens of 8,000-year-old footprints: the women and children

appear to have been collecting razor clams and shrimps; the men’s prints
are moving fast and paralleling those of red and roe deer.
An evolutionary bargain seems to have been struck: in exchange for
sexual exclusivity, the man brings meat and protects the fire from thieves
and bullies; in exchange for help rearing the children, the woman brings veg
and does much of the cooking. This may explain why human beings are the
only great apes with long pair bonds.
Just to be clear, this argument has nothing to do with the notion that ‘a
woman’s place is in the home’ while men go out to work. Women work
hard in hunter-gatherer societies, often harder than men. Neither gathering
nor hunting is especially good evolutionary preparation for sitting at a desk
answering the telephone. Anthropologists used to argue that the sexual
division of labour came about because of the long, helpless childhood of
human beings. Because women could not abandon their babies, they could
not hunt game, so they stayed near the home and gathered and cooked food
of the kind that was compatible with caring for children. With a baby
strapped to your back and a toddler giggling at your feet, it is undoubtedly
easier to gather fruit and dig roots than it is to ambush an antelope. The
anthropologists have been revising the view that the division of labour by
sex is all about childcare constraints, though. They have found that even
when hunter-gatherer women do not face a hard choice between child care
and hunting, they still seek out different kinds of food from their menfolk.
In the Alyawarre aborigines of Australia, while young women care for
children, older women go out looking for goanna lizards, not for the
kangaroos and emus that their menfolk hunt. A sexual division of labour
would exist even without childcare constraints.
When did this specialisation begin? There is a neat economic
explanation for the sexual division of labour in hunter-gatherers. In terms of
nutrition, women generally collect dependable, staple carbohydrates
whereas men fetch precious protein. Combine the two – predictable calories
from women and occasional protein from men – and you get the best of
both worlds. At the cost of some extra work, women get to eat some good
protein without having to chase it; men get to know where the next meal is
coming from if they fail to kill a deer. That very fact makes it easier for
them to spend more time chasing deer and so makes it more likely they will
catch one. Everybody gains – gains from trade. It is as if the species now

has two brains and two stores of knowledge instead of one – a brain that
learns about hunting and a brain that learns about gathering.
Neat, as I say. There are untidy complications to the story, including that
men seem to strive to catch big game to feed the whole band – in exchange
for both status and the occasional seduction – while women feed the family.
This can lead to men being economically less productive than they might
be. Hadza men spend weeks trying to catch a huge eland antelope when
they could be snaring a spring-hare each day instead; men on the island of
Mer in the Torres Strait stand with spears at the fringe of the reef hoping to
harpoon giant trevally while their women gather twice as much food by
collecting shellfish. Yet even allowing for such conspicuous generosity or
social parasitism – depends on how you view it – the economic benefits of
food sharing and specialised sex roles are real. They are also unique to
human beings. There are a few birds in which the sexes have slightly
different feeding habits – in the extinct Huia of New Zealand male and
female even had different beak shapes – but collecting different foods and
sharing them is something no other species does. It is a habit that put an end
to self-sufficiency long ago and that got our ancestors into the habit of
exchange.
When was the sexual division of labour invented? The cooking theory
points to half a million years ago or much more, but two archaeologists
argue otherwise. Steven Kuhn and Mary Stiner think that modern, Africanorigin Homo sapiens had a sexual division of labour and Neanderthals did
not, and that this was the former’s crucial ecological advantage over the
latter when they came head-to-head in Eurasia 40,000 years ago. In
advancing this notion they are contradicting a long-held tenet of their
science, first advocated by Glyn Isaac in 1978 – that different sex roles
started with food sharing millions of years ago. They point out that there is
just no sign of the kind of food normally brought by gatherer women in
Neanderthal debris, nor of the elaborate clothing and shelters that Inuit
women make while their men are hunting. There are occasional shellfish,
tortoises, eggshells and the like – foods easily picked up while hunting –
but no grindstones and no sign of nuts and roots. This is not to deny that
Neanderthals cooperated, and cooked. But it is to challenge the notion that
the sexes had different foraging strategies and swapped the results. Either
the Neanderthal women sat around doing nothing, or, since they were as

butch as most modern men, they went out hunting with the men. That seems
more likely.
This is a startling shift of view. Instead of talking about ‘huntergathering’ as the natural state of humanity effectively since forever, as they
are apt to do, scientists must begin to consider the possibility that it is a
comparatively recent phase, an innovation of the last 200,000 years or so. Is
the sexual division of labour a possible explanation of what made a small
race of Africans so much better at surviving in a time of megadroughts and
volatile climate change than all other hominids on the planet?
Perhaps. Remember how few are the remains from Neanderthal sites.
But at least the burden of proof has shifted a bit. Even if the habit is more
ancient, it may have been the predisposing factor that then conditioned the
African race to the whole notion of specialisation and exchange. Having
trained themselves to specialise and exchange between the sexes, having
got into the habit of exchanging labour with others, the thoroughly modern
Africans had then begun to extend the idea a little bit further and tentatively
try a new and still more portentous trick, of specialising within the band and
then between bands. This latter step was very hard to take, because of the
homicidal relationships between tribes. Famously, no other species of ape
can encounter strangers without trying to kill them, and the instinct still
lurks in the human breast. But by 82,000 years ago, human beings had
overcome this problem sufficiently to be able to pass Nassarius shells hand
to hand 125 miles inland. Barter had begun.
Beachcombing east
Barter was the trick that changed the world. To paraphrase H.G. Wells,
‘We had struck our camp forever, and were out upon the roads.’ Having
conquered much of Africa by about 80,000 years ago, the modern people
did not stop there. Genes tell an almost incredible story. The pattern of
variation in the DNA of both mitochondrial and Y chromosomes in all
people of non-African origin attests that some time around 65,000 years
ago, or not much later, a group of people, numbering just a few hundred in
all, left Africa. They probably crossed the narrow southern end of the Red
Sea, a channel much narrower then than it is now. They then spread along
the south coast of Arabia, hopping over a largely dry Persian Gulf, skirting
round India and a then-connected Sri Lanka, moving gradually down
through Burma, Malaya and along the coast of a landmass called Sunda in
which most of the Indonesian islands were then embedded, until they came

to a strait somewhere near Bali. But they did not stop there either. They
paddled across at least eight straits, the largest at least forty miles wide,
presumably on canoes or rafts, working their way through an archipelago to
land, probably around 45,000 years ago, on the continent of Sahul, in which
Australia and New Guinea were conjoined.
This great movement from Africa to Australia was not a migration, but
an expansion. As bands of people feasted on the coconuts, clams, turtles,
fish and birds on one part of the coast and grew fat and numerous, so they
would send out pioneers (or exile troublemakers?) to the east in search of
new camp sites. Sometimes these emigrants would have to leapfrog others
already in possession of the coast by trekking inland or taking to canoes.
Along the way they left tribes of hunter-gatherer descendants, a few of
whom survive to this day genetically unmixed with other races. On the
Malay Peninsula, forest hunter-gatherers called the Orang Asli (‘original
people’) look ‘negrito’ in appearance and prove to have mitochondrial
genes that branched off from the African tree about 60,000 years ago. In
New Guinea and Australia, too, the genetics tell an unambiguous story of
almost complete isolation since the first migration. Most remarkable of all,
the native people of the Andaman islands, black-skinned, curly-haired and
speaking a language unrelated to any other, have Y-chromosome and
mitochondrial genes that diverged from the common ancestor with the rest
of humankind 65,000 years ago. At least this is true of the Jarawa tribe on
Great Andaman. The North Sentinelese, on the nearby island of North
Sentinel, have not volunteered to give blood – at least not their own. As the
only hunter-gatherers who still resist ‘contact’, these fine-looking people –
strong, slim, fit and stark naked except for a small plant-fibre belt round the
waist – usually greet visitors with showers of arrows. Good luck to them.
To reach the Andaman islands (then closer to the Burmese coast, but
still out of sight) and Sahul, however, the migrants of 65,000 years ago
must have been proficient canoeists. It was in the early 1990s that the
African-born zoologist Jonathan Kingdon first suggested that the black skin
of many Africans, Australians, Melanesians and ‘negrito’ Asians hinted at a
maritime past. For a hunter-gatherer on the African savannah, a very black
skin is not needed, as the relatively pale Khoisan and pygmies prove. But
out on an exposed reef or beach, or in a fishing canoe, maximum sunscreen
is called for. Kingdon believed that the ‘Banda strandlopers’, as he called
them, had returned to conquer Africa from Asia, rather than the other way

round, but he was ahead of the genetic evidence in coining the idea of an
essentially maritime Palaeolithic race.
This remarkable expansion of the human race along the shore of Asia,
now known as the ‘beachcomber express’, has left few archaeological
traces, but that is because the then coastline is now 200 feet under water. It
was a cool, dry time with vast ice sheets in high latitudes and big glaciers
on mountain ranges. The interior of many of the continents was
inhospitably dry, windy and cold. But the lowlying coasts were dotted with
oases of freshwater springs. The low sea level not only exposed more
springs, but increased the relative pressure on underground aquifers to
discharge near the coast. All along the coast of Asia, the beachcombers
would have found fresh water bubbling up and flowing into streams that
meandered down to the ocean. The coast is also rich in food if you have the
ingenuity to find it, even on desert shores. It made sense to stick to the
beach.
The evidence of DNA attests that some of these beachcombers, on
reaching India and apparently not before, must have eventually moved
inland, because by 40,000 years ago ‘modern’ people were pressing west
into Europe and east into what is now China. Abandoning the crowded
coast, they resumed their old African ways of hunting game and gathering
fruits and roots, becoming gradually more dependent on hunting once more
as they inched north into the steppes grazed by herds of mammoths, horses
and rhinoceroses. Soon they came across their distant cousins, the
descendants of Homo erectus, with whom they last shared an ancestor half a
million years before. They got close enough to acquire the latter’s lice to
add to their own, so louse genes suggest, and conceivably even close
enough to acquire a smattering of their cousins’ genes by interbreeding. But
inexorably they rolled back the territory of these Eurasian erectus hominids
till the last survivor, of the European cold-adapted sort known as
Neanderthal, died with his back to the Strait of Gibraltar about 28,000 years
ago. Another 15,000 years saw some of them spilling into the Americas
from north-east Asia.
They were very good at wiping out not only their distant cousins, but
also much of their prey, something previous hominid species had not
managed. The earliest of the great cave painters, working at Chauvet in
southern France 32,000 years ago, was almost obsessed with rhinoceroses.
A more recent artist, working at Lascaux 15,000 years later, depicted mostly

bisons, bulls and horses – rhinoceroses were rare or extinct in Europe by
then. At first, modern human beings around the Mediterranean relied mostly
on large mammals for meat. They ate small game only if it was slowmoving – tortoises and limpets were popular. Then, gradually and
inexorably, starting in the Middle East, they switched their attention to
smaller animals, and especially to fast-breeding species, such as rabbits,
hares, partridges and smaller gazelles. They gradually stopped eating
tortoises. The archaeological record tells this same story at sites in Israel,
Turkey and Italy.
The reason for this shift, say Mary Stiner and Steven Kuhn, was that
human population densities were growing too high for the slowerreproducing prey such as tortoises, horses and elephants. Only the fastbreeding rabbits, hares and partridges, and for a while gazelles and deer,
could cope with such hunting pressure. This trend accelerated about 15,000
years ago as large game and tortoises disappeared from the Mediterranean
diet altogether – driven to the brink of extinction by human predation. (A
modern parallel: in the Mojave Desert of California, ravens occasionally
kill tortoises for food. But only when landfills provided the ravens with
ample alternative food and boosted – subsidised – their numbers did the
tortoise numbers start to collapse from raven predation. So modern people,
subsidised by hare meat, could extinguish mammoths.)
It is rare for a predator to wipe out its prey altogether. In times of prey
scarcity, erectus hominids, like other predators, had simply suffered local
depopulation; that in turn would have saved the prey from extinction and
the hominid numbers could recover in time. But these new people could
innovate their way out of trouble; they could shift their niche, so they
continued to thrive even as they extinguished their old prey. The last
mammoth to be eaten on the Asian plain was probably thought a rare
delicacy, a nice change from hare and gazelle stew. As they adjusted their
tactics to catch smaller and faster prey, so the moderns developed better
weapons, which in turn enabled them to survive at high densities, though at
the expense of extinguishing more of the larger and slower-breeding prey.
This pattern of shifting from big prey to small as the former were wiped out
was characteristic of the new ex-Africans wherever they went. In Australia,
almost all larger animal species, from diprotodons to giant kangaroos,
became extinct soon after human beings arrived. In the Americas, human
arrival coincided with a sudden extinction of the largest, slowest-breeding

beasts. Much later in Madagascar and New Zealand mass extinctions of
large animals also followed with human colonisation. (Incidentally, given
the obsession of ‘show-off’ male hunters with catching the largest beasts
with which to buy prestige in the tribe, it is worth reflecting that these mass
extinctions owe something to sexual selection.)
Shall we trade?
Meanwhile, the stream of new technologies gathered pace. From around
45,000 years ago, the people of western Eurasia had progressively
revolutionised their toolkit. They struck slim, sharp blades from cylindrical
rock ‘cores’ – a trick that produces ten times as much cutting edge as the
old way of working, but is far harder to pull off. By 34,000 years ago they
were making bone points for spears, and by 26,000 they were making
needles. Bone spear throwers, or atlatls – which greatly increase the
velocity of javelins – appear by 18,000 years ago. Bows and arrows came
soon afterwards. ‘Microburin’ borers were used for drilling the holes in
needles and beads. Of course, stone tools would have been only a tiny tip of
a technological iceberg, dominated by wood, which has long since rotted
away. Antler, ivory and bone were just as important. String, made from
plant fibres or leather, was almost certainly in use by then to catch fish and
rabbits in nets or snares, and to make bags for carrying things in.
Nor was this virtuosity confined to practicalities. As well as bone and
ivory, shells, fossil coral, steatite, jet, lignite, hematite, and pyrite were used
to make ornaments and objects. A flute made from the bone of a vulture
dates from 35,000 years ago at Hohle Fels and a tiny horse, carved from
mammoth ivory and worn smooth by being used as a pendant, dates from
32,000 years ago at Vogelherd – both in Germany. By the time of Sungir, an
open-air settlement from 28,000 years ago at a spot near the city of
Vladimir, north-east of Moscow, people were being buried in clothes
decorated with thousands of laboriously carved ivory beads, and even little
wheel-shaped bone ornaments had appeared. At Mezherich, in what is now
Ukraine, 18,000 years ago, jewellery made of shells from the Black Sea and
amber from the Baltic implied trade over hundreds of miles.
This is in striking contrast to the Neanderthals, whose stone tools were
virtually always made from raw material available within an hour’s walk of
where the tool was used. To me this is a vital clue to why the Neanderthals
were still making hand axes, while their African-origin competitors were
making ever more types of tool. Without trade, innovation just does not

happen. Exchange is to technology as sex is to evolution. It stimulates
novelty. The remarkable thing about the moderns of west Asia is not so
much the diversity of artefacts as the continual innovation. There is more
invention between 80,000 and 20,000 years ago than there had been in the
previous million. By today’s standards, it was very slow, but by the
standards of Homo erectus it was lightning-fast. And the next ten millennia
would see still more innovations: fish hooks, all sorts of implements,
domesticated wolves, wheat, figs, sheep, money.
If you are not self-sufficient, but are working for other people, too, then
it pays you to spend some time and effort to improve your technology and it
pays you to specialise. Suppose, for example, that Adam lives in a grassy
steppe where there are herds of reindeer in winter, but some days’ walk
away is a coast, where there are fish in summer. He could spend winter
hunting, then migrate to the coast to go fishing. But that way he would not
only waste time travelling, and probably run a huge risk crossing the
territory of another tribe. He would also have to get good at two quite
different things.
If, instead, Adam sticks to hunting and then gives some dried meat and
reindeer antlers – ideal for fashioning hooks from – to Oz, a coastal
fisherman, in exchange for fish, he has achieved the goal of varying his diet
in a less tiring or dangerous way. He has also bought an insurance policy.
And Oz would be better off, because he could now catch (and spare) more
fish. Next Adam realises that instead of giving Oz raw antlers, he can give
him pieces of antler already fashioned into hooks. These are easier to
transport and fetch a better price in fish. He got the idea when he once went
to the trading point and noticed others selling antlers that had already been
cut up into easy segments. One day, Oz asks him to make barbed hooks.
And Adam suggests that Oz dries or smokes his fish so it lasts longer. Soon
Oz brings shells, too, which Adam buys to make jewellery for a young
woman he fancies. After a while, depressed by the low price fetched by
hooks of even high quality, Adam hits on the idea of tanning some extra
hides and bringing those to the trading point, too. Now he finds he is better
at making hides than hooks, so he specialises in hides, giving his antlers to
somebody from his own tribe in exchange for his hides. And so on, and on
and on.
Fanciful, maybe. And no doubt wrong in all sorts of details. But the
point is how easy it is to envisage both opportunities for trade among

hunter-gatherers – meat for plants, fish for leather, wood for stone, antler
for shells – and how easy it is for Stone Age people to discover mutual
gains from trade and then to enhance that effect by further specialising and
further dividing labour. The extraordinary thing about exchange is that it
breeds: the more of it you do, the more of it you can do. And it calls forth
innovation.
Which only raises another question: why did economic progress not
accelerate towards an industrial revolution there and then? Why was
progress so agonisingly slow for so many millennia? The answer, I suspect,
lies in the fissile nature of human culture. Human beings have a deep
capacity for isolationism, for fragmenting into groups that diverge from
each other. In New Guinea, for instance, there are more than 800 languages,
some spoken in areas just a few miles across yet as unintelligible to those
on either side as French and English. There are still 7,000 languages spoken
on earth and the people who speak each one are remarkably resistant to
borrowing words, traditions, rituals or tastes from their neighbours.
‘Whereas vertical transmission of cultural traits goes largely unnoticed,
horizontal transmission is far more likely to be regarded with suspicion or
even indignation,’ say the evolutionary biologists Mark Pagel and Ruth
Mace. ‘Cultures, it seems, like to shoot messengers.’ People do their utmost
to cut themselves off from the free flow of ideas, technologies and habits,
limiting the impact of specialisation and exchange.
Ricardo’s magic trick
Divisions of labour beyond the pair bond had probably been invented in
the Upper Palaeolithic. Commenting on the ten thousand mammoth-ivory
beads with which the clothing of two 28,000-year-old child corpses at
Sungir in Russia were decorated, the anthropologist Ian Tattersall remarks:
‘It’s hardly probable that these young people had made their richly adorned
vestments themselves. It’s much more likely that the sheer diversity of
material production in their society was the result of the specialisation of
individuals in different activities.’ The carvers of mammoth beads at Sungir,
the painter of rhinoceroses at Chauvet, the striker of blades from rock cores,
the maker of rabbit nets – perhaps these were all specialists, exchanging
their labour for that of others. Perhaps there had been different roles within
each band of human beings ever since the first emergence of modern people
over 100,000 years ago.

It is such a human thing to do, and so obvious an explanation of the
thing that needs explaining: the capacity for innovation. Specialisation
would lead to expertise, and expertise would lead to improvement.
Specialisation would also give the specialist an excuse for investing time in
developing a laborious new technique. If you have a single fishing harpoon
to make, there’s no sense in building a clever tool for making harpoons first,
but if you have to make harpoons for five fishermen, then maybe there is
sense and time-saving in first making the harpoon-making tool.
Specialisation would therefore create and increase the opportunities for
gains from trade. The more Oz goes fishing, the better he gets at it, so the
less time it takes him to catch each fish. The more hooks Adam the reindeer
hunter makes, the better he gets at it, so the less time he takes to make each
one. So it pays Oz to spend his day fishing and buy his hooks off Adam by
giving him some fish. And it pays Adam to spend his day making hooks and
get his fish delivered by Oz.
And, wonderfully, this is true even if Oz is better at hookmaking than
Adam. Suppose Adam is a clumsy fool, who breaks half his hooks, but he is
an even clumsier fisherman who cannot throw a line to save his life. Oz,
meanwhile, is one of those irritating paragons who can whittle a bone hook
with little trouble and always catches lots of fish. Yet it still pays Oz to get
his hooks made for him by clumsy Adam. Why? Because with practise
Adam has at least become better at making hooks than he is at fishing. It
takes him three hours to make a hook, but four hours to catch a fish. Oz
takes only an hour to catch a fish, but good as he is he still needs two hours
to make a hook. So if each is self-sufficient, then Oz works for three hours
(two to make the hook and one to catch the fish), while Adam works for
seven hours (three to make the hook and four to catch a fish). If Oz catches
two fish and swaps one for a hook from Adam, he only has to work two
hours. If Adam makes two hooks and uses one to buy a fish from Oz, he
only works for six hours. Both are better off than when they were selfsufficient. Both have gained an hour of leisure time.
I have done nothing here but retell, in Stone Age terms, the notion of
comparative advantage as defined by the stockbroker David Ricardo in
1817. He used the example of England trading cloth for Portuguese wine,
but the argument is the same:

England may be so circumstanced, that to produce the cloth may
require the labour of 100 men for one year; and if she attempted to
make the wine, it might require the labour of 120 men for the same
time. England would therefore find it in her interest to import wine,
and to purchase it by the exportation of cloth. To produce the wine in
Portugal, might require only the labour of 80 men for one year, and to
produce the cloth in the same country, might require the labour of 90
men for the same time. It would therefore be advantageous for her to
export wine in exchange for cloth. This exchange might even take
place, notwithstanding that the commodity imported by Portugal could
be produced there with less labour than in England.
Ricardo’s law has been called the only proposition in the whole of the
social sciences that is both true and surprising. It is such an elegant idea that
it is hard to believe that Palaeolithic people took so long to stumble upon it
(or economists to define it); hard to understand why other species do not
make use of it, too. It is rather baffling that we appear to be the only species
that routinely exploits it. Of course, that is not quite right. Evolution has
discovered Ricardo’s law and applied it to symbioses, such as the
collaboration between alga and fungus that is a lichen plant or the
collaboration between a cow and a bacterium in a rumen. Within species,
too, there are clear gains from trade between cells of a body, polyps of a
coral colony, ants of an ant colony, or mole-rats of a mole-rat colony. The
great success of ants and termites – between them they may comprise onethird of all the animal biomass of land animals – is undoubtedly down to
their division of labour. Insect social life is built not on increases in the
complexity of individual behaviour, ‘but instead on specialization among
individuals’. In the leafcutter ants of the Amazon rainforest, colonies may
number millions, and workers grow into one of four distinct castes: minors,
medias, majors and supermajor. In one species a supermajor (or soldier)
may weigh the same as 500 minors.
But the big difference is that in every other species than human beings,
the colonies consist of close relatives – even a city of a million ants is really
just a huge family. Yet reproduction is the one task that people never
delegate to a specialist, let alone a queen. What gave people the chance to
exploit gains from trade, without waiting for Mother Nature’s tedious
evolutionary crawl, was technology. Equipped with the right tool, a human

being can become a soldier or a worker (maybe not a queen), and he can
switch between the roles. The more you do something, the better you get at
it. A band of hunter-gatherers in west Eurasia, 15,000 years ago, dividing
labour not just by gender but by individual as well, would have been
formidably more efficient than an undifferentiated band. Imagine, say, 100
people in the band. Some of them make tools, others make clothes, others
hunt, others gather. One tiresome bloke insists on prancing around in a deer
skull chanting spells and prayers, adding little to the general well-being, but
then maybe he is in charge of the lunar calendar so he can tell people when
the tides will be lowest for limpet-picking expeditions.
True, there is not much specialisation in modern hunter-gatherers. In the
Kalahari or the Australian desert, apart from the gathering women, the
hunting men and maybe the shaman, there are not too many distinct
occupations in each band. But these are the simple societies left in the harsh
habitats. In the relatively fertile lands of west Eurasia after 40,000 years
ago, when bands of people were larger and lines of work were diverse,
specialisation had probably grown up within each band. The Chauvet rhino
painter was so good at his job (and yes, archaeologists think it was mainly
one artist) that he must surely have had plenty of time off hunting duties to
practise. The Sungir bead maker must have been working for a wage of
some kind, because he cannot surely have had time to hunt for himself.
Even Charles Darwin reckoned that ‘primeval man practised a division of
labour; each man did not manufacture his own tools or rude pottery, but
certain individuals appear to have devoted themselves to such work, no
doubt receiving in exchange the produce of the chase.’
Innovation networks
According to the anthropologist Joe Henrich, human beings learn skills
from each other by copying prestigious individuals, and they innovate by
making mistakes that are very occasionally improvements – that is how
culture evolves. The bigger the connected population, the more skilled the
teacher, and the bigger the probability of a productive mistake. Conversely,
the smaller the connected population, the greater the steady deterioration of
the skill as it was passed on. Because they depended on wild resources,
hunter-gatherers could rarely live in bands larger than a few hundred and
could never achieve modern population densities. This had an important
consequence. It meant that there was a limit to what they could invent. A
band of a hundred people cannot sustain more than a certain number of

tools, for the simple reason that both the production and the consumption of
tools require a minimum size of market. People will only learn a limited set
of skills and if there are not enough experts to learn one rare skill from, they
will lose that skill. A good idea, manifest in bone, stone or string, needs to
be kept alive by numbers. Progress can easily falter and turn into regress.
Where modern hunter-gatherers have been deprived of access to a large
population of trading partners – in sparsely populated Australia, especially
Tasmania, and on the Andaman islands, for example – their technological
virtuosity was stunted and barely progressed beyond those of Neanderthals.
There was nothing special about the brains of the moderns; it was their
trade networks that made the difference – their collective brains.
The most striking case of technological regress is Tasmania. Isolated on
an island at the end of the world, a population of less than 5,000 huntergatherers divided into nine tribes did not just stagnate, or fail to progress.
They fell steadily and gradually back into a simpler toolkit and lifestyle,
purely because they lacked the numbers to sustain their existing technology.
Human beings reached Tasmania at least 35,000 years ago while it was still
connected to Australia. It remained connected – on and off – until about
10,000 years ago, when the rising seas filled the Bass Strait. Thereafter the
Tasmanians were isolated. By the time Europeans first encountered
Tasmanian natives, they found them not only to lack many of the skills and
tools of their mainland cousins, but to lack many technologies that their
own ancestors had once possessed. They had no bone tools of any kind,
such as needles and awls, no cold-weather clothing, no fish hooks, no
hafted tools, no barbed spears, no fish traps, no spear throwers, no
boomerangs. A few of these had been invented on the mainland after the
Tasmanians had been isolated from it – the boomerang, for instance – but
most had been made and used by the very first Tasmanians. Steadily and
inexorably, so the archaeological history tells, these tools and tricks were
abandoned. Bone tools, for example, grew simpler and simpler until they
were dropped altogether about 3,800 years ago. Without bone tools it
became impossible to sew skins into clothes, so even in the bitter winter,
the Tasmanians went nearly naked but for seal-fat grease smeared on their
skin and wallaby pelts over their shoulders. The first Tasmanians caught
and ate plenty of fish, but by the time of Western contact they not only ate
no fish and had eaten none for 3,000 years, but they were disgusted to be
offered it (though they happily ate shellfish).

The story is not quite that simple, because the Tasmanians did invent a
few new things during their isolation. Around 4,000 years ago they came up
with a horribly unreliable form of canoe-raft, made of bundles of rushes and
either paddled by men or pushed by swimming women (!), which enabled
them to reach offshore islets to harvest birds and seals. The raft would
become waterlogged and disintegrate or sink after a few hours, so it was no
good for re-establishing contact with the mainland. As far as innovation
goes, it was so unsatisfactory that it almost counts as an exception to prove
the rule. The women also learnt to dive up to twelve feet below the water to
prise clams off the rocks with wooden wedges and to grab lobsters. This
was dangerous and exhausting work, which they were very skilled at: the
men did not take part. So it was not that there was no innovation; it was that
regress overwhelmed progress.
The archaeologist who first described the Tasmanian regress, Rhys
Jones, called it a case of the ‘slow strangulation of the mind’, which
perhaps understandably enraged some of his academic colleagues. There
was nothing wrong with individual Tasmanian brains; there was something
wrong with their collective brains. Isolation – self-sufficiency – caused the
shrivelling of their technology. Earlier I wrote that division of labour was
made possible by technology. But it is more interesting than that.
Technology was made possible by division of labour: market exchange calls
forth innovation.
Now, at last, it becomes clear why the erectus hominids saw such slow
technological progress. They, and their descendants the Neanderthals, lived
without trade (recall how Neanderthal stone tools were sourced within an
hour’s walk of their use). So in effect each erectus hominid tribe occupied a
virtual Tasmania, cut off from the collective brain of the wider population.
Tasmania is about the size of the Irish Republic. By the time Abel Tasman
pitched up in 1642 it held probably about 4,000 hunter-gatherers divided
into nine tribes, and they lived mainly off seals, seabirds and wallabies,
which they killed with wooden clubs and spears. That means that there were
only a few hundred young adults on the entire island who were learning
new skills at any one time. If, as seems to be the case everywhere, culture
works by faithful imitation with a bias towards imitating prestigious
individuals (in other words, copy the expert, not the parent or the person
closest to hand), then all it would take for certain skills to be lost would be a
handful of unlucky accidents in which the most prestigious individual had

forgotten or mislearned a crucial step or even gone to his grave without
teaching an apprentice. Suppose, for example, that an abundance of seabirds
led one group to eschew fishing for a number of years until the last maker
of fishing tackle had died. Or that the best barbed-spear maker on the island
fell off a cliff one day leaving no apprentice. His barbs went on being used
for some years, but once they had all broken, suddenly there was nobody
who could make them. Acquiring a skill costs a lot of time and effort;
nobody could afford to learn barb-making from scratch. People
concentrated on learning the skills that they could watch first-hand.
Bit by bit, Tasmanian technology simplified. The most difficult tools
and complex skills were lost first, because they were the hardest to master
without a master to learn from. Tools are in effect a measure of the extent of
the division of labour and, as Adam Smith argued, the division of labour is
limited by the extent of the market. The Tasmanian market was too small to
sustain many specialised skills. Imagine if 4,000 people from your home
town were plonked on an island and left in total isolation for ten millennia.
How many skills and tools do you think they could preserve? Wireless
telephony? Double-entry book-keeping? Suppose one of the people in your
town was an accountant. He could teach double-entry book-keeping to a
youth, but would the youth or the youth’s youth pass it on – for ever?
On other Australian islands much the same thing happened as on
Tasmania. On Kangaroo Island and Flinders Island, human occupation
petered out, probably by extinction, a few thousand years after isolation.
Flinders is a fertile island that should be a paradise. But the hundred or so
people it could support were far too small a human population to sustain the
technology of hunter-gathering. The Tiwi people, isolated on two islands
north of Darwin for 5,500 years, also reversed the ratchet of accumulating
skills and slipped back to a simpler tool set. The Torres islanders lost the art
of canoe making, causing the anthropologist W.H.R. Rivers to puzzle over
the ‘disappearance of the useful arts’. It seems the hunter-gathering lifestyle
was doomed if too isolated. The Australian mainland, by contrast,
experienced steady technological progress. Where Tasmanian spears merely
had fire-hardened wood points, on the mainland spears acquired detachable
tips, stone barbs and ‘woomera’ spear throwers. It is no coincidence that the
mainland had long-range trade, so that inventions and luxuries could be
sourced from distant parts of the land. Shell beads had been moving long
distances across Australia since at least 30,000 years ago. Pearl and baler

shell pendants from the north coast moved through at least eight tribal areas
to reach the far south more than a thousand miles from where they had been
harvested, growing in sacredness as they went. ‘Pitchera’ – a tobacco-like
plant – moved west from Queensland. The best stone axes travelled up to
500 miles from where they were mined.
In contrast to Tasmania, Tierra del Fuego – an island not much bigger
than Tasmania, home to not many more people and generally rather colder
and less hospitable – possessed a race of people who, when Charles Darwin
met them in 1834, set bait for fish, nets for seals and snares for birds, used
hooks and harpoons, bows and arrows, canoes and clothing – all made with
specialised tools and skills. The difference is that the Fuegians were in
fairly frequent contact with other people across the Strait of Magellan so
that they could relearn lost skills or import new tools from time to time. All
it took was an occasional incomer from the mainland to keep technology
from regressing.
Networking in the near-east
The lesson is stark. Self-sufficiency was dead tens of thousand years
ago. Even the relatively simple lifestyle of a hunter-gatherer cannot exist
without a large population exchanging ideas and skills. The importance of
this notion cannot be emphasised too strongly. The success of human beings
depends crucially, but precariously, on numbers and connections. A few
hundred people cannot sustain a sophisticated technology: trade is a vital
part of the story.
Vast though it is, Australia itself may have suffered from this isolation
effect. Recall that it was colonised 45,000 years ago by pioneering
beachcombers spreading east from Africa along the shore of Asia. The
vanguard of such a migration must have been small in number and must
have travelled comparatively light. The chances are they had only a sample
of the technology available to their relatives back at the Red Sea crossing.
This may explain why Australian aboriginal technology, although it
developed and elaborated steadily over the ensuing millennia, was lacking
in so many features of the Old World – elastic weapons, for example, such
as bows and catapults, were unknown, as were ovens. It was not that they
were ‘primitive’ or that they had mentally regressed: it was that they had
arrived with only a subset of technologies and did not have a dense enough
population and therefore a large enough collective brain to develop them
much further.

The ‘Tasmanian effect’ may also explain why technological progress
had been so slow and erratic in Africa after 160,000 years ago. It explains
the periodic bursts of modern tools found at South African sites like
Pinnacle Point, Blombos Cave and Klasies River. Despite the invention of
exchange, the continent was like a patchwork of virtual Tasmanias. As
Steve Shennan and his colleagues have calculated, whenever the right
combination of (say) seafood, freshwater and fertile savannahs produced
local population explosions, technology would have grown sophisticated in
proportion to the number of people networked by exchange to sustain and
develop it – in proportion to the scale of the collective intelligence. But
when a river dried up or deserts advanced and human populations collapsed
or shrank, technology would simplify again. Human cultural progress is a
collective enterprise and it needs a dense collective brain.
Thus the extraordinary change in technology and cultural tradition that
seems to have flourished more than 30,000 years ago in western Asia and
the Near East – the so-called Upper Palaeolithic Revolution – may be
explained by a dense population. Fed by an increasingly intensive and
vegetarian hunter-gathering lifestyle, and with close contact between tribes,
the people of south-west Asia were in a position to accumulate more and
more skills and technologies than any previous human populations. A large,
interconnected population meant faster cumulative invention – a surprising
truth even to this day, as Hong Kong and Manhattan islands demonstrate.
As the economist Julian Simon put it, ‘population growth leading to
diminishing returns is fiction; the induced increase in productivity is
scientific fact’. And one of those inventions was farming, which is the
subject of the next chapter.
It is right to end the hunter-gatherer chapter, though, by remembering
what happened to the Tasmanians. In the early 1800s, white sealers began to
arrive along the island’s coasts and it was not long before the Tasmanians
were eagerly meeting the sealers to trade with them, proving that 10,000
years of limited exchange had done nothing to dampen their innate
enthusiasm for barter. The sealers’ dogs were especially sought after, being
deerhounds that could easily run down kangaroos. In exchange, sad to
relate, Tasmanians sold women to the sealers as concubines. Once white
farmers arrived, relations between the two peoples deteriorated and
eventually the whites sent bounty hunters to kill the natives, then rounded

up the survivors and exiled them to Flinders Island, where they eked out
their last days in misery.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Three
The manufacture of virtue: barter, trust
and rules after 50,000 years ago
Money is not metal. It is trust inscribed.
NIALL FERGUSON
The Ascent of Money

There is a scene in the film The Maltese Falcon in which Humphrey
Bogart is about to be given $1,000 by Sydney Greenstreet and will have to
share some of it with Mary Astor. Greenstreet whispers to Bogart that he’d
like to give him a word of advice: that he assumes that Bogart is going to
give her some of the money, but that if he does not give her as much as she
thinks she ought to have, he should be careful. The scene prefigures a game,
invented by Werner Guth in the late 1970s and much loved by economists,
called the Ultimatum Game, which opens a little window into the human
spirit. The first player is given some money and told to divide it with the
second player. The second player is told he can accept or refuse the offer,
but not change it. If he accepts, he receives the money; if he refuses, neither
he nor the first player gets a penny. The question is, how much money
should the first player offer the second player? Rationally, he should tender

almost nothing, and the second player should accept it, because however
small the sum, refusal will only make the second player worse off than
acceptance. But in practice, people usually offer close to half the money.
Generosity seems to come naturally, or rather, ungenerous behaviour is
irrationally foolish, because the second player will – and does – consider a
derisory offer worth rejecting, if only to punish the selfishness of the first
player.
The lesson of the ultimatum game and hundreds like it is that again and
again people emerge from such experiments as nicer than you think. But the
even more surprising lesson is that the more people are immersed in the
collective brain of the modern commercial world, the more generous they
are. As the economist Herb Gintis puts it, ‘societies that use markets
extensively develop a culture of cooperation, fairness and respect for the
individual’. His evidence comes from a fascinating study in which people in
fifteen mostly small-scale tribal societies were enticed to play the
Ultimatum Game. Those societies with the least experience of dealing with
outsiders were the most hard-hearted, ungenerous and narrowly ‘rational’.
Machiguenga slash-and-burn farmers from the Amazon most often offered
just 15 per cent of the sum to their co-subjects, and in all but one cases, the
second player accepted. Likewise, a Hadza hunter-gatherer from Tanzania
usually makes a very small offer and experiences few rejections. On the
other hand, players from those societies that are most integrated into
modern markets, such as the Orma nomads of Kenya or the Achuar
subsistence gardeners of Ecuador, will usually offer half the money just as a
Western undergraduate would. The whale-hunting Lamalera of the island of
Lembata in Indonesia, who need to coordinate large teams of strangers on
hunts, offer on average 58 per cent – as if investing the windfall in
acquiring new obligations. Much the same happens in two New Guinea
tribes, the Au and Gnau, whose members often make ‘hyper-fair’ offers and
yet see them rejected: in such cultures, gifts can be a burden to the receiver
because they carry an obligation to reciprocate.
The lesson of this study is that, on the whole, having to deal with
strangers teaches you to be polite to them, and that in order for such
generosity to emerge, costly punishment of selfishness may be necessary.
Rejecting the offer is costly for the second player, but he reckons it is worth
it to teach the first player a lesson. The argument is not that exchange
teaches people to be kind; it is that exchange teaches people to recognise

their enlightened self-interest lies in seeking cooperation. Here, then, lies a
clue to the unique human attribute of being able to deal with strangers, to
extend the division of labour to include even your enemies.
Cooperation, exchange and specialisation within a family group are
routine throughout the animal kingdom: among chimpanzees and dolphins,
among wolves and lions, among individuals of almost any social species. A
meerkat or a scrub jay trusts its relative on sentry duty to sound the alarm if
an eagle appears and shares the duty. A worker ant divides labour with its
queen, with soldiers and with its sisters in other castes of worker. All these
societies are just large families. Collaboration between unrelated strangers
seems to be a uniquely human achievement. In no other species can two
individuals that have never before met exchange goods or services to the
benefit of each other, as happens routinely each time you visit a shop or a
restaurant or a website. Indeed, in other group-living species, such as ants
or chimpanzees, the interactions between members of different groups are
almost always violent. Yet human beings can treat strangers as honorary
friends.
Taking the first step to proffer the hand of cooperation to a homicidal
enemy must have been momentous and almost impossibly difficult, which
is perhaps why it is such a rare trick in the animal kingdom. It took
primatologists such as Sarah Hrdy and Frans de Waal to notice just how
peculiar this is: how inconceivable it would be for an orderly queue of
stranger chimpanzees to board an aeroplane, or sit down in a restaurant,
without turning violently on each other. And generally speaking the more
cooperative a species is within groups, the more hostility there is between
groups. As a highly ‘groupish’ species ourselves, still given to mutual aid
within groups and mutual violence between groups, it is an extraordinary
thing that people can overcome their instincts enough to have social
commerce with strangers.
I think the first overtures may have been ventured first by human
females. After all, homicidal raids against neighbouring groups are – in
human beings and in most other primates – conducted always by males. So
encounters between strange females are not necessarily going to turn
violent. Moreover, in all apes females are the sex that leaves the group into
which they were born when they mate; in monkeys, curiously, it is males
that leave. Assuming human beings follow the ape pattern – as they do to
this day in most human societies – then women would have had close

relations in other groups in the shape of their mothers, fathers and brothers
with whom to build relation ships. There is even a curious, much later echo
of such a femalecentred pattern in the trading patterns of south-east Asia
before the arrival of Westerners. The traders of Malaysia, Indonesia and the
Philippines were often women, who were taught to calculate and to account
from an early age.
Again and again throughout history, trust has to start with relatives
before it can be extended to strangers; sending relatives abroad as agents
has a long history. The trading ports of Asia each had their own
communities of Gujaratis, Fujianese, Persians, Armenians, Jews and Arabs,
just as the ports of Europe had their separate communities of Genoese,
Florentine, Dutch, English and Hanseatic merchants, keeping the trust
within the family as their diasporas spread. The financing of Wellington’s
armies in Spain in 1809–12 was made possible because the British
government trusted a Jewish lender named Nathan Rothschild to trust his
brothers on the continent to buy bullion with British paper.
Finding a trade buddy
In 2004, a series of volunteer undergraduates sat down at computer
screens at George Mason University in Virginia to play games for money. In
the game each person found himself in a virtual village with his own house
and field in which he could produce and consume red and blue virtual
‘units’ during brief sessions of the game. In each case, he knew that the
more he acquired and the closer he got to a certain ratio of blue and red
units (e.g., 3:1) the more real money he went home with. But unknown to
him, he was either an ‘odd’ player, who was programmed to be faster at
making red units, or an ‘even’ player, faster at making blue units. On his
screen each player could see what other players (two, four or eight in total)
were up to and he could chat with them on-screen during each run and in
the 100-second gaps between runs. On one run of the game, in session six,
two players had the following exchange:
‘wonder if u can give me objects’
‘oh yeah.’
‘heyyy, i make blues faster, what color do u make faster?’
‘red’
‘lol ok’
‘LOL’

‘so ill make all blues and u make all reds’
‘then drop them to each other’s houses?’
‘yea do it’
‘ok 100% red’
‘100% blue’
The purpose of the experiment, run by Bart Wilson, Vernon Smith and
their colleagues, was of course to see if people discovered exchange and
specialisation for themselves with no rules or instructions. In the game,
specialising is risky because the pay-off for ending up with units of only
one colour is zero, but specialisation with exchange allows three times the
pay-off of self-sufficiency. Yet there were no clues that trading was even
possible. Though some players remained stuck in low-yielding selfsufficiency, most eventually discovered gains from trade. ‘Prior to
exchange,’ comment the experimenters, ‘near-autarky prevails, and once the
“power of exchanging” is discovered, specialisation gradually evolves.’
Intriguingly, the players began by trading bilaterally and personally – that
is, each player developed a trading relationship with another player and
only later extended the invitation to others.
That trade began as a bilateral and personal affair seems plausible. In
the nineteenth century among the Yir Yoront aborigines, in northern
Australia, each man’s family camp had at least one highly valued stone axe.
The axes all came from a quarry jealously guarded and systematically
worked by the Kalkadoon tribe at Mount Isa, 400 miles to the south, far
beyond the Yir Yoront lands, and they passed through the hands of many
trading partners to reach the tribe. Each older man had a trading partner to
the south whom he met once a year in the dry season at a ceremonial
gathering. In exchange for a dozen sting-ray barbs, to be used as spear tips,
he received an axe. In turn he had obtained some of the barbs from his other
trading partner to the north – to whom he gave an axe in return. Another
150 miles to the south, the exchange rate was different: one axe for one
barb. There were arbitrage profits all along the chain.
So perhaps the first steps to trade with strangers began as individual
friendships. A woman could trust her daughter who had married into an
allied band within the same tribal grouping. Then perhaps the woman’s
husband could learn to trust his son-in-law. The alliance between the bands
in the face of a common enemy allowed the barrier of suspicion to be
breached long enough for one to discover that the other had a surplus of

stone for making axes, or of sting-ray barbs for making spear tips.
Gradually, step by step, the habit of trade began to grow alongside the habit
of xenophobia, complicating the ambitions of men and women.
Most people assume that long-distance trade among strangers and the
very concept of the market was a comparatively late development in human
history, coming long after agriculture. But, as the Australian aborigines
suggest, this is bunk. There is no known human tribe that does not trade.
Western explorers, from Christopher Columbus to Captain Cook, ran into
many confusions and misunderstandings when they made first contact with
isolated peoples. But the principle of trading was not one of them, because
the people they met in every case already had a notion of swapping things.
Within hours or days of meeting a new tribe, every explorer is bartering. In
1834 in Tierra del Fuego a young naturalist named Charles Darwin came
face to face with some hunter-gatherers: ‘Some of the Fuegians plainly
showed that they had a fair notion of barter. I gave one man a large nail (a
most valuable present) without making any signs for a return; but he
immediately picked out two fish, and handed them up on the point of his
spear.’ Darwin and his new friend needed no common language to
understand the bargain they were agreeing. Likewise, New Guinea
highlanders, when first contacted by Michael Leahy and his fellow
prospectors in 1933, gave them bananas in exchange for cowrie shells. Precontact, the New Guineans had been trading stone axes over large distances
for a very long time. In Australia, baler shells and stone axes had been
crossing the entire continent by trade for untold generations. The people of
the Pacific coast of North America were sending seashells hundreds of
miles inland, and importing obsidian from even farther afield. In Europe
and Asia in the Old Stone Age, amber, obsidian, flint and seashells were
travelling farther than individual people could possibly have carried them.
In Africa, obsidian, shells and ochre were being traded long distances by
100,000 years ago. Trade is prehistoric and ubiquitous.
Moreover, some ancient hunter-gatherer societies reached such a pitch
of trade and prosperity as to live in dense, sophisticated hierarchical
societies with much specialisation. Where the sea produced a rich bounty, it
was possible to achieve a density of the kind that normally requires
agriculture to support it – complete with chiefs, priests, merchants and
conspicuous consumption. The Kwakiutl Americans, living off the salmon
runs of the Pacific North West, had family property rights to streams and

fishing spots, had enormous buildings richly decorated with sculptures and
textiles, and engaged in bizarre rituals of conspicuous consumption such as
the giving of rich copper gifts to each other, or the burning of candlefish oil,
just for the prestige of being seen to be philanthropic. They also employed
slaves. Yet they were strictly speaking hunter-gatherers. The Chumash of
the Californian channel islands, well fed on sea food and seal meat,
included specialist craftsmen who fashioned beads from abalone shells to
use as currency in a sophisticated and long-range canoe trade. Trade with
strangers, and the trust that underpins it, was a very early habit of modern
human beings.
The trust juice
But is trade made possible by the milk of human kindness, or the acid of
human self-interest? There was once a German philosophical conundrum
known as Das Adam Smith Problem, which professed to find a
contradiction between Adam Smith’s two books. In one he said that people
were endowed with instinctive sympathy and goodness; in the other, that
people were driven largely by self-interest. ‘How selfish soever man may be
supposed, there are evidently some principles in his nature, which interest
him in the fortunes of others, and render their happiness necessary to him,
though he derives nothing from it, except the pleasure of seeing it,’ he wrote
in Theory of Moral Sentiments. ‘Man has almost constant occasion for the
help of his brethren, and it is in vain for him to expect it from their
benevolence only. He will be more likely to prevail if he can interest their
self-love in his favour,’ he wrote in The Wealth of Nations.
Smith’s resolution of the conundrum is that benevolence and friendship
are necessary but not sufficient for society to function, because man ‘stands
at all times in need of the cooperation and assistance of great multitudes,
while his whole life is scarce sufficient to gain the friendship of a few
persons’. In other words, people go beyond friendship and achieve common
interest with strangers: they turn strangers into honorary friends, to use Paul
Seabright’s term. Smith brilliantly confused the distinction between
altruism and selfishness: if sympathy allows you to please yourself by
pleasing others, are you being selfish or altruistic? As the philosopher
Robert Solomon put it, ‘What I want for myself is your approval, and to get
it I will most likely do what you think I should do.’
This ability to transact with strangers as if they were friends is made
possible by an intrinsic, instinctive human capacity for trust. Often the very

first thing you do when you meet a stranger and begin to transact with him
or her, say a waiter in a restaurant, is to smile – a small, instinctive gesture
of trust. The human smile, the glowing embodiment of Smith’s innate
sentiment of sympathy, can reach right into the brain of another person and
influence her thoughts. In the extreme case, a baby smiling causes particular
circuits in its mother’s brain to fire and make her feel good. No other
animal smiles in this way. But even among adults, a touch, a massage, or, as
experiments have shown, a simple act of financial generosity, can cause the
release of the hormone oxytocin in the brain of the recipient, and oxytocin
is the chemical that evolution uses to make mammals feel good about each
other – whether parents about their babies, lovers about their mates or
friends about their friends. It works the other way, too: squirting oxytocin
up the noses of students will cause them to trust strangers with their money
more readily than those who receive a placebo squirted up their noses.
‘Oxytocin is a physiologic signature of empathy,’ says the neuro-economist
Paul Zak, who conducts these experiments, ‘and appears to induce a
temporary attachment to others.’
In 2004 Zak, together with Ernst Fehr and other colleagues, conducted
one of the most revealing experiments in the history of economics, which
showed just how specific the trusting effect of oxytocin is. They recruited
194 male students from Zurich (the experiment must not be done with
females, because if one happens to be pregnant without knowing it,
oxytocin might trigger labour) and made them play one of two games. In
the first game, the trust game, a player called the investor is given twelve
monetary units and told that if he hands some of it over to another player,
the trustee, that amount will be quadrupled by the experimenter. Thus if he
hands over all twelve units, the trustee will receive forty-eight. The trustee
may pay some of it back to the investor, but has absolutely no obligation to
do so. So the investor risks losing all his money, but if he can trust the
trustee to be generous, he might stand to make a good profit. The question
is: how much will the investor hand over?
The results were remarkable. Investors who receive a squirt of oxytocin
up their noses before the experiment begins hand over 17 per cent more
money than those who receive a squirt of inert saline solution up their
noses, and the median transfer is ten units rather than eight. The oxytocin
investors are more than twice as likely to hand over the full twelve units as
the controls. Yet oxytocin has no such effect on the back transfers offered

by the trustees, who are just as generous without oxytocin as with. So – as
animal experiments have suggested – oxytocin does not affect reciprocity,
just the tendency to take a social risk, to go out on a limb. Moreover, a
second game, identical to the first except that the generosity of the trustees
is randomly decided, shows no effect of oxytocin on the investors. So
oxytocin specifically increases trusting, rather than general risk-taking. As
with lovers and mothers, the hormone enables animals to take the risk of
approaching other members of the species – it ‘links the overcoming of
social avoidance with the activation of brain circuits implicated in reward’.
It does this partly by suppressing the activity of the amygdala, the organ
that expresses fear. If human economic progress has included a crucial
moment when human beings learned to treat strangers as trading partners,
rather than enemies, then oxytocin undoubtedly played a vital role.
People are surprisingly good at guessing who to trust. Robert Frank and
his colleagues set up an experiment in which the volunteer subjects had
conversations in groups of three for half an hour. After that, they were sent
to separate rooms to play, with their conversation partners, the prisoner’s
dilemma game (in which each player must decide whether to cooperate in
the hope of a mutual gain or defect in the hope of a selfish gain if the other
player cooperates). First, though, each player filled in a form not only
saying how she would play with each partner, but also predicting what
strategy each partner would adopt. As so often in this game, three-quarters
of subjects said they would cooperate, reinforcing Smith’s point that people
are innately nice (economics students, who have been taught the selfinterested nature of human beings, are twice as likely to defect!).
Remarkably, the subjects were very good at predicting who would
cooperate and who would defect: people who were predicted to cooperate
did so 81 per cent of the time, compared with 74 per cent for the group as a
whole. People who were predicted to defect did so 57 per cent of the time,
compared with 26 per cent for the group as a whole. Most people, says the
economist Robert Frank, can think of an unrelated friend who they would
trust to return to them a wallet that had been lost in a crowded concert.
Conversely, people acutely remember the faces of those who cheat them.
Thus, the entire edifice of human cooperation and exchange, upon
which prosperity and progress are built, depends on a fortunate biological
fact. Human beings are capable of empathy, and are discerning trusters. Is
that it, then? That human beings can build complicated societies and

experience prosperity is down to the fact that they have a biological instinct
that encourages cooperation? If only it were that simple. If only the
arguments of Hobbes and Locke, of Rousseau and Voltaire, of Hume and
Smith, of Kant and Rawls, could be brought to such a neat and reductionist
conclusion. However, the biology is only the start. It is something that
makes prosperity possible, but it is not the whole explanation.
Besides, there is still no evidence that any of this biology is uniquely
developed in human beings. Capuchin monkeys and chimpanzees are just as
resentful of unfair treatment as human beings are and just as capable of
helpful acts towards kin or group members. The more you look at altruism
and cooperation, the less uniquely human it appears. Oxytocin is common
to all mammals, and is used for mother-love in sheep and lover-love in
voles, so the chances are that it is available to underpin trust in almost any
social mammal. It is necessary, but not sufficient to explain the human
propensity to exchange. On the other hand, it is highly likely that during the
past 100,000 years human beings have developed peculiarly sensitive
oxytocin systems, much more ready to fire with sympathy, as a result of
natural selection in a trading species. That is to say, just as the genes for
digesting milk as an adult have changed in response to the invention of
dairying, so the genes for flushing your brain with oxytocin have probably
changed in response to population growth, urbanisation and trading –
people have become oxytocin-junkies far more than many other animals.
Moreover, finding the underlying physiology of trust does little to
explain why some human societies are much better at generating trust than
others. As a broad generalisation, the more people trust each other in a
society, the more prosperous that society is, and trust growth seems to
precede income growth. This can be measured by a combination of
questionnaires and experiments – leaving a wallet on the street and seeing if
it is returned, for instance. Or asking people, in their native tongue,
‘generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted, or that
you cannot be too careful in dealing with people?’ By these measures,
Norway is heaving with trust (65 per cent trust each other) and wealthy,
while Peru is wallowing in mistrust (5 per cent trust each other) and poor.
‘A 15% increase in the proportion of people in a country who think others
are trustworthy,’ says Paul Zak, ‘raises income per person by 1% per year
for every year thereafter.’ This is most unlikely to be because Norwegians
have more oxytocin receptors in their brains than Peruvians, but it does

suggest that Norwegian society is better designed to elicit the trust systems
than Peruvian.
It is not at all clear what comes first: the trust instinct or trade. It is most
unlikely that the oxytocin system fortuitously mutated into a sensitive form,
which then enabled human beings to develop trading. Much more plausibly,
human beings began tentatively to trade, capturing the benefits of
comparative advantage and collective brains, which in turn encouraged
natural selection to favour mutant forms of the human mind that were
especially capable of trust and empathy – and even then to do so cautiously
and suspiciously. I shall be amazed if the genetics of the oxytocin system do
not show evidence of having changed rapidly and recently in response to
the invention of trade, by gene-culture co-evolution.
The shadow of the future
A trillion generations of unbroken parental generosity stand behind a
bargain with your mother. A hundred good experiences stand behind your
reliance on a friend. The long shadow of the future hangs over any
transaction with your local shopkeeper. He surely knows that in making a
quick buck now by ripping you off he risks losing all future purchases you
might make. What is miraculous is that in modern society you can trust and
be trusted by a shopkeeper you do not know. Almost invisible, the
guarantors of trust lurk beneath every modern market transaction: the sealed
packaging, the warranty, the customer feedback form, the consumer
legislation, the brand itself, the credit card, the ‘promise to pay the bearer’
on the money. When I go into a well-known supermarket and pick up a tube
of toothpaste of a well-known brand, I do not need to open the package and
squirt a little toothpaste on to my finger to test that the tube is not filled
with water; I do not even need to know that the shop is subject to laws that
would prosecute it for selling false goods. I just need to know that this big
retailing company, and the big company that made the toothpaste, are both
keen to keep me coming back year after year, that the shadow of
reputational risk hangs over this simple transaction, ensuring that I can trust
this toothpaste seller without a moment’s thought.
There is a vast history behind the trustworthiness of a tube of
toothpaste, a long path of building trust inch by inch. Once that path is
trodden, though, trust can be borrowed for new products and new media
with surprising ease. The remarkable thing about the early days of the
internet was not how hard it proved to enable people to trust each other in

the anonymous reaches of the ether, but how easy. All it took was for eBay
to solicit feedback from customers after each transaction and post the
comments of buyers about the sellers. Suddenly every deal lay under the
shadow of the future; suddenly, every eBay user felt the hot breath of
reputation on his neck as surely as a Stone Age reindeer hide salesman
returning to a trading place after selling a rotten hide the year before. When
Pierre Omidyar founded eBay, few believed as he did that trust between
anonymous strangers would prove easy to create in the new medium. But
by 2001, fewer than 0.01 per cent of all transactions on the site were fraud
attempts. John Clippinger draws an optimistic conclusion: ‘The success of
trust-based peer organizations such as eBay, Wikipedia, and the opensource movement, indicates that trust is a highly expandable network
property.’ Perhaps the internet has returned us to a world a bit like the Stone
Age in which there is no place for a fraudster to hide.
That response would be naïve. There is plenty of innovative and
destructive cyber-crime to come. None the less, the internet is a place where
the problem of trust between strangers is solved daily. Viruses can be
avoided, spam filters can work, Nigerian emails that con people into
divulging their bank account details can be marginalised, and as for the
question of trust between buyer and seller, companies like eBay have
enabled their customers to police each other’s reputations by the simple
practice of feedback. The internet, in other words, may be the best forum
for crime, but it is also the best forum for free and fair exchange the world
has ever seen.
My point is simply this: with frequent setbacks, trust has gradually and
progressively grown, spread and deepened during human history, because
of exchange. Exchange breeds trust as much as vice versa. You may think
you are living in a suspicious and dishonest world, but you are actually the
beneficiary of immense draughts of trust. Without that trust the swapping of
fractions of labour that goes to make people richer could not happen. Trust
matters, said J.P. Morgan to a congressional hearing in 1912, ‘before money
or anything else. Money cannot buy it … because a man I do not trust could
not get money from me on all the bonds in Christendom.’ Google’s code of
conduct echoes Morgan: ‘Trust is the foundation upon which our success
and prosperity rest, and it must be re-earned every day, in every way, by
every one of us.’ (And, yes, one day people will probably look back on
Google’s founders as robber barons, too.) If people trust each other well,

then mutual service can evolve with low transactional friction; if they do
not, then prosperity will seep away. That is, of course, a large part of the
story of the banking crisis of 2008. Banks found themselves holding bits of
paper that told lies – that said they were worth far more than they were.
Transactions collapsed.
If trust makes markets work, can markets generate trust?
A successful transaction between two people – a sale and purchase –
should benefit both. If it benefits one and not the other, it is exploitation,
and it does nothing to raise the standard of living. The history of human
prosperity, as Robert Wright has argued, lies in the repeated discovery of
non-zero-sum bargains that benefit both sides. Like Portia’s mercy in The
Merchant of Venice, exchange is ‘twice blest: it blesseth him that gives and
him that takes.’ That’s the Indian rope trick by which the world gets rich.
Yet it takes only a few sidelong glances at your fellow human beings to
realise that remarkably few people think this way. Zero-sum thinking
dominates the popular discourse, whether in debates about trade or in
complaints about service providers. You just don’t hear people coming out
of shops saying, ‘I got a great bargain, but don’t worry, I paid enough to be
sure that the shopkeeper feeds his family, too.’ Michael Shermer thinks that
is because most of the Stone Age transactions rarely benefited both sides:
‘during our evolutionary tenure, we lived in a zero-sum (win-lose world), in
which one person’s gain meant another person’s loss’.
This is a shame, because the zero-sum mistake was what made so many
-isms of past centuries so wrong. Mercantilism said that exports made you
rich and imports made you poor, a fallacy mocked by Adam Smith when he
pointed out that Britain selling durable hardware to France in exchange for
perishable wine was a missed opportunity to achieve the ‘incredible aug
mentation of the pots and pans of the country’. Marxism said that capitalists
got rich because workers got poor, another fallacy. In the film Wall Street,
the fictional Gordon Gekko not only says that greed is good; he also adds
that it’s a zero-sum game where somebody wins and somebody loses. He is
not necessarily wrong about some speculative markets in capital and in
assets, but he is about markets in goods and services. The notion of synergy,
of both sides benefiting, just does not seem to come naturally to people. If
sympathy is instinctive, synergy is not.
For most people, therefore, the market does not feel like a virtuous
place. It feels like an arena in which the consumer does battle with the

producer to see who can win. Long before the credit crunch of 2008 most
people saw capitalism (and therefore the market) as necessary evils, rather
than inherent goods. It is almost an axiom of modern debate that free
exchange encourages and demands selfishness, whereas people were kinder
and gentler before their lives were commercialised, that putting a price on
everything has fragmented society and cheapened souls. Perhaps this lies
behind the extraordinarily widespread view that commerce is immoral,
lucre filthy and that modern people are good despite being enmeshed in
markets rather than because of it – a view that can be heard from almost any
Anglican pulpit at any time. ‘Marx long ago observed the way in which
unbridled capitalism became a kind of mythology, ascribing reality, power
and agency to things that had no life in themselves,’ said the Archbishop of
Canterbury in 2008.
Like biological evolution, the market is a bottom-up world with nobody
in charge. As the Australian economist Peter Saunders argues, ‘Nobody
planned the global capitalist system, nobody runs it, and nobody really
comprehends it. This particularly offends intellectuals, for capitalism
renders them redundant. It gets on perfectly well without them.’ There is
nothing new about this. The intelligentsia has disdained commerce
throughout Western history. Homer and Isaiah despised traders. St Paul, St
Thomas Aquinas and Martin Luther all considered usury a sin. Shakespeare
could not bring himself to make the persecuted Shylock a hero. Of 1900,
Brink Lindsey writes: ‘Many of the brightest minds of the age mistook the
engine of eventual mass deliverance – the competitive market system – for
the chief bulwark of domination and oppression.’ Economists like Thorstein
Veblen longed to replace the profit motive with a combination of publicspiritedness and centralised government decision-taking. In the 1880s
Arnold Toynbee, lecturing working men on the English industrial revolution
which had so enriched them, castigated free enterprise capitalism as a
‘world of gold-seeking animals, stripped of every human affection’ and
‘less real than the island of Lilliput’. In 2009 Adam Phillips and Barbara
Taylor argued that ‘capitalism is no system for the kind-hearted. Even its
devotees acknowledge this while insisting that, however tawdry capitalist
motives may be, the results are socially beneficial.’ As the British politician
Lord Taverne puts it, speaking of himself: ‘a classical education teaches you
to despise the wealth it prevents you from earning.’

But both the premise and the conclusion are wrong. The notion that the
market is a necessary evil, which allows people to be wealthy enough to
offset its corrosive drawbacks, is wide of the mark. In market societies, if
you get a reputation for unfairness, people will not deal with you. In places
where traditional, honour-based feudal societies gave way to commercial,
prudence-based economies – say, Italy in 1400, Scotland in 1700, Japan in
1945 – the effect is civilising, not coarsening. When John Padgett at the
University of Chicago compiled data on the commercial revolution in
fourteenth-century Florence, he found that far from self-interest increasing,
it withered, as a system of ‘reciprocal credit’ emerged in which business
partners gradually extended more and more trust and support to each other.
There was a ‘trust explosion’. ‘Wherever the ways of man are gentle, there
is commerce, and wherever there is commerce, the ways of men are gentle,’
observed Charles, Baron de Montesquieu. Voltaire pointed out that people
who would otherwise have tried to kill each other for worshipping the
wrong god were civil when they met on the floor of the Exchange in
London. David Hume thought commerce ‘rather favourable to liberty, and
has a natural tendency to preserve, if not produce a free government’ and
that ‘nothing is more favourable to the rise of politeness and learning, than
a number of neighbouring and independent states, connected together by
commerce and policy’. It dawned on Victorians such as John Stuart Mill
that a rule of Rothschilds and Barings was proving rather more pleasant
than one of Bonapartes and Habsburgs, that prudence might be a less
bloody virtue than courage or honour or faith. (Courage, honour and faith
will always make better fiction.) True, there was always a Rousseau or a
Marx to carp, and a Ruskin or a Goethe to scoff, but it was possible to
wonder, with Voltaire and Hume, if commercial behaviour might make
people more moral.
Coercion is the opposite of freedom
Perhaps Adam Smith was right, that in turning strangers into honorary
friends, exchange can transmute base self-interest into general benevolence.
The rapid commercialisation of lives since 1800 has coincided with an
extraordinary improvement in human sensibility compared with previous
centuries, and the process began in the most commercial nations, Holland
and England. Unimaginable cruelty was commonplace in the
precommercial world: execution was a spectator sport, mutilation a routine
punishment, human sacrifice a futile tragedy and animal torture a popular

entertainment. The nineteenth century, when industrial capitalism drew so
many people into dependence on the market, was a time when slavery, child
labour and pastimes like fox tossing and cock fighting became
unacceptable. The late twentieth century, when life became still more
commercialised, was a time when racism, sexism and child molesting
became unacceptable. In between, when capitalism gave way to various
forms of state-directed totalitarianism and their pale imitators, such virtues
were noticeable by their retreat – while faith and courage revived. The
twenty-first century, when commercialisation has so far continued to
spread, is already a time when battery farming and unilaterally declaring
war have just about become unacceptable. Random violence makes the
news precisely because it is so rare; routine kindness does not make the
news precisely because it is so commonplace. Charitable giving has been
growing faster than the economy as a whole in recent decades. The internet
reverberates with people sharing tips for free.
Of course, these trends could be nothing more than coincidence: we
happen to be becoming nicer as we become more irretrievably dependent on
markets and free enterprise. But I do not think so. It was the ‘nation of
shopkeepers’ that first worried about abolishing slave trading, emancipating
Catholics and feeding the poor. Just as it was the nouveau riche merchants,
with names like Wedgwood and Wilberforce, who financed and led the antislavery movement before and after 1800, while the old county money
looked on with indifference, so today it is the new money of entrepreneurs
and actors that funds compassion for people, pets and planets. There is a
direct link between commerce and virtue. ‘Far from being a vice,’ says
Eamonn Butler, ‘the market system makes self interest into something
thoroughly virtuous.’ This is the extraordinary feature of markets: just as
they can turn many individually irrational individuals into a collectively
rational outcome, so they can turn many individually selfish motives into a
collectively kind result.
For instance, as evolutionary psychologists confirm, sometimes the
motivation behind conspicuous displays of virtue by the very rich are far
from pure. When shown a photograph of an attractive man and asked to
write a story about an ideal date with him, a woman will say she is prepared
to spend time on conspicuous pro-social volunteering. By contrast, a
woman shown a photograph of a street scene and asked to write about ideal
weather for being there, shows no such sudden urge to philanthropy. (A man

in the same ‘mating-primed’ condition will want to spend more on
conspicuous luxuries, or on heroic acts.) That Charles Darwin’s wealthy
spinster aunt Sarah Wedgwood’s funding of the anti-slavery movement (she
was the movement’s biggest donor) may have a hint of unconscious sexual
motives, is a charming surprise. But it does not detract from the good she
did, or from the fact that commerce paid for that good.
This applies among the poor as well as the rich. The working poor give
a much higher proportion of their income to good causes than the rich do,
and crucially they give three times as much as people on welfare do. As
Michael Shermer comments, ‘Poverty is not a barrier to charity, but welfare
is.’ Those of libertarian bent often prove more generous than those of a
socialist persuasion: where the socialist feels that it is government’s job to
look after the poor using taxes, libertarians think it is their duty. I am not
saying that the market is the only source of charity. Clearly not: religion and
community provide much motivation to philanthropy too. But the idea that
the market destroys charity by teaching selfishness is plainly wide of the
mark. When the market economy booms so does philanthropy. Ask Warren
Buffett and Bill Gates.
It is not just cruelty and indifference to the disadvantaged that have
retreated with the spread of the collective brain. So has illiteracy and ill
health. So has crime: your chances of being murdered have fallen steadily
since the seventeenth century in every European country, but once again
beginning with the trade-mad Holland and England. Murder was ten times
as common before the industrial revolution in Europe, per head of
population, as it is today. The fall in crime rates turned into a plummet at
the turn of the twenty-first century – and use of illegal drugs fell too. So has
pollution, which was far worse under communist regimes than in the freemarket, democratic West. There is now a pretty well established rule of
thumb (known as the environmental Kuznets curve) that when per capita
income reaches about $4,000, people demand a clean-up of their local
streams and air. Universal access to education came about during a time
when Western societies were unusually devoted to free enterprise. Flexible
working hours, occupational pensions, safety at work – all of these
improved in the postwar West because people were enriching themselves
and demanding higher standards, as much as because higher standards were
imposed on recalcitrant firms by saintly politicians; the decline in
workplace accidents was just as steep before the occupational safety and

health act as after it. Again, some of these trends might have happened
anyway, without the commercialisation of life, but don’t bet on it. The taxes
that paid for sewers were generated by commerce.
Commerce is good for minorities, too. If you don’t like the outcome of
an election you have to lump it; if you don’t like your hairdresser, you can
find another. Political decisions are by definition monopolistic,
disenfranchising and despotically majoritarian; markets are good at
supplying minority needs. The other day I bought a device for attaching a
fly-fishing rod to my car. How long would I have had to wait in 1970s
Leningrad before some central planner had the bright idea of supplying
such a trivial need? The market found it. Moreover, thanks to the internet,
the economy is getting better and better at meeting the desires of minorities.
Because the very few people in the world who need fishing rod attachments
or books on fourteenth-century suicide can now find suppliers on the web,
niches are thriving. The ‘long tail’ of the distribution – the very many
products that are each wanted by very few, rather than vice versa – can be
serviced more and more easily.
Freedom itself owes much to commerce. The great drive to universal
suffrage, religious tolerance and female emancipation began with pragmatic
enthusiasts for free enterprise, like Ben Franklin, and was pressed forward
by the urban bourgeoisie as a response to economic growth. Right into the
twentieth century tsars and general secretaries found it an awful lot easier to
dictate a tyranny of peasants than a demos of bourgeois consumers.
Parliamentary reform began in Britain in the 1830s because of the grotesque
under-representation of the growing manufacturing towns. Even Marx was
subsidised by Engels’s father’s textile mill. It was the now-unfashionable
philosopher Herbert Spencer who insisted that freedom would increase
along with commerce. ‘My aim,’ he wrote in 1842 (anticipating John Stuart
Mill by nine years), ‘is the liberty of each limited alone by the like liberty
of all.’ Yet he foresaw that the battle to persuade leaders not to believe in
coercion was far from over: ‘Though we no longer coerce men for their
spiritual good, we still think ourselves called upon to coerce them for their
material good: not seeing that the one is as unwarrantable as the other.’ The
inherent illiberalism of the bureaucracy, not to mention its tendency to
corruption and extravagance, was a threat Spencer warned against in vain.
A century later, the gradual dismantling of apartheid and segregation
was helped by commercialisation, too. The American civil rights movement

drew its strength partly from a great economic migration. More AfricanAmericans left the South between 1940 and 1970 than Poles, Jews, Italians
or Irish had arrived in America as immigrants during their great migrations.
Lured by better jobs or displaced by mechanical cotton pickers, black sharecroppers came to the cities of the industrial North and began to discover
their economic and political voice. They then began to challenge the system
of prejudice and discrimination they had left behind. The first victory along
that road was an exercise in consumer power – the Montgomery bus
boycott of 1955–6.
The sexual and political liberation of women in the 1960s followed
directly their domestic liberation from the kitchen by labour-saving
electrical machinery. Lower-class women had always worked for wages –
tilling in fields, sewing in sweatshops, serving in parlours. Among the
upper-middle classes, though, it was a badge of rank, handed down from the
feudal past, to be or to have a non-working (or at least housekeeping) wife.
In the 1950s many suburban men, returning from war, found they too could
afford such an accessory, and many women were pressured into giving their
battleship-welding jobs back to men. In the absence of economic change,
that is probably how it would have stayed, but soon the opportunities to
work outside the home grew as the time spent on increasingly mechanised
housework dwindled, and it was this, as much as any political awakening,
that enabled the feminist movement to gain traction in the 1960s.
The lesson of the last two centuries is that liberty and welfare march
hand in hand with prosperity and trade. Countries that lose their liberty to
tyrants today, through military coups, are generally experiencing falling per
capita income at an average rate of 1.4 per cent at the time – just as it was
falling per capita income that helped turn Russia, Germany and Japan into
dictatorships between the two world wars. One of the great puzzles of
history is why this did not happen in America in the 1930s, where on the
whole pluralism and tolerance not only survived the severe economic
shocks of the 1930s, but thrived. Perhaps it nearly did happen: Father
Coughlin tried, and had Roosevelt been more ambitious or the constitution
weaker, who knows where the New Deal might have led? Perhaps some
democracies were just strong enough for their values to survive. Today
there is much argument about whether democracy is necessary for growth,
China seeming to prove that it is not. But there can be little doubt that

China would – indeed may yet – see either more revolution or more
repression if its growth rate were to fall to nothing.
I am happy to cheer, with Deirdre McCloskey: ‘Hurrah for late
twentieth-century enrichment and democratisation. Hurrah for birth control
and the civil rights movement. Arise ye wretched of the earth’.
Interdependence through the market made these things possible. Politically,
as Brink Lindsey has diagnosed, the coincidence of wealth with toleration
has led to the bizarre paradox of a conservative movement that embraces
economic change but hates its social consequences and a liberal movement
that loves the social consequences but hates the economic source from
which they come. ‘One side denounced capitalism but gobbled up its fruits;
the other cursed the fruits while defending the system that bore them.’
Contrary to the cartoon, it was commerce that freed people from narrow
materialism, that gave them the chance to be different. Much as the
intelligentsia continued to despise the suburbs, it was there that tolerance
and community and voluntary organisation and peace between the classes
flourished; it was there that the refugees from cramped tenements and
tedious farms became rights-conscious consumers – and parents of hippies.
For it was in the suburbs that the young, seizing their economic
independence, did something other than meekly follow father and mother’s
advice. By the late 1950s, teenagers were earning as much as whole
families had in the early 1940s. It was this prosperity that made Presley,
Ginsberg, Kerouac, Brando and Dean resonate. It was the mass affluence of
the 1960s (and the trust funds it generated) that made possible the dream of
free-love communes. Just as material progress subverts the economic order,
so it also subverts the social order – ask Osama bin Laden, the ultimate
spoilt rich kid.
The corporate monster
Yet for all the liberating effects of commerce, most modern
commentators see a far greater threat to human freedom from the power of
corporations that free markets inevitably throw up. The fashionable cultural
critic sees himself or herself as David slinging stones at vast, corrupt and
dehumanising Goliath-like corporations that punish, pollute and profiteer
with impunity. To my knowledge, no large company has yet featured in a
Hollywood movie without its boss embarking on a sinister plot to kill
people (in the latest one I watched, Tilda Swinton somewhat predictably
tried to kill George Clooney for exposing her company’s poisoning of

people with pesticides). I hold no brief for large corporations, whose
inefficiencies, complacencies and anti-competitive tendencies often drive
me as crazy as the next man. Like Milton Friedman, I notice that ‘business
corporations in general are not defenders of free enterprise. On the contrary,
they are one of the chief sources of danger.’ They are addicted to corporate
welfare, they love regulations that erect barriers to entry to their small
competitors, they yearn for monopoly and they grow flabby and inefficient
with age.
But I detect that the criticism is increasingly out of date, and that large
corporations are ever more vulnerable to their nimbler competitors in the
modern world – or would be if they were not granted special privileges by
the state. Most big firms are actually becoming frail, fragile and frightened
– of the press, of pressure groups, of government, of their customers. So
they should be. Given how frequently they vanish – by take-over or
bankruptcy – this is hardly surprising. Coca-Cola may wish its customers
were ‘serfs under feudal brandlords’, in the words of one critic, but look
what happened to New Coke. Shell may have tried to dump an oil-storage
device in the deep sea in 1995, but a whiff of consumer boycott and it
changed its mind. Exxon may have famously stood out from the consensus
by funding scepticism of climate change (while Enron funded climate
alarmism) – but by 2008 it had been bullied into recanting.
Companies have a far shorter half-life than government agencies. Half
of the biggest American companies of 1980 have now disappeared by takeover or bankruptcy; half of today’s biggest companies did not even exist in
1980. The same is not true of government monopolies: the Internal Revenue
Service and the National Health Service will not die, however much
incompetence they might display. Yet most anti-corporate activists have
faith in the good will of the leviathans that can force you to do business
with them, but are suspicious of the behemoths that have to beg for your
business. I find that odd.
Moreover, for all their eventual sins, entrepreneurial corporations can do
enormous good while they are young and growing. Consider the case of
discount retailing. The burst of increasing productivity that countries like
America and Britain rather unexpectedly experienced in the 1990s at first
puzzled many economists. They wanted to credit computers, but as the
economist Robert Solow had quipped in 1987, ‘you can see the computer
everywhere but in the productivity statistics’, and those of us who

experienced how easy it was to waste time using a computer in those days
agreed. A study by McKinsey concluded that the 1990s surge in the United
States was caused by (drum roll of excitement) logistical changes in
business (groan of disappointment), especially in the retail business and
especially in just one firm – Wal-Mart. Efficient ordering, ruthless
negotiating, hyper-punctual time keeping (suppliers must sometimes hit a
thirty-second window for deliveries), merciless cost control and ingenious
responses to customers’ preferences had given Wal-Mart a 40 per cent
efficiency advantage over its competitors by the early 1990s. Wal-Mart’s
competitors rapidly followed suit, raising their own productivity by 28 per
cent in the later 1990s, but Wal-Mart had not stood still, gaining another 22
per cent in the same time, even as it opened an average of seven new threeacre supercentres a month for a decade. According to Eric Beinhocker of
McKinsey, these ‘social-technology’ innovations in the retail sector alone
accounted for fully a quarter of all United States productivity growth. Tesco
probably had a similar effect in Britain.
Sam Walton’s determination in 1950s Arkansas to sell everyday items
for less than his competitors was hardly a new idea. It is difficult to describe
it as an innovation, although things like ‘cross-docking’ where goods go
from suppliers’ trucks to distributor’s trucks without spending time in
warehouses in between were indeed new. Yet the way in which he pursued
and resolutely stuck to that simple idea ended up delivering a huge boost to
American living standards. Like corrugated iron and container shipping,
discount merchandising is among the most unsophisticated yet enriching
innovations of the twentieth century. A single, routine, minuscule Wal-Mart
decision in the 1990s – not to sell deodorant in cardboard boxes – saved
America $50 million a year, half of which was passed on to customers.
Charles Fishman writes: ‘Whole forests have not fallen in part because of a
decision made in the Wal-Mart home office … to eliminate the [deodorant]
box.’
On average, when it lands in a town, Wal-Mart causes a 13 per cent
drop in its competitors’ prices and saves its customers nationally $200
billion a year. Yet critics of corporate giants, who normally complain about
profiteering, still disapprove of Wal-Mart, saying the low prices are a bad
thing because smaller businesses can’t compete or that Wal-Mart is ‘the
world’s largest sweat shop’ for paying low wages even though Wal-Mart
pays twice the minimum wage (and as I was writing this announced $2

billion in bonuses to staff, despite the recession, because of record sales). It
is true that the growth of Wal-Mart in the 1990s, just like the opening of a
new Wal-Mart in a certain town, created turmoil. Competitors went bust or
were forced into humiliating mergers. Suppliers found themselves driven to
new practices. Unions lost their leverage over retailing workforces.
Cardboard box makers went to the wall. Consumers changed their habits.
Innovation, whether in the form of new technology or new ways of
organising the world, can destroy as well as create. A Wal-Mart store drives
small general retailers out of business as surely as the computer drove the
typewriter out of business. But against this must be balanced the enormous
benefits that (especially the poorest) customers reap in terms of cheaper,
more varied and better goods.
It was Joseph Schumpeter who pointed out that the competition which
keeps a businessman awake at night is not that from his rivals cutting
prices, but that of entrepreneurs making his product obsolete. As Kodak and
Fuji slugged it out for dominance in the 35mm film industry in the 1990s,
digital photography began to extinguish the entire market for analogue film
– as analogue records and analogue video cassettes had gone before.
Creative destruction, Schumpeter called it. His point was that there is just as
much creation going on as destruction – that the growth of digital
photography would create as many jobs in the long run as were lost in
analogue, or that the savings pocketed by a Wal-Mart customer are soon
spent on other things, leading to the opening of new stores to service those
new demands. In America, roughly 15 per cent of jobs are destroyed every
year; and roughly 15 per cent created.
Commerce and creativity
This turnover in itself ensures a steady improvement in working
conditions. From Josiah Wedgwood, proud of conditions in his Etruria
pottery factory, via Henry Ford, doubling the wages of his employees in
1914 to reduce staff turnover, to Larry Page, idealistically designing the
Googleplex, each generation of entrepreneurs often tries to make work a
better experience for their employees. In the early days of the internet, eBay
was just one of many online auction companies. It succeeded where its
competitors failed because it realised that a sense of shared community, not
a competitive auction process, was key. ‘This isn’t about auctions,’ said
Meg Whitman, the chief executive of eBay, ‘in fact it’s not about economic
warfare. It’s the opposite.’ It was survival of the nicest.

The turnover of firms is accelerating so much that most criticism of
corporations is out of date already. Large companies not only fall more
often these days – the disappearance in a month in 2008 of many banking
names is merely an accelerated case in a particular industry – but
increasingly they fragment and decentralise, too. As islands of top-down
planning in a bottom-up sea, big companies have less and less of a future
(the smaller the scale, the better planning works). AIG and General Motors
may have been kept alive by taxpayers, but they are in corporate comas.
The stars of the modern market economy are as different from the giants of
industrial capitalism, eBay from Exxon, as capitalism is from socialism.
Nike, born in 1972, grew into a huge company merely by contracting
between factories in Asia and shops in America from a relatively small head
office. Wikipedia has a paid staff of fewer than thirty and makes no profit.
Whereas the typical firm was once a team of workers, hierarchically
arranged and housed on a single site, increasingly it is a nebulous and
ephemeral coming together of creative and marketing talent to transmit the
efforts of contracting individuals towards the satisfying of consumer
preferences.
In that sense ‘capitalism’ is dying, and fast. The size of the average
American company is down from twenty-five employees to ten in just
twenty-five years. The market economy is evolving a new form in which
even to speak about the power of corporations is to miss the point.
Tomorrow’s largely self-employed workers, clocking on to work online in
bursts for different clients when and where it suits them, will surely look
back on the days of bosses and foremen, of meetings and appraisals, of time
sheets and trade unions, with amusement. I repeat: firms are temporary
aggregations of people to help them do their producing in such a way as to
help others do their consuming.
Nor can there be any doubt that the collective brain enriches culture and
stimulates the spirit. The intelligentsia generally looks down on commerce
as irredeemably philistine, conventional and lowering in its taste. But for
anybody who thinks great art and great philosophy have nothing to do with
commerce, let him visit Athens and Baghdad to ask how Aristotle and alKhwarizmi had the leisure time to philosophise. Let him visit Florence, Pisa
and Venice and inquire into how Michelangelo, Galileo and Vivaldi were
paid. Let him go to Amsterdam and London and ask what funded Spinoza,

Rembrandt, Newton and Darwin. Where commerce thrives, creativity and
compassion both flourish.
Rules and tools
Even if the world is indeed becoming a more trusting and less violent
place as it becomes more commercial, that does not mean that commerce is
in itself either the only way to make the world trusting, or enough on its
own to create trust. As well as new tools, there had to be new rules. The
innovations that made the world nicer, it may be argued, are institutions, not
technologies: things like the golden rule, the rule of law, respect for private
property, democratic government, impartial courts, credit, consumer
regulation, the welfare state, a free press, religious teaching of morality,
copyright, the custom that you do not spit at the table and the convention
that you always drive on the right (or left if in Japan, Britain, India,
Australia and much of Africa). These rules made trustful, safe commerce
possible, at least as much as vice versa.
The aborigines of Australia or the Khoisan of southern Africa lacked not
only steel and steam when they first met Westerners; they also lacked courts
and Christmas. Certainly, the imposition of a new rule has often enabled a
society to capture the benefits of exchange and specialisation ahead of its
rivals, and to better the lives of its citizens in moral as well as material
ways. Looking around the world, there are plainly societies which manage
their citizens’ lives well with good rules and societies which manage their
citizens’ lives badly with bad rules. Good rules reward exchange and
specialisation; bad rules reward confiscation and politicking. South and
North Korea spring to mind. One is generally a fair and free place, where
people are mostly becoming more rich and happy; the other an arbitrary,
hungry and cruel place whence people are fleeing as desperate refugees
whenever they can. The difference – which results in fifteen times as much
prosperity per head for the South – is plainly in the way they are ruled, in
their institutions. Later in this book I will argue that the wrong kind of
government can be a disastrous long-term impoverishing factor – the Ming
empire is my prime example. Zimbabwe today needs better rules before it
can have better markets. But note here that a country’s economic freedom
predicts its prosperity better than its mineral wealth, education system or
infrastructure do. In a sample of 127 countries, the sixty-three with the
higher economic freedom had more than four times the income per capita
and nearly twice the growth rate of the countries that did not.

A few years ago the World Bank published a study of ‘intangible
wealth’ – trying to measure the value of education, the rule of law and other
such nebulous things. It simply added up the natural capital (resources,
land) and produced capital (tools, property) and measured what was left
over to explain each country’s per capita income. It concluded that
Americans can draw upon more than ten times as much intangible capital as
Mexicans, which explains why a Mexican who crosses the border can
quadruple his productivity almost immediately. He has access to smoother
institutions, clearer rules, better-educated customers, simpler forms – that
sort of thing. ‘Rich countries,’ concluded the Bank, ‘are largely rich because
of the skills of their populations and the quality of the institutions
supporting economic activity.’ In some countries, intangible capital may be
minute or even negative. Nigeria, for example, scores so low on the rule of
law, education and the probity of its public institutions that even its
immense oil reserves have failed to enrich it.
So perhaps I am wrong to seek the flywheel of human progress in the
gradual development of exchange and specialisation. Perhaps they are
symptoms, not causes, and it was the invention of institutions and rules that
then made exchange possible. The rule against revenge killing, for example,
must have greatly helped society to settle down. It must have been quite a
breakthrough to say that ‘do unto others’ applies only to charity, not to
homicide, and that handing the matter of revenge over to the state to pursue
on your behalf through due process would be of general benefit to all. Both
Orestes and Romeo and Juliet (and The Godfather and Dirty Harry, for that
matter) capture societies in the act of wrestling with the issue: all can agree
that the rule of law is better than the rule of reciprocal revenge, though it
makes less good theatre, but not all can overcome their instincts and
customs to achieve it.
True enough, but I see these rules and institutions as evolutionary
phenomena, too, emerging bottom-up in society rather than being imposed
top-down by fortuitously Solomonic rulers. They come through the filter of
cultural selection just as surely as do technologies. And if you look at the
history of, for instance, merchant law, you find exactly this: merchants
make it up as they go along, turning their innovations into customs,
ostracising those who break the informal rules and only later do monarchs
subsume the rules within the laws of the land. That is the story of the lex
mercatoria of the medieval period: the great law-giving kings of England,

such as Henry II and John, were mostly codifying what their trading
subjects had already agreed among themselves when trading with strangers
in Bruges, Brabant and Visby. Indeed, it is the whole point of common law.
When Michael Shermer and three friends started a bicycle race across
America in the 1980s, they began with virtually no rules. Only with
experience did they have to bring in rules about how to deal with being
arrested for causing a traffic jam on a hill in Arizona and other such
unexpected complications.
So while it is true that institutional innovators in the public sphere are
just as vital as technological innovators in the private, I suspect that
specialisation is the key to both. Just as becoming a specialist axe maker for
the whole tribe gives you the time, the capital and the market to develop a
new and better form of axe, so becoming the specialist bicycle racer enables
you to make up rules about bicycle racing. Human history is driven by a coevolution of rules and tools. The increasing specialisation of the human
species, and the enlarging habit of exchange, are the root cause of
innovation in both.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Four
The feeding of the nine billion: farming
after 10,000 years ago
Whoever could make two ears of corn, or two blades of grass, to grow
upon a spot of ground where only one grew before, would deserve better of
mankind, and do more essential service to his country, than the whole race
of politicians put together.
JONATHAN SWIFT
Gulliver’s Travels

Oetzi, the mummified ‘iceman’ found high in the Alps in 1991, was
carrying as much equipment on him as the hikers who found him. He had
tools made of copper, flint, bone and six kinds of wood: ash, viburnum,
lime, dogwood, yew and birch. He wore clothes made of woven grass, tree
bark, sinew and four kinds of leather: bearskin, deer hide, goat hide and calf
skin. He carried two species of fungus, one as medicine, another as part of a
tinder kit that included a dozen plants and pyrite for making sparks. He was
a walking encyclopedia of accumulated knowledge – knowledge of how to
fashion tools and clothes and from what materials to make them. He carried
the inventions of scores, perhaps thousands, of people upon him, their

insights manifest in his kit. If he had had to invent from scratch all his
equipment he would have had to be a genius. But even knowing what to
make and how to make it, if Oetzi had spent his days collecting all the raw
materials he needed for just his food and his clothing (let alone his shelter
or his tools), he would have been stretched to breaking point, let alone if he
then had to smelt, tan, weave, sew, shape and sharpen everything. He was
undoubtedly consuming the labour of many other people, and giving his
own in exchange.
He was also consuming the specialised labour of other species. Oetzi
lived about 5,300 years ago in an Alpine valley. This was 2,000 years after
agriculture reached southern Europe. Compared with his hunter-gatherer
ancestors, Oetzi had cattle and goats that spent all day working for him
gathering grass and turning it into leather and meat; wheat plants that
gathered sunlight and turned it into grain. Under human genetic tutelage
these species had grown specialised in doing so at the expense of their other
biological imperatives. That is the point of agriculture: it diverts the labour
of other species to providing services for human beings. The biologist Lee
Silver was once watching chickens coming ‘home to roost’ in a village in
south-east Asia and it struck him that they were like the farmer’s tools: they
had been gathering food for him in the forest all day. Farming is the
extension of specialisation and exchange to include other species.
Oetzi was also the beneficiary of capital investment. He lived right at
the beginning of the metal age, when copper was first being smelted. His
pristine copper axe, 99.7 per cent pure, had been smelted in a furnace that
had consumed a lot of somebody’s capital to build. The chaff in his clothing
came from a grain crop grown with invested capital in the form of stored
seeds and stored labour. For Adam Smith capital is ‘as it were, a certain
quantity of labour stocked and stored up to be employed, if necessary, upon
some other occasion’.
If you can store the labour of others for future use, then you can spare
yourself the time and the energy of working for your own immediate needs,
which means you can invest in something new that will bring even greater
reward. Once capital had arrived on the scene, innovation could accelerate,
because time and property could be invested in projects that initially
generated no benefit. Few hunter-gatherers, for example, could ever afford
the time off ‘work’ to build a furnace and slowly and laboriously smelt

enough metal to make a copper axe: they would starve in the meantime –
even if they could find a market for the axes.
In the conventional account it was agriculture that made capital possible
by generating stored surpluses and stored surpluses could be used in trade.
Before farming, nobody could hoard a surplus. There is some truth in this,
but to some degree it gets the story the wrong way round. Agriculture was
possible because of trade. Trade provided the incentive to specialise in
farmed goods and to generate surplus food.
Agriculture started to appear independently in the Near East, the Andes,
Mexico, China, the highlands of New Guinea, the Brazilian rainforest and
the African Sahel – all within a few thousand years. Something made it
inevitable, almost compulsory around this time: however much it eventually
resulted in misery, disease and despotism in the long run, it clearly gave its
first practitioners competitive advantage. Yet farming was not an overnight
transition. It was the culmination of a long, slow intensification of human
diet that took tens of thousands of years. In search of extra calories people
gradually ‘moved down the trophic pyramid’ – i.e., became more
vegetarian. By 23,000 years ago the people of what is now Israel and Syria
had become dependent on acorns, pulses and even grass seeds, as well as
fish and birds, garnished with the occasional gazelle – perhaps supplied by
other hunting tribes through trade. At one remarkable site, Ohalo II, now
submerged except in dry years by Lake Kinneret (the Sea of Galilee), direct
evidence has emerged of the eating of wild grains long before farming. In
the remains of one of six brushwood huts, there is a flat stone apparently
used for grinding seeds, and on it, preserved for 23,000 years by lake
sediments, are microscopic starch grains from wild barley seeds. Nearby is
what appears to be a stone oven for baking. By grinding grain to flour and
baking it, the users would have nearly doubled the energy they could get
from it.
So bread is far older than farming. It would be an astonishing 12,000
years after Ohalo II before anybody started planting and reaping cereals
such as rye, wheat and barley, and 4,000 years after that before modern,
genetically hexaploid wheat, with its heavy, free-threshing seeds, was
invented – and began its long career as humankind’s biggest and most
widespread source of calories. The inescapable conclusion is that the people
of the Near East were no fools. They captured the benefits of cereals –
milled and baked starch – long before they took on the hard graft of farming

them. Why spend months tending your own field of corn, when you can
spend hours harvesting a wild one? One study notes an ‘extreme reluctance
to shift to domestic foods’.
By 13,000 years ago the people of the Near East, known now as the
Natufian culture, were using stone sickle blades to harvest the heads of the
grasses, rather than beating the seeds into baskets. They lived in settlements
that were sufficiently stable to be plagued by house mice. They were as
close to farming as you can get without genetic domestication of crops. Yet,
at this moment, on the brink of making history, they regressed. They
abandoned their settlements, returned to nomadism and broadened their diet
again. The same happened in Egypt about the same time – a retreat from
grinding grain to hunting and fishing (except in Egypt’s case it was much
longer before the proto-farming experiment resumed). The probable cause
of this hiatus was a cold snap, over a thousand years long, known as the
‘Younger Dryas’. The probable cause of the cold snap was the North
Atlantic suddenly cooling either from the bursting of a series of vast ice
dams on the North American continent, or from the sudden outflow of water
from the Arctic ocean. Once the cold snap had begun, not only was it colder
and drier, but the weather fluctuated wildly from year to year, with changes
of up to seven degrees in a single decade. Unable to rely on local rainfall, or
local summer ripening, the people could not sustain their intensive cerealfeeding lifestyle. They must have starved in great numbers, and the
survivors took to nomadic hunter-gathering again.
Then, around 11,500 years ago the temperature of the Greenland ice cap
shot up by ten degrees (centigrade) in half a century; throughout the world
conditions became dramatically warmer, wetter and more predictable. In the
Levant intensification of cereal use could resume, the Natufians could
return to settled homes and soon something prompted some body to start
deliberately saving seed to plant. Chickpeas may have been the first crop,
then rye and einkorn wheat, though figs had probably been cultivated and
dogs domesticated some millennia before. Can there be any doubt that it
was woman, the diligent gatherer, rather than man, the dilettante hunter,
who first had the idea of sowing grain? A well planted crop, sown into
riverbank mud or some other bare land, then carefully weeded and guarded
from birds, would have meant new and harder work, but would have
brought rewards in yield to the family of the woman who tried it. It would
have brought a surplus of flour that could be exchanged with hunters for

meat, so it would have kept not only the field’s owner and her children
alive, but perhaps a couple of other hunting families too. The exchange of
grain for meat effectively subsidised hunting, or raised the ‘price’ of meat,
putting more pressure on the hares and gazelles and so gradually making
the entire settlement more dependent on the farm – and bringing a new
incentive to the first man who thought of raising an orphaned goat kid
rather than eating it. Farming would have become a necessity for all the
people living there, and the hunter-gatherer way of life would have
gradually atrophied. It was undoubtedly a long and slow process: farmers
supplemented their diet with hunted ‘bushmeat’ for many millennia after
they first started cultivating the land. In most of North America, the natives
combined crops with seasonal hunts. In parts of Africa, many still do.
The Fertile Crescent was probably the place where agriculture first took
hold, and from there the habit gradually spread south to Egypt, west into
Asia Minor and east to India, but farming was quickly invented in at least
six other places in a short time, driven by the same ratchet of trade,
population growth, stable climate and increasingly vegetarian
intensification. Squashes and then peanuts were cultivated in Peru by 9,200
years ago, millet and rice in China by 8,400 years ago, maize in Mexico by
7,300 years ago, taro and bananas in New Guinea by 6,900 years ago,
sunflowers in North America by 6,000 years ago, and sorghum in Africa by
around the same time. This phenomenal coincidence, as bizarre as finding
that an aborigine, an Inuit, a Polynesian and a Scotsman all invented steam
engines in the same decade of the eighteenth century without contact of any
kind, is explained by the stabilising climate after the ice age ended. In the
words of a recent paper, ‘agriculture was impossible during the last glacial,
but compulsory in the Holocene’. It is no accident that modern Australia,
with its unpredictable years of drought followed by years of wet, still looks
a bit like that volatile glacial world. Australians were probably quite
capable of farming: they knew how to grind grass seeds, burn the bush to
improve kangaroo grazing and encourage favoured plants; and they
certainly knew how to alter the flow of rivers to encourage and harvest eels.
But they also knew, or found out the hard way, that farming does not work
in a highly volatile climate.
No farming without trade
One of the intriguing things about the first farming settlements is that
they also seem to be trading towns. From 14,000 years ago, much-valued

obsidian (volcanic glass) from the Cappadocian volcanoes in Anatolia was
being transported south along the upper Euphrates, through the Damascus
basin and down the Jordan Valley. Seashells from the Red Sea were going
the other way. This is precisely where the first farming settlements are – at
Catalhoyuk, Abu Hureyra and Jericho. Such settlements were sited in oases
where springs of fresh water from the mountains spilled out on to the
western edge of the desert: places where soil nutrients, moisture and
sunshine came together nicely – and also places where people mixed with
their neighbours because of trade. This is surprising only because it is easy
to think of early farmers as sedentary, self-sufficient folk. But they were
exchanging harder in this region than anywhere else, and it is a reasonable
guess that one of the pressures to invent agriculture was to feed and profit
from wealthy traders – to generate a surplus that could be exchanged for
obsidian, shells or other more perishable goods. Trade came first.
In the 1960s, Jane Jacobs suggested in her book The Economy of Cities
that agriculture was invented to feed the first cities, rather than cities being
made possible by the invention of agriculture. This goes too far, and
archaeologists have discredited the idea of urban centres preceding the first
farms. The largest permanent settlements of hunter-gatherers cannot be
described as urban even among the fishermen of the Pacific coast of North
America. None the less, there was a germ of truth in her idea: the first
farmers were already enthusiastic traders breaking free of subsistence
through exchange, and farming was just another expression of trade.
In Greece, farmers arrived suddenly and dramatically around 9,000
years ago. Stone tools suggest that they were colonists from Anatolia or the
Levant who probably came by boat deliberately seeking to colonise new
land. Moreover, these very earliest Greek farmers were also apparently
enthusiastic traders with each other and were very far from being selfsufficient: they relied upon specialist craftsmen to produce obsidian tools
from raw material imported from elsewhere. This is once again not what
conventional wisdom envisages. Trade comes first, not last. Farming works
precisely because it is embedded in trading networks.
Some time later, at 7,600 years ago, farmers who were happily
cultivating the fertile plains around the ‘Euxine lake’ suffered a rude shock,
when rising sea levels burst over the Hellespont and flooded into the lake’s
basin, filling it at a rate of six inches a day till it became the modern Black
Sea. Baffled refugees presumably fled up the Danube into the heart of

Europe. Within just a few hundred years, they had reached the Atlantic
coast, peopling all of the southern half of Europe with farmers, sometimes
by infecting their neighbours with enthusiasm for the new trick of farming,
but more often (so the genetic evidence suggests) displacing and violently
overwhelming hunter-gatherers as they went. It took another thousand years
to reach the Baltic, chiefly because fishermen inhabited that coast at high
densities and had no need to start farming. The crops the farmers took with
them changed little, despite the new conditions they encountered. Some
crops, like lentils and figs, had to be left behind on the Mediterranean.
Others, like emmer and einkorn wheat, adapted readily to the wetter and
cooler lands of Northern Europe. By 5,000 years ago farmers had reached
Ireland, Spain, Ethiopia and India.
Other descendants of the Black Sea refugees took to the plains of what
is now Ukraine where they domesticated the horse and developed a new
language, Indo-European, that would come to dominate the western half of
the Eurasian continent, and of which Sanskrit and Gaelic are both
descendants. It was also somewhere near the Baltic or the Black Sea
between 6,000 and 10,000 years ago that a genetic mutation, substituting G
for A in a control sequence upstream of a pigment gene called OCA2, gave
adults blue eyes for the first time. It was a mutation that would eventually
be inherited by nearly 40 per cent of Europeans. Because it went with
unusually pale skin, it probably helped those people who were trying to live
on vitamin-D-deficient grain in sunless northern climates: sunlight enables
the body to synthesise vitamin D. The gene’s frequency speaks of the
fecundity of farmers.
One of the reasons that farming spreads so rapidly once it starts is that
the first few crops are both more productive and more easily grown than
later crops, so farmers are always happy to move on to virgin land. If you
burn down a forest, you are left with a soft, friable soil seasoned with
fertilising ash. All you need do is poke a digging stick into the ground and
plant a seed and sit back and wait for it to grow. After a few years, however,
the soil is compacted and needs breaking up with a hoe, and weeds have
proliferated. If you now leave the ground fallow to allow the fertility to
build up again, the tough roots of grasses need to be broken up and buried
to make a good seedbed – and for that you need a plough and an ox to pull
it. But the ox needs feeding, so you need pasture as well as arable land. No
wonder that shifting agriculture – slash and burn – remains so much more

popular with many tribal people in forests to this day. In Neolithic Europe,
the smoke of fires must have hung heavy in the air as the expanding front of
farming spread west. The carbon dioxide released by the fires may even
have helped to warm the climate to its 6,000-years-ago balmy maximum,
when the Arctic ice retreated from Greenland’s northern coast in summer.
This is because early farming used probably nine times as much land per
head of population as farming does today, so the small populations of the
day generated lots of carbon dioxide per head.
Capital and metal
Wherever they went, the farmers also brought their habits: not just
sowing, reaping and threshing, but baking, fermenting, hoarding and
owning. Hunter-gatherers have to travel light; even if they are not
seasonally nomadic, they must be ready to move at any time. Farmers, by
contrast, have to store grain or protect herds or guard fields before they are
harvested. The first person to plant a wheat field must have faced the
dilemma of how to say ‘This is mine; only I may harvest it.’ The first signs
of private property are the stamp seals of the Halaf people, 8,000 years ago
on the borders of Syria and Turkey: similar seals were later used for
denoting ownership. This land rush presumably left the remaining hunters
baffled spectators as their game lands were carved up, possibly by ‘poorer’,
more desperate people. Perhaps Cain was a farmer; Abel a hunter.
Meanwhile, as farming replaced gathering, so herding replaced hunting.
The Neolithic settlements of the Middle East probably grew up as markets
where shepherds from the hills could meet cereal farmers from the plains
and exchange their surpluses. The hunter-gatherer market now became the
herderfarmer market. Haim Ofek writes: ‘On the human level, nothing
could be more handy at the onset of agriculture than a well-established
propensity to exchange, for nothing could better reconcile the need for
specialisation in food production with the need for diversification in food
consumption.’
Copper smelting was a practice that makes no sense for an individual
trying to meet his own needs, or even for a self-sufficient tribe. It requires a
stupendous effort to mine the ore and then by virtue of elaborate bellows to
smelt it in a charcoal fire at more than 1,083°C, just to produce a few ingots
of a metal that is strong and malleable, but not very hard. Imagine: you
have to cut wood and make charcoal from it, make ceramic crucibles for the
smelting, dig and crush the ore, then mould and hammer the copper. Only

by consuming the stored labour of others – by living off capital – could you
even finish the job. Then, even if you can sell copper axes to other huntergatherers, the market is likely to be too small to make it worth your while
setting up a smelting operation. But once agriculture has provided the
capital, increased the density of people, and given them a good reason for
chop ping down trees, then there might be a market large enough to support
a community of full-time copper smelters, so long as they can sell the
copper to neighbouring tribes. Or, in the words of two theorists: ‘The denser
societies made possible by agriculture can realize considerable returns to
better exploitation of the potential of co-operation, co-ordination and the
division of labour.’
Hence, the invention of metal smelting was an almost inevitable
consequence of the invention of agriculture (though some very early mining
of pure copper-metal deposits around Lake Superior was apparently done
by hunter-gatherers, perhaps supplying the almost agricultural salmon
ranchers of the Pacific coast). Copper was produced throughout the Alps,
where some of the best ores are to be found, but it was exported to the rest
of Europe for several thousand years after Oetzi’s death, only later being
displaced by copper mined in Cyprus. A little more than a thousand years
after Oetzi died, and a short distance to the west in the Mitterberg region of
what is now Austria, there were settlements inhabited by people who
apparently did little else but mine and smelt copper from lodes in the nearby
mountains. Living in a cold mountain valley, they found it more profitable
to make copper and exchange it for, say, meat and grain from the Danube
plains, rather than to raise their own cattle. It seems not to have made them
very rich – nor would Cornish tin, Peruvian silver, or for that matter Welsh
coal enrich their miners in the millennia to come. Compared with the
farmers on the Danube Plain, the Mitterberg copper miners left behind few
ornaments or luxuries. But they were better off than they could be trying to
live self-sufficiently in the mountains raising their own food. They were not
supplying a need; they were making a living, responding to economic
incentives as clearly as any modern person. Homo economicus was not an
eighteenth-century Scottish invention. Their copper, turned into ingots and
sickles, standardised for weight, then broken up and circulated far and wide,
would soon become a primitive form of money widely used throughout
Europe to lubricate exchange.

Conventional wisdom has probably underestimated the extent of
specialisation and trade in the Neolithic age. There is a tendency to think
that everybody was a farmer. But in Oetzi’s world, there were farmers who
grew einkorn and maybe farmers who grew grass for weaving into cloaks;
coppersmiths who made axes and maybe bear hunters who made hats and
shoes. And yet there were things that Oetzi no doubt made for himself: his
bow was unfinished and so were some of his arrows. At a rough estimation,
typical modern non-industrial people, living in traditional societies, directly
consume between one-third and two-thirds of what they produce, and
exchange the rest for other goods. Up to about 300 kilograms of food per
head per year, people eat what they grow; after that they start to exchange
surplus food for clothing, shelter, medicine or education. Almost by
definition, the more wealthy somebody is, the more things he acquires from
specialists. The characteristic signature of prosperity is increasing
specialisation. The characteristic signature of poverty is a return to selfsufficiency. Go to a poor village in Malawi or Mozambique today and you
will find few specialists and people consuming a high proportion of what
they produce. They are ‘not in the market’, as an economist might say. And
quite possibly they are less ‘in the market’ than ancient agrarian folk like
Oetzi were.
Indulge me in a little sermon. The tradition among many
anthropologists and archaeologists has been to treat the past as a very
different place from the present, a place with its own mysterious rituals. To
cram the Stone Age or the tribal South Seas into modern economic
terminology is therefore an anachronistic error showing capitalist
indoctrination. This view was promulgated especially by the anthropologist
Marshall Sahlins, who distinguished pre-industrial economies based on
‘reciprocity’ from modern economies based on markets. Stephen Shennan
satirises the attitude thus: ‘We engage in exchanges to make some sort of
profit; they do so in order to cement social relationships; we trade
commodities; they give gifts.’ Like Shennan, I think this is patronising
bunk. I think people respond to incentives and always have done. People
weigh costs and benefits and do what profits them. Sure, they take into
account non-economic factors, such as the need to remain on good terms
with trading partners and to placate malevolent deities. Sure, they give
better deals to families, friends and patrons than they do to strangers. But
they do that today as well. Even the most market-embedded modern

financial trader is enmeshed in a web of ritual, etiquette, convention and
obligation, not excluding social debt for a good lunch or an invitation to a
football match. Just as modern economists often exaggerate the coldhearted rationality of consumers, so anthropologists exaggerate the cuddly
irrationality of pre-industrial people.
The ‘kula’ system of the south Pacific is a favourite case history of
those who like to argue that markets were unknown to pre-industrial people.
According to Bronislaw Malinowski, the people of fourteen different island
groups exchanged armshells for necklaces in such a way that the armshells
travelled in an anti-clockwise circle around the entire island group, while
the necklaces went clockwise. After two years or more, an item might have
returned to its original owner. To describe such a system as a market is
plainly absurd: the exchange itself, not profit, must be the point. But look
closer and kula becomes less peculiar. It was only one of many kinds of
exchange practised in these islands; the fact that Westerners give each other
cards and socks at Christmas speaks to the importance in their lives of the
social meaning of exchange, but does not mean they do not also seek profits
in markets. An anthropologist from the South Pacific might study Western
Christmas and conclude that an utterly pointless and profitless but frantic
midwinter commercial activity, inspired by religion, dominates the lives of
Westerners. Pacific islanders were and are acutely aware of the importance
of getting a good bargain when trading with a stranger. In any case, further
research since the days of Malinowski has demonstrated that he had rather
exaggerated the circular nature of the system, which is a mere side effect of
the fact that traders who are exchanging useful items also like to give each
other useless but pretty gifts that then sometimes end back where they
started.
Ignoble savage?
In the first half of the twentieth century, the Neolithic Revolution was
interpreted by Gordon Childe and his followers as a bettering of the human
condition, which brought obvious benefits: stored food with which to
survive famines; new forms of nutrition close at hand, such as milk and
eggs; less need for exhausting, dangerous and often fruitless treks through
the wilderness; work that the unfit and injured could still do; perhaps more
spare time in which to invent civilisation.
In the last third of the twentieth century, a prosperous yet nostalgic time,
farming came to be reinterpreted as an invention born of desperation rather

than inspiration, and perhaps even ‘the worst mistake in the history of the
human race’. The pessimists, led by Mark Cohen and Marshall Sahlins,
argued that farming was a back-breaking treadmill that brought a
monotonous diet deficient in nutrients to a people plagued by pollution,
squalor, infectious diseases and early death. More people could now live
upon the land, but with unchecked fertility, they would have to work harder.
More babies were born, but more people died young. Whereas extant
hunter-gatherers such as the Dobe !Kung seemed to have ample leisure and
to live in ‘the original affluent society’ (Sahlins’s phrase), limiting their
reproduction and so preventing overpopulation, skeletons of the first
farmers seemed to show wear and tear, chronic deformity, toothache and
short stature. Meanwhile, they would catch measles from cattle, smallpox
from camels, tuberculosis from milk, influenza from pigs, plague from rats,
not to mention worms from using their own excrement as fertiliser and
malaria from mosquitoes in their ditches and water butts.
They also got a bad attack of inequality for the first time. Extant huntergatherers are remarkably egalitarian, a state of affairs dictated by their
dependence on sharing each other’s hunting and gathering luck. (They
sometimes need to enforce this equality with savage reprisals against people
who get ideas above their stations.) A successful farmer, however, can soon
afford to store some provisions with which to buy the labour of other less
successful neighbours, and that makes him more successful still, until
eventually – especially in an irrigated river valley, where he controls the
water – he can become an emperor using servants and soldiers to impose his
despotic whim upon subjects.
Worse still, as Friedrich Engels was the first to argue, agriculture may
have worsened sexual inequality. It is certainly painfully obvious that in
many peasant farming communities, men make women do much of the hard
work. In hunter-gathering, men have many tiresome sexist habits, but they
do at least contribute. When the plough was invented around 6,000 years
ago, men took over the work of driving the oxen that cultivated fields,
because it required greater strength, but this only exacerbated inequality.
Now women were treated increasingly as the chattels of men, loaded with
bracelets and ankle rings to indicate their husband’s wealth. Now art
became dominated by the symbols of male power and competition –
arrows, axes and daggers. Now polygamy probably increased and the
wealthiest men acquired harems and patriarchal status: at Branc in Slovakia,

more women than men were buried with elaborate grave goods, indicating
not that they were wealthy, so much as that their polygamous husbands
were wealthy while other men languished in celibate poverty. In this way,
polygamy enables poor women to share in prosperity more than poor men.
It was an age of patriarchy.
Yet there is no evidence that early farmers behaved any worse than
hunter-gatherers. Those few hunter-gatherer societies that became fat and
prosperous on a dependable and rich local resource – most notably, the
salmon-fishing tribes of the American north-west – soon indulged in
patriarchy and inequality, too. The ‘original affluence’ of the modern
hunter-gatherer !Kung was only possible because of modern tools, trade
with farmers and even the odd helping hand from anthropologists. Their
low fertility owed more to sexually transmitted infections than birth control.
As for the deformities of early farmers, skeletons may not be representative
and may tell you more about the injuries and diseases that were survived,
rather than proved fatal. Even the gender equality of hunter-gatherers may
prove wishful thinking. After all, Fuegian men, who could not swim, left
their wives to anchor canoes in kelp beds and swim ashore in snow storms.
The truth is that both hunter-gathering and farming could produce affluence
or misery depending on the abundance of food and the relative density of
people. One commentator writes: ‘All pre-industrial economies, no matter
how simple or complex, are capable of generating misery and will do so
given enough time.’
The chronic and perpetual violence of the hunter-gatherer world had not
ended with the invention of farming. Oetzi died a violent death, shot from
behind by an arrow that pierced an artery in his shoulder, after – so DNA
suggests – killing two men with one of his own arrows and carrying a
wounded comrade on his back. The blood of a fourth man was on his knife.
In the process he sustained a deep cut to his thumb and a fatal blow to the
head. This was no small skirmish. His position in death suggests that his
killer turned him over to retrieve the arrow, but the stone arrow head broke
off inside his body. The archaeologist Steven LeBlanc says that the
evidence of constant violence in the ancient past has been systematically
overlooked by Rousseauesque wishful thinking among academics. He cites
his own discoveries of innumerable sling shots and doughnutshaped stones
in Turkish sites from around 8,000 years ago. In the 1970s when he worked
there he thought these were used by shepherds to chase away wolves and by

farmers to weigh down their hoes. Now he realises that they were weapons
of violence: the stones were mace heads and the sling shots were stockpiled
for defence.
Wherever archaeologists look, they find evidence that early farmers
fought each other incessantly and with deadly effect. The early inhabitants
of Jericho dug a defensive ditch thirty feet deep and ten feet wide into solid
rock without metal tools. In the Merzbach valley in Germany, the arrival of
agriculture brought five centuries of peaceful population growth followed
by the building of defensive earthworks, the dumping of corpses in pits and
the abandonment of the whole valley. At Talheim around 4900 BC, an entire
community of thirty-four people was massacred by blows to the head and
arrows in the back, apart from the adult women who are missing –
presumably abducted as sexual prizes. The killers were doing no more than
Moses later ordered his followers in the Bible. After a successful battle
against the Midianites and a massacre of the adult males, he told them to
finish the job by raping the virgins: ‘Now therefore kill every male among
the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with
him. But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with
him, keep alive for yourselves.’ (Numbers 31)
Likewise, wherever anthropologists look, from New Guinea to the
Amazon and Easter Island, they find chronic warfare among today’s
subsistence farmers. Pre-emptively raiding your neighbours lest they raid
you is routine human behaviour. As Paul Seabright has written: ‘Where
there are no institutional restraints on such behaviour, systematic killing of
unrelated individuals is so common among human beings that, awful
though it is, it cannot be described as exceptional, pathological or
disturbed.’
Nor can it be denied that such violence was habitually accompanied by
cruelty to a degree that turns the modern stomach. When Samuel Champlain
accompanied (and assisted with his arquebus) a successful Huron raid upon
the Mohawks in 1609, he had to watch as his allies sacrificed a captive by
branding his torso with glowing sticks from the fire, periodically reviving
him with buckets of water if he passed out, from dusk till dawn. Only when
the sun rose were they permitted by their tradition to disembowel and then
eat the unfortunate victim, during which procedure he gradually died.
The fertiliser revolution

The Neolithic Revolution provided posterity with almost limitless
calories. There would be famines aplenty in the millennia to come, but they
would never again reduce human population density to the hunter-gatherer
level. Inch by inch, trick by trick and crop by crop, people would find a way
to coax food from even the poorest soils, and calories from even the poorest
foods and would crystallise insights of almost miraculous perspicacity as to
how to do so. Fast-forward from the Neolithic a few thousand years to the
industrial revolution, when population began to explode rather than expand
and stand amazed that you and your ancestors came through that explosion
better fed, not starving. In 1798 Robert Malthus famously predicted in his
Essay on Population that food supply could not keep pace with population
growth because of the finite productivity of land. He was wrong, but it was
no easy matter; in the nineteenth century it was at times touch-and-go. Even
though steamships, railways, the Erie Canal, refrigeration and the binderand-reaper enabled the Americas to send vast amounts of wheat back east to
feed the industrial masses of Europe, directly and in the form of beef and
pork, famine was never far away.
It would have been worse but for a strange windfall discovered in about
1830. On dry bird islands off the South American and South African coasts,
where no rain leached away the cormorant, penguin and booby droppings,
immense deposits of nitrogen and phosphorus had accumulated over
centuries. Guano mining became a very profitable, and very grim, business.
The tiny island of Ichaboe yielded 800,000 tonnes of guano in a few short
years. Between 1840 and 1880, guano nitrogen made a colossal difference
to European agriculture. But soon the best deposits were exhausted. The
miners turned to rich mineral saltpetre deposits in the Andes (which proved
to be ancient guano islands lifted up by South America’s westward drift),
but these could barely keep pace with demand. By the turn of the twentieth
century the fertiliser crisis was desperate. In 1898, the centenary of
Malthus’s pessimistic prognostication, the eminent British chemist Sir
William Crookes gave a similar jeremiad in his presidential address to the
British Association entitled ‘The Wheat Problem’. He argued that, given the
growing population and the lack of suitable new acres to plough in the
Americas, ‘all civilisations stand in deadly peril of not having enough to
eat,’ and unless nitrogen could be chemically ‘fixed’ from the air by some
scientific process, ‘the great Caucasian race will cease to be foremost in the

world, and will be squeezed out of existence by races to whom wheaten
bread is not the staff of life.’
Within fifteen years his challenge had been met. Fritz Haber and Carl
Bosch invented a way of making large quantities of inorganic nitrogen
fertiliser from steam, methane and air. Today nearly half the nitrogen atoms
in your body passed through such an ammonia factory. But an even bigger
factor in averting Crookes’s disaster was the internal combustion engine.
The first tractors had few advantages over the best horses, but they did have
one enormous benefit as far as the world was concerned: they did not need
land to grow their fuel. America’s horse population peaked at twenty-one
million animals in 1915; at the time about one-third of all agricultural land
was devoted to feeding them. So the replacement of draught animals by
machines released an enormous acreage of land to grow food for human
consumption. At the same time motorised transport was bringing land
within reach of railheads. As late as 1920, over three million acres of good
agricultural land in the American Midwest lay uncultivated because it was
more than eighty miles from a railway, which meant a five-day trip by horse
wagon costing up to 30 per cent more than the value of the grain.
In 1920 plant breeders developed a vigorous and hardy new variety of
wheat, ‘Marquis’, by crossing a Himalayan and an American plant, which
could survive further north in Canada. So thanks to tractors, fertilisers and
new varieties, by 1931, the year in which Crookes had chosen to place his
potential future famine, the supply of wheat had so far exceeded the
demand that the price of wheat had plummeted and wheat land was being
turned over to pasture all over Europe.
Borlaug’s genes
The twentieth century would continue to confound the Malthusian
pessimists, most spectacularly in the 1960s in Asia. For two years in the
mid-1960s, India seemed to be on the brink of mass famine. Crops were
failing in a drought, and people were starving in growing numbers. Hunger
had never been absent from the subcontinent for long, and memories of the
great Bengal famine of 1943 were raw. With over 400 million people, the
country was in the midst of an unprecedented population explosion. The
government had put agriculture at the top of its agenda, but the state
monopolies charged with finding new varieties of wheat and rice had
nothing to offer. There was little new land to bring into cultivation. Five
million tonnes of food aid a year from America were all that stood between

India and a terrible fate, and those shipments could surely not continue for
ever.
Yet even amid such defeatism, India’s wheat production was taking off,
because of a sequence of events that had begun more than twenty years
before. On General Douglas MacArthur’s team in Japan at the end of the
Second World War was an agricultural scientist named Cecil Salmon.
Salmon collected sixteen varieties of wheat including one called ‘Norin 10’.
It grew just two feet tall, instead of the usual four – thanks, it is now known,
to a single mutation in a gene called Rht1, which makes the plant less
responsive to a natural growth hormone. Salmon collected some seeds and
sent them back to the United States, where they reached a scientist named
Orville Vogel in Oregon in 1949. At the time it was proving impossible to
boost the yield of tall wheat by adding artificial fertiliser. The fertiliser
caused the crop to grow tall and thick, whereupon it fell over, or ‘lodged’.
Vogel began crossing Norin 10 with other wheats to make new shortstrawed varieties. In 1952 Vogel was visited by a scientist working in
Mexico called Norman Borlaug, who took some Norin and Norin-Brevor
hybrid seeds back to Mexico and began to grow new crosses. Within a few
short years Borlaug had produced wheat that yielded three times as much as
before. By 1963, 95 per cent of Mexico’s wheat was Borlaug’s variety, and
the country’s wheat harvest was six times what it had been when Borlaug
set foot in Mexico. Borlaug started training agricultural scientists from
other countries, including Egypt and Pakistan.
Between 1963 and 1966 Borlaug and his Mexican dwarf wheats faced
innumerable hurdles to acceptance in Pakistan and India. Jealous local
researchers deliberately underfertilised the experimental plots. Customs
officials in Mexico and America – not to mention race riots in Los Angeles
– delayed shipments of seed so they arrived late for the planting season.
Overenthusiastic fumigation at customs killed half the seeds. The Indian
state grain monopolies lobbied against the seeds, spreading rumours that
they were susceptible to disease. The Indian government refused to allow
increased fertiliser imports, because it wanted to build up an indigenous
fertiliser industry, until Borlaug shouted at the deputy prime minister. To
cap it all, war broke out between the two countries.
But gradually, thanks to Borlaug’s persistence, the dwarf wheats
prevailed. The Pakistani agriculture minister took to the radio extolling the
new varieties. The Indian agriculture minister ploughed and planted his

cricket pitch. In 1968, after huge shipments of Mexican seed, the wheat
harvest was extraordinary in both countries. There were not enough people,
bullock carts, trucks or storage facilities to cope with the crop. In some
towns grain was stored in schools.
In March of that year India issued a postage stamp celebrating the wheat
revolution. That was the very same year the environmentalist Paul Ehrlich’s
book The Population Bomb was published declaring it a fantasy that India
would ever feed itself. His prediction was wrong before the ink was dry. By
1974, India was a net exporter of wheat. Wheat production had tripled.
Borlaug’s wheat – and dwarf rice varieties that followed – ushered in the
Green Revolution, the extraordinary transformation of Asian agriculture in
the 1970s that banished famine from almost the entire continent even as
population was rapidly expanding. In 1970 Norman Borlaug was awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize.
In effect, Borlaug and his allies had unleashed the power of fertiliser,
made with fossil fuels. Since 1900 the world has increased its population by
400 per cent; its cropland area by 30 per cent; its average yields by 400 per
cent and its total crop harvest by 600 per cent. So per capita food
production has risen by 50 per cent. Great news – thanks to fossil fuels.
Intensive farming saves nature
Taking all cereal crops together worldwide, in 2005 twice as much grain
was produced from the same acreage as in 1968. That intensification has
spared land on a vast scale. Consider this extraordinary statistic, calculated
by the economist Indur Goklany. If the average yields of 1961 had still
prevailed in 1998, then to feed six billion people would have required the
ploughing of 7.9 billion acres, instead of the 3.7 billion acres actually
ploughed in 1998: an extra area the size of South America minus Chile. And
that’s optimistically assuming that yields would have remained at the same
level in the newly cultivated land, taken from the rainforests, the swamps
and the semi-deserts. If yields had not increased, therefore, rainforests
would have been burnt, deserts irrigated, wetlands drained, tidal flats
reclaimed, pastures ploughed – to a far greater extent than actually
happened. To put it another way, today people farm (i.e., plough, crop or
graze) just 38 per cent of the land area of the earth, whereas with 1961
yields they would have to farm 82 per cent to feed today’s population.
Intensification has saved 44 per cent of this planet for wilderness.
Intensification is the best thing that ever happened – from the

environmental perspective. There are now over two billion acres of
‘secondary’ tropical rainforest, regrowing after farmers left for the cities,
and it is already almost as rich in biodiversity as primary forest. That is
because of intensive farming and urbanisation.
Some argue that the human race already appropriates for itself an
unsustainable fraction of the planet’s primary production and that if it uses
any more, the ecosystem of the entire globe will collapse. Human beings
comprise about 0.5 per cent by weight of the animals on the planet. Yet they
beg, borrow and steal for themselves roughly 23 per cent of the entire
primary production of land plants (the number is much lower if the oceans
are included). This number is known to ecologists as the HANPP – the
‘human appropriation of net primary productivity’. That is to say, of the 650
billion tonnes of carbon potentially absorbed from the air by land plants
each year, eighty are harvested, ten are burnt and sixty are prevented from
growing by ploughs, streets and goats, leaving 500 to support all the other
species.
That may seem to leave some room for growth yet, but is it really
practical to expect a planet to go on supporting such a dominant
monoculture of one ape? To answer this question, break the numbers down
by region. In Siberia and the Amazon perhaps 99 per cent of plant growth
supports wildlife rather than people. In much of Africa and central Asia,
people reduce the productivity of land even as they appropriate a fifth of the
production – an overgrazed scrubland supports fewer goats than it would
support antelopes if it were wilderness. In western Europe and eastern Asia,
however, people eat nearly half the plant production yet barely reduce the
amount left over for other species at all – because they dramatically raise
the productivity of the land with fertiliser: the grass meadow near my
house, sprinkled with nitrate twice a year, supports a large herd of milking
cows, but it is also teeming with worms, leatherjackets, dung flies – and the
blackbirds, jackdaws and swallows that eat them. This actually gives great
cause for optimism, because it implies that intensifying agriculture
throughout Africa and central Asia could feed more people and still support
more other species, too. Or, in academic-ese: ‘These findings suggest that,
on a global scale, there may be a considerable potential to raise agricultural
output without necessarily increasing HANPP.’
Other trends too have made modern farming better for the planet. Now
that weeds can be controlled by herbicides rather than ploughing (the main

function of a plough is to bury weeds), more and more crops are sown
directly into the ground without tilling. This reduces soil erosion, silt runoff and the massacre of innocent small animals of the soil that inevitably
attends the ploughing of a field – as flocks of worm-eating seagulls attest.
Food processing with preservatives, much despised by greenchic folk, has
greatly reduced the amount of food that goes to waste. Even the
confinement of chickens, pigs and cattle to indoor barns and batteries,
though it troubles the consciences (mine included) of those who care for
animal welfare, undoubtedly results in more meat produced from less feed
with less pollution and less disease. When bird flu threatened, it was freerange flocks of chickens, not battery farms, that were at greatest risk. Some
intensive farming of animals is unacceptably cruel; but some is no worse
than some kinds of free-range farming, and its environmental impact is
undoubtedly smaller.
Borlaug’s genes, sexually recombined with Haber’s ammonium and
Rudolf Diesel’s internal combustion engine, have rearranged sufficient
atoms not only to ensure that Malthus was wrong for at least another halfcentury, but that tigers and toucans can still exist in the wild. So I am going
to make an outrageous proposal: that the world could reasonably set a goal
of feeding itself to a higher and higher standard throughout the twenty-first
century without bringing any new land under the plough, indeed with a
gradual reduction in farmland area. Could it be done? In the early 1960s the
economist Colin Clark calculated that human beings could in theory sustain
themselves on just twenty-seven square metres of land each. His reasoning
went like this: an average person needs about 2,500 calories of food per
day, equivalent to about 685 grams of grain. Double it for growing a bit of
fuel, fibre and some animal protein: 1,370 grams. The maximum rate of
photosynthesis on well-watered, rich soils is about 350 grams per square
metre per day, but you can knock that down to about fifty for the best that
farming is in practice able to achieve over a wide area. So it takes twentyseven square metres to grow the 1,370 grams a person needs. On this basis
and using the yields of the day, Clark calculated in the 1960s that the world
could feed thirty-five billion mouths.
Well, let me assume that despite Clark’s conservatism about
photosynthesis, this is still wildly optimistic. Let me quadruple his number
and assume that earth cannot feed an average human from less than 100
square metres. How close are we to that point? In 2004, the world grew

about two billion tonnes of rice, wheat and maize on about half a billion
hectares of land: an average yield of four tonnes to the hectare. Those three
crops provided about two-thirds of the world’s food, both directly and via
beef, chicken and pork – equivalent to feeding four billion people. So a
hectare fed about eight people, or about 1,250 square metres each, down
from about 4,000 square metres in the 1950s. That is a long way above 100
square metres. In addition, the world cultivated another billion hectares
growing other cereals, soybeans, vegetables, cotton and the like (pasture
land is not part of this calculation) – that is about 5,000 square metres each.
Even if you increase the number of people to nine billion, there is still an
enormous amount of room for improvement before we start hitting the limit
of agricultural productivity. You could double or quadruple yields and still
be nowhere near the maximum practical yields of land, let alone the
photosynthetic limit. If we all turned vegetarian, the amount of land we
would need would be still less, but if we turned organic, it would be more:
we would need extra acres to grow the cows whose manure would fertilise
our fields: more precisely, to replace all the industrial nitrogen fertiliser
now applied would mean an extra seven billion cattle grazing an extra thirty
billion acres of pasture. (You will often hear organic champions extol the
virtues of both manure and vegetarianism: notice the contradiction.) But
these calculations show that even without vegetarianism, there will be a
growing surplus of farmland.
So let’s do it: let’s continue to cut down the area of farmland per person
to the point where we can begin to turn the rest over to wilderness.
Running out of land to capture sunlight is not going to be a problem for
food production – not since Haber broke the fertiliser bottleneck. Running
out of water could well be. Lester Brown points out that India depends
heavily on a rapidly depleting aquifer and a slowly drying Ganges to
irrigate crops, that salination caused by evaporation of irrigation water is an
increasing problem all across the world and that fully 70 per cent of all the
world’s water usage is for crop irrigation. But he goes on to admit that the
inefficiency of irrigation systems (i.e., the loss to evaporation) is falling
fast, especially in China, and that there is already a well-used technique –
drip irrigation – that could almost eliminate the problem. Countries like
Cyprus, Israel and Jordan are already heavy users of drip irrigation. In other
words, the wastefulness of irrigation is a product of the low price of water.

Once it is properly priced by markets, water is not only used more frugally,
but its very abundance increases through incentives to capture and store it.
This is what it would take to feed nine billion people in 2050: at least a
doubling of agricultural production driven by a huge increase in fertiliser
use in Africa, the adoption of drip irrigation in Asia and America, the spread
of double cropping to many tropical countries, the use of GM crops all
across the world to improve yields and reduce pollution, a further shift from
feeding cattle with grain to feeding them with soybeans, a continuing
relative expansion of fish, chicken and pig farming at the expense of beef
and sheep (chickens and fish convert grain into meat three times as
efficiently as cattle; pigs are in between) – and a great deal of trade, not just
because the mouths and the plants will not be in the same place, but also
because trade encourages specialisation in the best-yielding crops for any
particular district. If price signals drive the world’s farmers to take these
measures it is quite conceivable that in 2050 there will be nine billion
people feeding more comfortably than today off a smaller acreage of
cropland, releasing large tracts of land for nature reserves. Imagine that: an
immense expansion of wilderness throughout the world by 2050. It’s a
wonderful goal and one that can only be brought about by further
intensification and change, not by retreat and organic subsistence. Indeed,
come to think of it, let’s make farming a multi-storey business, with
hydroponic drip-irrigation and electric lighting producing food year-round
on derelict urban sites linked by conveyor belt directly to supermarkets.
Let’s pay for the buildings and the electricity by granting the developer tax
breaks for retiring farmland elsewhere into forest, swamp or savannah. It is
an uplifting and thrilling ideal.
Should the world decide, as a professor and a chef have both suggested
on my radio recently, that countries should largely grow and eat their own
food (why countries? Why not continents, or villages, or planets?), then of
course a very much higher acreage will be needed. My country happens to
be as useless at growing bananas and cotton as Jamaica is at growing wheat
and wool. If the world decides, as it crazily started to do in the early 2000s,
that it wants to grow its motor fuel in fields rather than extract it from oil
wells, then again the acreage under the plough will have to balloon. And
good night rainforests. But as long as some sanity prevails, then yes, my
grandchildren can both eat well and visit larger and wilder nature reserves

than I can. It is a vision I am happy to strive for. Intensive yields are the
way to get there.
When human beings were all still hunter-gatherers, each needed about a
thousand hectares of land to support him or her. Now – thanks to farming,
genetics, oil, machinery and trade – each needs little more than a thousand
square metres, a tenth of a hectare. (Whether the oil will last long enough is
a different subject and one I tackle later in the book: briefly my answer is
that substitutes will be adopted if the price rises high enough.) That is
possible only because each square metre is encouraged to grow whatever it
is good at growing and global trade distributes the result to ensure that
everybody gets a bit of everything. Once again, the theme of specialised
production/diversified consumption turns out to be the key to prosperity.
Organic’s wrong call
Politicians can make my prediction fail. Should the world decide to go
organic – that is, should farming get its nitrogen from plants and fish rather
than direct from the air using factories and fossil fuels – then many of the
nine billion will starve and all rainforests will be cut down. Yes, I wrote
‘all’. Organic farming is low-yield, whether you like it or not. The reason
for this is simple chemistry. Since organic farming eschews all synthetic
fertiliser, it exhausts the mineral nutrients in the soil – especially
phosphorus and potassium, but eventually also sulphur, calcium and
manganese. It gets round this problem by adding crushed rock or squashed
fish to the soil. These have to be mined or netted. Its main problem, though,
is nitrogen deficiency, which it can reverse by growing legumes (clover,
alfalfa or beans), which fix nitrogen from the air, and either ploughing them
into the soil or feeding them to cattle whose manure is then ploughed into
the soil. With such help a particular organic plot can match non-organic
yields, but only by using extra land elsewhere to grow the legumes and feed
the cattle, effectively doubling the area under the plough. Conventional
farming, by contrast, gets its nitrogen from what are in effect point sources
– factories, which fix it from the air.
Organic farmers also aspire to rely less on fossil fuels, but unless
organic food is to be expensive, scarce, dirty and decaying, then it has to be
intensively produced, and that means using fuel – in practice, a pound of
organic lettuce, grown without synthetic fertilisers or pesticides in
California, and containing eighty calories, requires 4,600 fossil-fuel calories
to get it to a customer’s plate in a city restaurant: planting, weeding,

harvesting, refrigerating, washing, processing and transporting all use fossil
fuel. A conventional lettuce requires about 4,800 calories. The difference is
trivial.
Yet when a technology came along that promised to make organic
farming both competitive and efficient, the organic movement promptly
rejected it. That technology was genetic modification, which was first
invented in the mid-1980s as a kinder, gentler alternative to ‘mutation
breeding’ using gamma rays and carcinogenic chemicals. Did you know
that this was the way many crops were produced over the last half-century?
That much pasta comes from an irradiated variety of durum wheat? That
most Asian pears are grown on irradiated grafts? Or that Golden Promise, a
variety of barley especially popular with organic brewers, was first created
in an atomic reactor in Britain in the 1950s by massive mutation of its genes
followed by selection? By the 1980s, scientists had reached the point where,
instead of this random scrambling of the genes of a target plant with
unknown result and lots of collateral genetic damage, they could take a
known gene, with known function, and inject it into the genome of a plant,
where it would do its known job. That gene might come from a different
species, so achieving the horizontal transfer of traits between species that
happens relatively rarely among plants in nature (though it is commonplace among microbes).
For example, many organic farmers happily adopted an insect-killing
bacterium called Bacillus thuringiensis or bt, first commercialised in France
as Sporeine in the 1930s, which they sprayed on crops to control pests. As a
‘biological’ not a chemical spray, it met their tests. By the 1980s lots of
different variants of bt had been developed for different insects. All were
regarded as organic. But then genetic engineers took the bt toxin and
incorporated it into the cotton plant to produce bt-cotton, one of the first
genetically modified crops. This had two huge advantages: it killed
bollworms living inside the plant where sprays could not reach them easily;
and it did not kill innocent insects that were not eating the cotton plant. Yet,
though this was an officially organic product, biologically integrated into
the plant, and obviously better for the environment, organic high priests
rejected the technology. Bt cotton went on to transform the cotton industry
and has now replaced more than a third of the entire cotton crop. Indian
farmers, denied the technology by their government, rioted to demand it
after seeing bootlegged crops growing in their neighbours’ fields. Now most

Indian cotton is bt, and the result has been a near-doubling of yield and a
halving of insecticide use – win/win. In every study of bt cotton crops
across the world from China to Arizona, the use of insecticides is down by
as much as 80 per cent and the bees, butterflies and birds are back in
abundance. Economically and ecologically, good news all round. Yet
merely to board a passing bandwagon of protest publicity, the leaders of the
organic movement locked themselves out of a new technology that has
delivered huge reductions in the use of synthetic pesticides. One estimate
puts the amount of pesticide not used because of genetic modification at
over 200 million kilograms of active ingredients and climbing.
This is just one example of how the organic movement’s insistence on
freezing agricultural technology at a midtwentieth-century moment means it
misses out on environmental benefits brought by later inventions. ‘I’m so
tired of people who wouldn’t visit a doctor who used a stethoscope instead
of an MRI demanding that farmers like me use 1930s technology to raise
food,’ writes the Missouri farmer Blake Hurst. Organic farmers are happy to
spray copper sulphate or nicotine sulphate, but forbid themselves the use of
synthetic pyrethroids, which swiftly kill insects but have very low toxicity
for mammals and do not persist in the environment causing collateral
damage to non-pests. They forbid themselves herbicides, which means they
have to weed by hand, using poorly paid labour, or by tilling and flamethrowing, which can devastate soil fauna, accelerate soil erosion and release
greenhouse gases. They forbid themselves fertiliser made from air, but
allow themselves fertiliser made from trawled fish.
In her classic book Silent Spring, Rachel Carson called upon scientists
to turn their backs on chemical pesticides and seek ‘biological solutions’ to
pest control instead. They have done so, and the organic movement has
rejected them.
The many ways of modifying genes
Of course, almost by definition, all crop plants are ‘genetically
modified’. They are monstrous mutants capable of yielding unnaturally
large, free-threshing seeds or heavy, sweet fruit and dependent on human
intervention to survive. Carrots are orange thanks only to the selection of a
mutant first discovered perhaps as late as the sixteenth century in Holland.
Bananas are sterile and incapable of setting seed. Wheat has three whole
diploid (double) genomes in each of its cells, descended from three different
wild grasses, and simply cannot survive as a wild plant – you never

encounter wheat weeds. Rice, maize and wheat all share genetic mutations
that alter the development of the plant to enlarge seeds, prevent shattering,
and allow free threshing from chaff. These mutations were selected, albeit
inadvertently, by the first farmers sowing and reaping them.
But modern genetic modification, using single genes, was a technology
that came worryingly close to being stifled at birth by irrational fears
fanned by pressure groups. First they said the food might be unsafe. A
trillion GM meals later, with not a single case of human illness caused by
GM food, that argument has gone. Then they argued that it was unnatural
for genes to cross the species barrier. Yet wheat, the biggest crop of all, is an
unnatural ‘polyploid’ merger of three wild plant species and horizontal gene
transfer is showing up in lots of plants, such as Amborella, a primitive
flowering plant, which proves to have DNA sequences borrowed from
mosses and algae. (DNA has even been caught jumping naturally from
snakes to gerbils with the help of a virus.) Then they said GM crops were
produced and sold for profit, not to help farmers. So are tractors. Then they
tried the bizarre argument that herbicide-resistant crops might cross-breed
with wild plants and result in a ‘super’ weed that was impossible to kill –
with that herbicide. This from people who were against herbicides anyway,
so what could be more attractive to them than rendering the herbicide
useless?
By 2008, less than twenty-five years after they were first invented, fully
10 per cent of all arable land, thirty million acres, was growing genetically
modified crops: one of the most rapid and successful adoptions of a new
technology in the history of farming. Only in parts of Europe and Africa
were these crops denied to farmers and consumers by the pressure of
militant environmentalists, with what Stewart Brand calls their ‘customary
indifference to starvation’. African governments, after intense lobbying by
Western campaigners, have been persuaded to tie genetically modified food
in red tape, which prevents them being grown commercially in all but three
countries (South Africa, Burkina Faso and Egypt). In one notorious case
Zambia in 2002 even turned down food aid in the middle of a famine after
being persuaded by a campaign by groups, including Greenpeace
International and Friends of the Earth, that because it was genetically
modified it could be dangerous. A pressure group even told a Zambian
delegation that GM crops might cause retroviral infections. Robert
Paarlberg writes that, ‘Europeans are imposing the richest of tastes on the

poorest of people.’ Ingo Potrykus, developer of golden rice, thinks that
‘blanket opposition to all GM foods is a luxury that only pampered
Westerners can afford.’ Or as the Kenyan scientist Florence Wambugu puts
it, ‘You people in the developed world are certainly free to debate the merits
of genetically modified foods, but can we eat first?’
Yet it is Africa that could stand to benefit the most from GM crops
precisely because so many of its farmers are smallholders with little access
to chemical pesticides. In Uganda, where a fungal disease called Black
Sigatoka threatens the staple banana crop, and resistant strains with rice
genes are still years from market because of regulations, the experimental
GM plants have to be guarded by padlocked fences, not to protect them
from tram pling titled protesters, but to protect them from eager users. Per
capita food production in Africa has fallen 20 per cent in thirty-five years;
some 15 per cent of the African maize crop is lost to stem-borer moth larvae
and at least as much again is lost in storage to beetles: bt maize is resistant
to both pests. Nor is corporate ownership a problem: Western companies
and foundations are keen to give such crops royalty-free to African farmers,
through organisations like the African Agricultural Technology Foundation.
There are glimmers of hope. Field trials begin in Kenya in 2010 of droughtresistant and insect-resistant maize, though years of safety testing will
follow.
Ironically, the main result globally of the campaign against GM crops
was to delay the retreat of chemical pesticides and ensure that only
commodity crops could afford to find their way through the regulatory
thicket to market, which effectively meant that the crops were denied to
small farmers and charities. Genetic engineering remained for longer than it
would have done the preserve of large corporations able to afford the
regulations imposed by the pressure of the environmentalists. Yet the
environmental benefits of GM crops are already immense – pesticide use is
falling fast wherever GM cotton is grown and no-till cultivation is enriching
soil wherever herbicide-tolerant soybeans are grown. But the benefits will
not stop there. Plants that are resistant to drought, salt and toxic aluminium
are on the way. Lysine-enriched soybeans may soon be feeding salmon in
fish farms, so that wild stocks of other fish do not have to be plundered to
make feed. By the time you read this, plants may already be on the market
that absorb nitrogen more efficiently, so that higher yields can be achieved
with less than half as much fertiliser, saving aquatic habitats from eutrophic

runoff, saving the atmosphere from a greenhouse gas (nitrous oxide) that is
300 times as potent as carbon dioxide and cutting the amount of fossil fuel
used to make fertiliser – not to mention saving farmers’ costs. Some of this
would be possible without gene transfer, but it is a lot quicker and safer
with it. Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth still oppose it all.
There is one respect in which the environmental critique of modern
agriculture has force. In the pursuit of quantity, science may have sacrificed
nutritional quality of food. Indeed, the twentieth-century drive to provide a
growing population with an ever faster-growing supply of calories has
succeeded so magnificently that the diseases caused by too much bland
food are rampant: obesity, heart disease, diabetes, and perhaps depression.
For example, modern plant oils and plentiful red meat make for a diet low
in omega-3 fatty acids, which may contribute to heart disease; modern
wheat flour is rich in amylopectin starch, which may contribute to insulin
resistance and hence diabetes; and maize is especially low in the amino acid
tryptophan, a precursor of serotonin, the ‘feel-good’ neurotransmitter.
Consumers will rightly be looking to the next generation of plant varieties
to redress these deficiencies. They could do so by eating more fish, fruit and
vegetables. But not only would this be a land-hungry option, it would suit
the wealthy more than the poor, so it would exacerbate health inequalities.
Arguing against vitamin-enriched rice, the Indian activist Vandana Shiva,
echoing Marie-Antoinette, recommended that Indians should eat more
meat, spinach and mangoes rather than relying on golden rice.
Instead, genetic modification provides an obvious solution: to insert
healthy nutritional traits into high-yielding varieties: tryptophan into maize
to fight depression, calcium transporter genes into carrots to help fight
osteoporosis in people who cannot drink milk, or vitamins and minerals into
sorghum and cassava for those who depend on them as staples. By the time
this book is published soybeans with omega-3 fatty acids developed in
South Dakota should be on the way to supermarkets in America. They
promise to lower the risk of heart attacks and perhaps help the mental health
of those who cook with their oil – and at the same time they can reduce the
pressure on wild fish stocks from which fish oils are derived.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Five
The triumph of cities: trade after 5,000
years ago
Imports are Christmas morning; exports are January’s MasterCard bill.
P.J. O’ROURKE
On The Wealth of Nations

A modern combine harvester, driven by a single man, can reap enough
wheat in a single day to make half a million loaves. Little wonder that as I
write these words (around the end of 2008), for the very first time the
majority of the world’s population lives in cities – up from just 15 per cent
in 1900. The mechanisation of agriculture has enabled, and been enabled
by, a flood of people leaving the land to seek their fortune in the city, all
free to make for each other things other than food.
Though some came to town with hope and ambition, and some with
desperation and fear, almost all were drawn by the same aim: to take part in
trade. Cities exist for trade. They are places where people come to divide
their labour, to specialise and exchange. They grow when trade expands –
Hong Kong’s population grew by thirty times in the twentieth century – and
shrink when trade dries up. Rome declined from a million inhabitants in
100 BC to less than 20,000 in the early Middle Ages. Since people have

generally done more dying than procreating when in cities, big cities have
always depended on rural immigrants to sustain their numbers.
Just as agriculture appeared in six or seven parts of the world
simultaneously, suggesting an evolutionary determinism, so the same is
true, a few thousand years later, of cities. Large urban settlements, with
communal buildings, monuments and shared infrastructure, start popping
up after seven thousand years ago in several fertile river valleys. The oldest
cities were in southern Mesopotamia, in what is now Iraq. Their emergence
signified that production was becoming more specialised, consumption
more diversified.
It seems that farmers on the rich alluvial soils of the southern Euphrates
valley began to grow sufficiently prosperous, in a period of high rainfall, to
exchange their grain and woven wool for timber and precious stones from
the people in the hills to the north. From about 7,500 years ago, a distinctive
‘Ubaid’ style of pottery, clay sickles and house design spread all across the
Near East, reaching up into the mountains of Iran, across to the
Mediterranean and along the shores of the Arabian peninsula, where
fishermen sold fish to Ubaid merchants in exchange for grain and nets. This
was a trading diaspora, not an empire: the domestic habits of the distant
people who adopted Ubaid style remained distinctive, showing that they
were not colonists from Mesopotamia, but locals aping the Ubaid habits.
The ur-city
So Ubaid Mesopotamia, by exporting grain and cloth, drew its
neighbours into exporting timber and later metal. The Ubaids must have
become rich enough to support chiefs and priests. Inevitably, these had
ideas above their stations, for when, after 6,000 years ago, the Ubaid culture
disappeared, it was replaced by something that looks much more like an
empire – the ‘Uruk expansion’. Uruk was a large city, probably the first the
world had ever seen, housing more than 50,000 people within its six miles
of wall (King Gilgamesh may have built the wall – having plundered his
trading partners’ lands and earned their enmity). All the signs are that Uruk,
its agriculture made prosperous by sophisticated irrigation canals, had in the
words of the archaeologist Gil Stein ‘developed centralized institutions to
mobilize surplus labour and goods from the hinterlands in a meticulously
administered political economy’. To put it more succinctly, a class of
middlemen, of trade intermediaries, had emerged for the first time. These
were people who lived not by production, nor by plunder and tribute, but by

deals alone. Like traders ever since, they gathered as tightly together as
possible to maximise information flow and minimise costs. Trade with the
hills continued, but increasingly it came to look like tribute as Uruk
merchants’ dwellings, complete with distinctive central halls, niched-façade
temples and peculiar forms of pottery and stone tool, were plonked amid the
rural settlements of trading partners in the hills. A cooperative trade
network seems to have turned into something much more like colonialism.
Tax and even slavery soon began to rear their ugly heads. Thus was set the
pattern that would endure for the next 6,000 years – merchants make
wealth; chiefs nationalise it.
The story of Ubaid and Uruk is familiar and modern. You can imagine
the Ubaid merchants displaying their cloths and pots and groaning sacks of
grain to the wide-eyed peasants of the hills. You can see the Uruk nabobs in
their privileged enclaves, surrounded by subservient natives, like the British
in India or Chinese in Singapore. It is with a start that you recall this is still
essentially the Stone Age. Only towards the end of the Ubaid period is
copper being smelted, and well into the Uruk times, sickles and knives are
still made of stone or clay. Late in the Uruk period clay tablets appear with
uniform marks on them meticulously accounting for merchants’ stocks and
profits. Those dull records, dug into the surfaces of clay tablets, are the
ancestors of writing – accountancy was its first application. The message
those tablets tell is that the market came long before the other
appurtenances of civilisation. Exchange and trade were well established
traditions before the first city, and record keeping may have played a crucial
role in allowing cities to emerge full of strangers who could trust each other
in transactions. It was the habit of exchange that enabled specialists to
appear in Uruk, swelling the city with artisans and craftsmen who never
went near the fields. For instance, there seems to have been almost mass
production of bevelled-rim bowls that appear to have been disposable.
Handed out at communal events like temple constructions, they were
undoubtedly made in something like a factory, by workers paid to make
them, not by moonlighting farmers.
Uruk did not last, because the climate dried out and the population
collapsed, aided no doubt by soil erosion, salination, imperial overspending
and uppity barbarians. But Uruk was followed by an endless series of
empires on the same ground: Sumerian, Akkadian, Assyrian, Babylonian,
neo-Assyrian, Persian, Hellenistic, Roman (briefly, under Trajan), Parthian,

Abbasid, Mongol, Timurid, Ottoman, British, Saddamite, Bushite … Each
empire was the product of trading wealth and was itself the eventual cause
of that wealth’s destruction. Merchants and craftsmen make prosperity;
chiefs, priests and thieves fritter it away.
Cotton and fish
The urban revolution on the banks of the Euphrates was repeated on the
banks of the Nile, Indus and Yellow rivers. Ancient Egypt could grow
nearly two tonnes of wheat per hectare on land irrigated and replenished
with nutrients by the annual flood of the Nile, providing an ample surplus
of food, if peasants could be persuaded to produce one, to exchange for
other goods, not excluding pyramids. Even more than in Mesopotamia,
Egypt followed the path of irrigation, centralisation, monument building
and eventual stagnation. Dependent on the flow of the Nile for their crops,
the peasants became subject to whoever owned the boats and sluice gates,
and he took most of the surplus. Unlike hunter-gatherers or herders, farmers
faced with taxes have to stay put and pay, especially if surrounded by desert
and dependent on irrigation ditches. So once Menes had unified the upper
and lower valley and made himself the first pharaoh, the productive
Egyptian economy found itself nationalised, monopolised, bureaucratised
and eventually stifled by – in the words of two modern historians – the
‘leaden authoritarianism’ of its rulers.
On the banks of the Indus, an urban civilisation arose without spawning
an emperor, at least not one whose name is known. Harappa and MohenjoDaro are known for the precisely standardised size of their bricks and their
neat sanitary arrangements. The port of Lothal was distinguished by what
appears to be a dock and tidal lock, and a factory for making beads. There is
less sign of palaces or temples, let alone pyramids, but the anthropologist
Gordon Childe’s preliminary conclusion that the whole thing appears to
have been rather egalitarian and peaceful turned out to be largely wishful
thinking. Somebody was imposing a neat grid of streets and building a hefty
‘citadel’ of pillars, towers and walls. Smells like a monarch to me. As Sir
Mortimer Wheeler wrote in his autobiography: ‘I sat down and wrote to
Gordon Childe in London that the bourgeois complacency of the Indus
civilisation had dissolved into dust and that, instead, a thoroughly
militaristic imperialism had raised its ugly head amongst the ruins.’
The Indus people were good at transport: bullock carts may have been
used here for the first time and plank-built sailing boats. Transport allowed

extensive trade. Some of the very earliest settlements in the region, such as
Mehrgarh in Baluchistan, were importing lapis lazuli from north of the
Hindu Kush mountains as early as 6,000 years ago. By the time of Harappa,
copper came from Rajasthan, cotton from Gujarat, and lumber from the
mountains. Even more remarkably, the archaeologist Shereen Ratnagar
concluded that boats sent exports west to Mesopotamia, stopping at ports
along the coast of what is now Iran – implying a seamanship that is
surprising at such an early date. There can be little doubt that the great
wealth of the Indus cities was generated by trade.
The Harappan people ate a lot of fish and grew a lot of cotton, things
they had in common with citizens of another valley on the far side of the
world. Caral in the desert of the Supe Valley in Peru was a large town with
monuments, warehouses, temples and plazas. Discovered in the 1990s by
Ruth Shady, it lies in a desert crossed by a river valley and was only the
biggest of many towns in the area, some of which date from more than
5,000 years ago – the so-called Norte Chico civilisation. For archaeologists
there are three baffling features of the ancient Peruvian towns. First, their
people had no cereals in their diet. Maize was yet to be invented, and
although there were several domesticated squashes and other foods, there
was nothing so easily accumulated and stored as the grain which was the
staple of Mesopotamia. The idea that cities are made possible by largescale
hoarding of grain thus takes a blow. Second, the Norte Chico towns have
yielded no pottery of any kind: they were ‘preceramic’. This surely made
both the storage and the cooking of food more difficult, again undermining
one of the favourite tenets of archaeologists trying to explain how cities
began. And third, there is no evidence of warfare or defensive works. So the
conventional wisdom that cereal stores made cities possible, that ceramic
containers made them practical and that warfare made them necessary takes
quite a knock from Norte Chico.
So what was driving people together into these South American towns?
The answer, in a word, is trade. The settlements on the coast harvested fish
in huge quantities, mainly anchovies and sardines, but also clams and
mussels. For this they needed nets. The settlements in the interior grew
huge quantities of cotton in fields irrigated with Andean snowmelt. They
fashioned the cotton into nets, which they bartered for fish. There was not
just mutual dependence, but mutual gain. A fisherman need only catch some
more fish rather than spend time making his own nets; a cotton grower need

only grow some more cotton rather than spend time fishing. Specialisation
raised the standard of living for both. Caral lay at the centre of a large web
of trade, reaching high into the Andes, over into the rainforest and far along
the coast.
The flag follows trade
To argue, therefore, that emperors or agricultural surpluses made the
urban revolution is to get it backwards. Intensification of trade came first.
Agricultural surpluses were summoned forth by trade, which offered
farmers a way of turning their produce into valuable goods from elsewhere.
Emperors, with their ziggurats and pyramids, were often made possible by
trade. Throughout history, empires start as trade areas before they become
the playthings of military plunderers from within or without. The urban
revolution was an extension of the division of labour.
When a usurper named Sargon founded the Akkadian dynasty by
conquest in the middle of the third millennium BC, he inherited the
prosperity of the Syrian city of Ebla and its trading partners: a world in
which grain, leather, textiles, silver and copper flowed easily between the
Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf. Managing to resist the temptation of
bureaucratic authoritarianism rather more than their Chinese and Egyptian
contemporaries, the Akkadians allowed this trade to expand until it made
fruitful contact with Lothal near the mouth of the Indus and bought the
cotton and lapis lazuli of India with the wheat and bronze of Mesopotamia.
A great free trade area stretched from the Nile to the Indus. An Akkadian
merchant could handle Anatolian silver from a thousand miles to the west
and Rajasthani copper from a thousand miles to the east. And that meant
that he could raise the standard of living of the consumers he supplied,
whether they were farmers or priests, by connecting them with distant
producers of diverse goods.
Who was such a merchant? The economist Karl Polanyi argued in the
1950s that the concept of the market cannot be applied to any time before
the fourth century BC, that until then instead of supply, demand and price,
there was reciprocal exchange, state-sponsored redistribution of goods and
top-down treaty trade in which agents were sent abroad to acquire things on
behalf of the palace. Trade was administered, not spontaneous. But
Polanyi’s thesis or those of his fellow ‘substantivists’ has not stood the test
of time well. It now seems that the state did not so much sponsor trade, as
capture it. The more that comes to light about ancient trade, the more

bottom-up it looks. While it is true that some Akkadian merchants may well
have eventually seen themselves partly as civil servants sent abroad to
acquire goods for their rulers, even they earned a living by trading for a
profit themselves. Polanyi depicted a reflection of his own planningobsessed times. The dirigiste mentality that dominated the second half of
the twentieth century was always asking who is in charge, looking for who
decided on a policy of trade. That is not how the world works. Trade
emerged from the interactions of individuals. It evolved. Nobody was in
charge.
So the typical Akkadian tamkarum or merchant was a businessman of
the most surprisingly modern kind, who depended for his livelihood on
freely exchanging goods for profit. Though there was no minted coinage,
from the end of the fourth millennium BC there were silver-based prices,
which fluctuated freely. The temple would act as a sort of bank, lending
money at interest – and the Uruk word for high priest is the same as the
word for accountant. By 2000 BC, under the Assyrian empire, merchants
from Ashur operated in ‘karum’ enclaves in the independent states of
Anatolia as thoroughly modern entrepreneurs with ‘head offices, foreign
branch-plants, corporate hierarchies, extra-territorial business law, and even
a bit of foreign direct investment and value-added activity’. They bought
gold, silver and copper in exchange for tin, goat-hair felt, woven textiles
and perfumes shipped in on caravans of up to 300 donkeys. The profit
margin was 100 per cent on tin and 200 per cent on textiles, but it had to be
because the transport was unreliable and the risk of theft high. One such
merchant, Pusu-Ken, operating in a tax-free zone in the Anatolian city of
Kanesh, was to be found in 1900 BC lobbying the king, paying fines for
evading textile import regulations imposed by the assembly, and sharing
profits with his investor-partners, sounding in other words every inch the
modern chief executive. Such merchants ‘did not devote themselves to
trading in copper and wool because Assyria needed them, but because that
trade was a means of obtaining more gold and silver’. Profit ruled.
In these Bronze Age empires, commerce was the cause, not the
symptom of prosperity. None the less, a free trade area lends itself easily to
imperial domination. Soon, through tax, regulation and monopoly, the
wealth generated by trade was being diverted into the luxury of the few and
the oppression of the many. By 1500 BC you could argue that the richest
parts of the world had sunk into the stagnation of palace socialism as the

activities of merchants were progressively nationalised. Egyptian, Minoan,
Babylonian and Shang dictators ruled over societies of rigid dirigisme,
extravagant bureaucracy and feeble individual rights, stifling technological
innovation, crowding out social innovation and punishing creativity. A
Bronze Age empire stagnated for much the same reason that a nationalised
industry stagnates: monopoly rewards caution and discourages experiment,
the income is gradually captured by the interests of the producers at the
expense of the interests of the consumers, and so on. The list of innovations
achieved by the pharaohs is as thin as the list of innovations achieved by
British Rail or the US Postal Service.
The maritime revolution
Still, you cannot keep a good idea down. Around 1200 BC, the power of
both Egypt and Assyria waned, the Minoans fell, the Myceneans
fragmented and the Hittites came and went. It was a dark age for empires,
and like the later Dark Ages that followed the fall of Rome, this political
fragmentation, perhaps aided by a population decline, caused a burst of
invention as demand rose among free people. The Philistines invented iron;
the Canaanites the alphabet; and their coastal cousins, the Phoenicians,
glass.
It was a different Phoenician invention, the bireme galley, that truly
created the classical world. The people of Byblos, Tyre and Sidon lived
close to great forests of magnificent cedars and cypresses, the hard,
aromatic planks of which made especially durable boats. With decks of pine
from Cyprus and oars of oak from Jordan (says Ezekiel), the Phoenician
boat was greater than the sum of its far-flung parts. There was of course
nothing new about the boat as a concept: boats had been plying the Nile,
Euphrates, Indus and Yellow rivers for centuries, and the coasts of Asia and
the Mediterranean for almost as long. But, realising their comparative
advantage in timber, the Phoenicians built ships of greater capacity, finer
trim and more seaworthy mortise joints than any people before them.
Eventually they were able to build ships so large that they needed two
banks of oars to propel them. Oars, though, were used only for
manoeuvring close to shore. These were sailing ships and the larger they
were, the more they could amplify the work of their human operators.
Using the power of the wind, a comparatively small crew could transport a
heavy cargo hundreds of miles further, and much more cheaply, than a
caravan of donkeys could ever hope to manage.

Suddenly, for the first time, a largescale seaborne division of labour
became a possibility: wheat from Egypt could feed the Hittites in Anatolia;
wool from Anatolia could clothe the Egyptians on the Nile; olive oil from
Crete could enrich the diets of Assyrians in Mesopotamia. The ships of
what is now Lebanon could trade for profit and scour the seas for tempting
products. Grain, wine, honey, oil, resin, spices, ivory, ebony, leather, wool,
cloth, tin, lead, iron, silver, horses, slaves, or a purple dye made from a
gland in the body of the murex shellfish – there was little the Phoenicians
could not find for an ambitious pharaoh with a harem to pamper, or a
prosperous Assyrian farmer with a fiancée to impress.
All around the Mediterranean, markets grew into towns and ports into
cities. Travelling farther afield, the Phoenicians’ innovations multiplied:
better keels, sails, navigational knowledge, accounting systems, logkeeping. Trade, once more, was the flywheel of the innovation machine. To
the south, steeped in their religious obsessions, the Israelite pastoralists
looked on in puritan horror at the explosion of wealth thus created. Isaiah
cheerily anticipates Yahweh’s destruction of Tyre, the ‘market of the
nations’, to humble her pride. Ezekiel vents his Schadenfreude when Tyre is
attacked: ‘When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many
peoples; Thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with thy merchandise and
thy riches … Thou art become a terror; and thou shalt never be any more.’
To the west, the warring island farmers of the Aegean looked down in
warrior contempt on the bourgeois traders who were suddenly appearing in
their midst. Throughout both the Iliad and the Odyssey, ‘Homer’ displays a
relentlessly negative attitude to Phoenician traders and hints that they must
be pirates. Greek trade in the age of Homer was supposed to handle
precious reciprocal gifts between elites, not workaday goods in demand
among ordinary people. The snobbery of the elite towards trade has ancient
roots.
The effect of the Phoenicians must have been to create a burst of
specialisation all around the Mediterranean. Villages, towns and regions
would have discovered their comparative advantages in smelting metals,
manufacturing pottery, tanning hides or growing grain. Mutual dependence
and gains from trade would have emerged in unexpected places. Redressing
the natural inequality in the location of metal ores, for example, benefits
everybody. Cyprus may have lots of copper and Britain lots of tin, but put
them together and bring them to Tyre and you can make the much more

useful bronze. Tyrian traders founded Gadir, present-day Cadiz, around 750
BC not to settle the area but to trade with its inhabitants, in particular to
exploit the silver ores of the Iberian hinterland – discovered, according to
legend, when a forest fire caused rivulets of pure silver to pour from the
hillsides. In doing so they must have turned the people of the region from
largely self-sufficient peasants into producer-consumers. The Tartessian
natives controlled the mining and smelting of the silver, selling it to the
Tyrians at Gadir in exchange for oil, salt, wine and trinkets to charm the
chiefs of the tribes farther into the interior. The Tyrians then took that silver
(according to Diodorus, sometimes making silver anchors for their ships so
as to squeeze a little more on board) east into the Mediterranean,
exchanging it for staples and other luxuries.
No doubt just as the Tyrians could not believe their fortune at finding
savages happy to give them so much silver for a little Cretan olive oil, so
the Tartessians could not believe their luck at finding strange seagoing
people prepared to give them such a convenient, storable, calorie-rich
bounty for a mere metal. It is common to find that two traders both think
their counterparts are idiotically overpaying: that is the beauty of Ricardo’s
magic trick. ‘The English have no sense,’ said a Montagnais trapper to a
French missionary in seventeenth-century Canada. ‘They give us twenty
knives for this one beaver skin.’ The contempt was mutual. When HMS
Dolphin’s sailors found that a twenty-penny iron nail could buy a sexual
encounter on Tahiti in 1767, neither sailors nor Tahitian men could believe
their luck; whether the Tahitian women were as happy as their menfolk
about this bargain goes unrecorded. Twelve days later, rampant inflation
had set in and sex now cost a nine-inch marlinspike.
Traders from Gadir even worked their way south along the coast of
Africa, acquiring gold from the inhabitants by ‘silent trade’: leaving goods
on the shore and retreating. Comparative Ricardo ruled the Phoenician
world. Tyre is the prototype of the trading port, the Genoa, Amsterdam,
New York or Hong Kong of its day. The Phoenician diaspora is one of the
great untold stories of history – untold because Tyre and its books were so
utterly destroyed by thugs like Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus and Alexander, and
Carthage by the Scipios, so the story comes to us only through snippets
from snobbish and envious neighbours. But in truth, was there ever a more
admirable people than the Phoenicians? They knitted together not only the
entire Mediterranean, but bits of the Atlantic, the Red Sea and the overland

routes to Asia, yet they never had an emperor, had comparatively little time
for religion and fought no memorable battles – unless you count Cannae,
fought by a mercenary army paid by Carthage. I do not mean they were
necessarily nice: they traded in slaves, sometimes resorted to war and did
deals with the piratical Philistine ‘sea peoples’ who destroyed coastal cities
around 1200 BC, but the Phoenicians seem to have managed to resist the
temptations of turning into thieves, priests and chiefs better than most
successful people in history. Through enterprise they discovered social
virtue.
The virtue of fragmented government
The Phoenician diaspora teaches another important lesson, first
advanced by David Hume: political fragmentation is often the friend, not
the enemy, of economic advance, because of the stop which it gives ‘both to
power and authority’. There was no need for Tyre, Sidon, Carthage and
Gadir to unite as a single political entity for them all to prosper. At most
they were a federation. The extraordinary flowering of wealth and culture
around the Aegean between 600 and 300 BC tells the same story. First the
Milesians then the Athenians and their allies grew wealthy by trading
among small, independent ‘citizen states’, not by uniting as an empire.
Having copied the Phoenicians’ ships and trading habits, Miletus, the most
successful of the Ionian Greek cities, sat ‘like a bloated spider’ at the
junction of four trade routes, east overland to Asia, north through the
Hellespont to the Black Sea, south to Egypt and west to Italy. But though it
established colonies all over the Black Sea, Miletus was not an imperial
capital: it was first among equals. The city of Sybaris, a preferred trading
partner of Miletus on a fertile plain in the toe of southern Italy, grew to
perhaps several hundred thousand people and became a byword for
opulence and refinement before it was destroyed by its enemies and buried
under the diverted river Crathis in 510 BC.
The discovery of rich silver ores at Laurion in Attica in the 480s BC
propelled the experimental democracy at Athens to the status of a regional
economic superpower, not least by allowing it to finance a navy with which
to defeat the Persians; but Athens too was primus inter pares. The Greek
world depended crucially on finding gains from trade: grain from the
Crimea, saffron from Libya and metals from Sicily swapped for olive oil
from the Aegean itself. Modern philosophers who aspire to rise above the
sordid economic reality of the world would do well to recall that this trade

made possible the cross-fertilisation of ideas that led to great discoveries.
Pythagoras probably got his theorem from a student of Thales the Milesian
who learnt geometry on trade excursions to Egypt. We would never have
heard of Pericles, Socrates or Aeschylus had there not been tens of
thousands of slaves toiling underground at Laurion and tens of thousands of
customers for Athenian goods all over the Mediterranean.
Yet as soon as Greece was unified into an empire by a thug – Philip of
Macedon in 338 BC – it lost its edge. Had his son Alexander’s empire lasted,
it would undoubtedly have become as commercially and intellectually inert
as its Persian predecessor. But because the empire fragmented on
Alexander’s death, parts of it were reborn as independent city states that
lived off trade, most notably Alexandria in Egypt, which reached a third of
a million people living in a state of famous wealth under the comparatively
benign rule of the book-collecting Ptolemy III. That wealth was based on
new roads to bring cash crops of cotton, wine, grain and papyrus within
reach of the river Nile for export.
This is not to say that democratic city states are the only places where
economic progress can occur, but it is to discern a pattern. Plainly, there is
something beneficial to the growth of the division of labour when
governments are limited (though not so weak that there is widespread
piracy), republican or fragmented. The chief reason is surely that strong
governments are, by definition, monopolies and monopolies always grow
complacent, stagnant and self-serving. Monarchs love monopolies because
where they cannot keep them to themselves, they can sell them, grant them
to favourites and tax them. They also fall for the perpetual fallacy that they
can make business work more efficiently if they plan it rather than allow
and encourage it to evolve. The scientist and historian Terence Kealey
points out that entrepreneurs are rational and if they find that wealth can
more easily be stolen than created, then they will steal it: ‘Humanity’s great
battle over the last 10,000 years has been the battle against monopoly.’
This is not disproved by the success of two empires from around the
beginning of the Christian era: both Rome and India realised the benefits of
economic unification before they managed to endure the disasters of
political unification. The Mauryan empire in India seems to have harvested
the prosperity of the Ganges valley to combine an imperial monarchy with
expanding trade. It was ruled at its zenith in 250 BC by Asoka, a warrior
who turned into a Buddhist pacifist once he had won (funny, that) and was

as economically benign a head of state as you could wish. He built roads
and waterways to encourage the movement of goods, established a common
currency and opened maritime trade routes with China, south-east Asia and
the Middle East, sparking an export-led boom in which cotton and silk
textiles played a prominent part. Trade was carried on almost entirely by
private firms (sreni) of a recognisably corporate kind; taxation, though
extensive, was fairly administered. There were remarkable scientific
advances, not least the invention of zero and the decimal system and the
accurate calculation of pi. Asoka’s empire disintegrated before it had
become totalitarian, and its legacy was impressive: for the next few
centuries the Indian subcontinent was both the most populous and the most
prosperous part of the world, with a third of the world’s people and a third
of the world’s GDP. It was without question the economic superpower of
the day, dwarfing both China and Rome, and its capital city Pataliputra was
the largest city in the world, famous for its gardens, luxuries and markets.
Only later, under the Guptas, did the caste system ossify Indian commerce.
From Ganges to Tiber
Asoka was a contemporary of Hannibal and Scipio, which brings me to
Rome. Rome’s particular speciality, from its very first days until the end of
its empire, was simply to plunder its provinces to pay for bribes, luxuries,
triumphs and soldiers’ pensions nearer to home. There were four
respectable ways for a prominent Roman to gain wealth: landowning, booty
from war, money lending and bribery. Cicero pocketed over two million
sesterces (three times the sum he had previously quoted to illustrate
‘luxury’) from his governorship of Cilicia in 51 and 50 BC – and he had a
reputation as an especially honest governor.
Yet there is no doubt that Rome’s hegemony was built on trade. Rome
was the final unification of Greece’s and Carthage’s trade zones, with a
smattering of belligerent Etruscans and Latins in charge. ‘The history of
antiquity resounds with the sanguinary achievements of Aryan warrior
elites,’ wrote Thomas Carney, ‘but it was the despised Levantines,
Arameans, Syrians and Greeklings who constituted the economic heroes of
antiquity.’ The populous and prosperous cities of southern Italy, Sicily and
points east that were the core of Rome’s world were Greek-speaking; they
did the hard work of keeping people rich while legionaries and consuls
strutted their triumphs. The fact that standard histories of Rome barely
mention the markets, merchants, ships and family firms that sustained the

empire, preferring instead to bang on about battles, does not mean they did
not exist. Ostia was a trading city as surely as Hong Kong is today, with ‘a
vast piazza housing the head offices of some five dozen companies’. Much
of the Campanian countryside was devoted to slave-manned plantations
growing wine and oil for export.
Moreover, Rome’s continuing prosperity once the republic became an
empire may be down at least partly to the ‘discovery’ of India. Following
Augustus’s absorption of Egypt, the Romans inherited the Egyptians’ trade
with the East, and soon the Red Sea was alive with massive Roman cargo
ships carrying tin, lead, silver, glass and wine – the latter soon becoming an
exciting novelty in India. Thanks to the discovery of the monsoon, which
reliably blew ships eastward in summer and back westward in winter, the
journey across the Arabian Sea was cut from years to months. At last
Rome’s ships made direct contact with the world’s economic superpower. In
the first century, the anonymous author of The Periplus of the Erythrean
Sea described the navigation and trade of the Indian Ocean; Strabo wrote
that ‘now great fleets are sent as far as India’; and the emperor Tiberius
complained of Indian luxuries draining the empire of its wealth. Peacocks
from India became a favourite possession of Roman plutocrats. Indian ports
like Barigaza (modern Bharuch in Gujarat) seem to have blossomed
through exporting cotton cloth and other manufactures to the West. Soon,
even within India, there were enclaves of Roman traders, whose hoards of
amphorae and coins still sometimes come to light. Arikamedu, for example,
on the east coast near modern Pondicherry, was exporting to China glass
imported from Roman Syria (glass blowing was a new Roman invention
and glass was suddenly much better and cheaper throughout the empire).
Think about this from the consumer’s point of view. Nobody in China
can blow glass; nobody in Europe can reel silk. Thanks to a middleman in
India, however, the European can wear silk and the Chinese can use glass.
The European may scoff at the ridiculous legend that this lovely cloth is
made from the cocoons of caterpillars; and the Chinese may guffaw at the
laughable fable that this transparent ceramic is made from sand. But both of
them are better off and so is the Indian middleman. All three have acquired
the labour of others. In Robert Wright’s terms, this is a non-zero transaction.
The collective brain has expanded across the entire Indian Ocean and lifted
the standard of living at both ends.
Ships of the desert

But the plundering, the lack of invention, the barbarians and above all
Diocletian’s red tape did for Rome in the end. As the empire disintegrated
under this bureaucratic burden, at least in the west, money lending at
interest stopped and coins ceased to circulate so freely. In the Dark Ages
that followed, because free trade became impossible, cities shrank, markets
atrophied, merchants disappeared, literacy declined and – crudely speaking
– once Goth, Hun and Vandal plundering had run its course, everybody had
to go back to being self-sufficient again. Europe de-urbanised. Even Rome
and Constantinople fell to a fraction of their former populations. Trade with
Egypt and India largely dried up, especially once the Arabs took control of
Alexandria, so that not only did oriental imports such as papyrus, spices and
silk cease to appear, but those export-oriented plantations in Campania
became the plots of subsistence farmers instead. In that sense, the decline of
the Roman empire turned consumer traders back into subsistence peasants.
The Dark Ages were a massive experiment in the back-to-the-land hippy
lifestyle (without the trust fund): you ground your own corn, sheared your
own sheep, cured your own leather and cut your own wood. Any pathetic
surplus you generated was confiscated to support a monk, or maybe you
could occasionally sell something to buy a metal tool off a part-time
blacksmith. Otherwise, subsistence replaced specialisation.
This was never, of course, absolutely true. Within each village or
monastery there was a degree of specialisation, but it was not enough to
support large towns. At least there were now, as there had not been in slavepowered Rome, incentives to improve technology. A steady trickle of
innovations began to improve productivity in northern Europe long after the
end of the western empire: the barrel, soap, spoked wheels, the overshot
water wheel, the horseshoe and the horse collar. Fitfully, Byzantium
prospered from what was left of the Mediterranean trade, but plague, war,
politics and piracy kept getting in the way. The predatory expansion of the
Carolingian Franks in the eighth century, caused by a modest revival of
regional trade in grain and manufactures, began also to stimulate trade in
spices and slaves across the Mediterranean. The Vikings, paddling their
boats down the rivers of Russia to the Black Sea and the Mediterranean,
partly revived the oriental trade (with a little pillage thrown in) – hence
their sudden prosperity and power.
But meanwhile the torch passed east. As Europe sank back into selfsufficiency, Arabia was discovering gains from trade. The sudden

emergence of an all-conquering prophet in the middle of a desert in the
seventh century is rather baffling as the tale is usually told – one of
religious inspiration and military leadership. What is missing from the story
is the economic reason that Arabs were suddenly in a position to carry all
before them. Thanks to a newly perfected technology, the camel, the people
of the Arabian Peninsula found themselves well placed to profit from trade
between East and West. The camel caravans of Arabia were the source of
the wealth that carried Muhammad and his followers to power. The camel
had been domesticated several thousand years earlier, but it was in the early
centuries AD that it was at last made into a reliable beast of burden. It could
carry far more than a donkey could, go to places a wheeled bullock cart
could not, and because it could find its own forage en route, its fuel costs
were essentially zero – like a sailing ship. For a while even the Byzantine
sailing ships of the Red Sea, waiting for the right winds and running the
gauntlet of increasingly numerous pirates, found themselves at a
competitive disadvantage compared with ‘ships of the desert’. With the
route down the Euphrates disrupted by wars between Sassanid Persia and
Byzantine Constantinople, the way was open for the people of Mecca, like
dry Phoenicians, to become rich through trade. Spices, slaves and textiles
went north and west; while metals, wine and glass went south and east.
Later, by adopting two Chinese inventions, the lateen sail and the
sternpost rudder, the Arabs extended their commercial tentacles deep into
Africa and the Far East. A dhow that sank off Belitung in Indonesia in AD
826 was carrying objects of gold, silver, lead, lacquer, bronze and 57,000
ceramics, including 40,000 Changsha bowls, 1,000 funerary urns and 800
inkpots – mass-produced exports from the kilns of Hunan for the wellheeled
consumers of Basra and Baghdad. Not coincidentally, the free-trading Arabs
exchanged ideas as well as goods and culture thrived. As they spilled out of
their homeland, Arabs brought luxury and learning to an area stretching
from Aden to Cordoba, before the inevitable imperial complacency and then
severe priestly repression set in at home. Once the priesthood tightened its
grip, books were burned, not read.
The merchant of Pisa
In due course, these Muslim gains from trade began to lift Europe out of
its self-sufficiency thanks largely to Jewish traders, who in the tenth century
abandoned the increasingly oppressive court of the Abbasids in Baghdad for
the more tolerant regime of the Egyptian Fatimids. Settling along the

southern shores of the Mediterranean and in Sicily, these Maghribi traders
developed their own rules of contract enforcement and punishment by
ostracism, quite outside the official courts. Like all the best entrepreneurs,
they thrived despite, rather than because of their government. And it was
they who began to trade with the ports of Italy. Italian peasants started to
discover that instead of dividing their land among impoverished heirs they
could send sons to town to trade with Maghribi Jews.
Northern Italy, because of a stand-off between the Holy Roman emperor
and the pope, was temporarily favoured by an absence of greedy rentseeking kings. When Arab piracy and papal plunder paused under the
influence of the first Otto, the towns of Lombardy and Tuscany found
themselves free to set up their own governments, and since towns were
there because of trade, these governments became dominated by the
interests of merchants. Amalfi, Pisa, and above all Genoa began to flourish
on the back of the Maghribi trade. It was a Pisan trader living in north
Africa, Fibonacci, who brought Indian–Arabic decimals, fractions and the
calculation of interest to Europe’s notice in his book Liber Abaci, published
in 1202. Genoa’s trade with North Africa doubled after an agreement for the
protection of merchants was reached in 1161, and by 1293 the city’s trade
exceeded the entire revenue of the king of France. Lucca acquired a strong
position in the silk trade and then in banking. Florence became wealthy
through weaving wool and silk. Milan, gateway to the Alpine passes,
flourished as a market town. And Venice, long independent in the safety of
its lagoon, gradually became the epitome of the trading state. Despite
competing and often warring with each other, republican city states, run by
merchants, not only took care not to tax or regulate trade into extinction, but
did everything they could to encourage it: in Venice, for example, the
government built and leased ships and arranged convoys.
Italy’s prosperity was felt in northern Europe, too. Venetian merchants
crossed the Brenner pass into Germany in search of silver and began to
appear at Champagne fairs in Flanders – another no man’s land between
kingdoms – bringing silk, spices, sugar and lacquer in exchange for wool.
In the early 1400s, for instance, Giovanni Arnolfini settled in Bruges as an
agent for his family silk business in Lucca, and was immortalised in the
famous painting by van Eyck. Although a small percentage of the European
population in the Middle Ages would have even encountered silk and sugar,
let alone regularly, and a tiny proportion of Europe’s GDP came from such

trade, none the less it is undeniable that Europe’s reawakening was boosted
by contact with the productivity of China, India, Arabia and Byzantium
through Italian trade. Regions that participated in Asian trade grew richer
than the regions that did not: by 1500 Italy’s GDP per capita was 60 per
cent higher than the European average. But historians often put too much
emphasis on exotic trade with the Orient. As late as 1600, European trade
with Asia, dominated because of transport costs of luxuries such as spices,
was only half the value of the inter-regional European trade in cattle alone.
Europe could trade with Asia because it traded so much with itself, not vice
versa.
Inexorably, gains from trade could be rediscovered – people could
become consumers again, which meant that they could also become
producers of cash crops to sell to each other. If I grow a bit more wheat and
you tan a bit more leather, then I can feed you and you can shoe me …
Eventually in the twelfth century towns started to grow at a rapid rate. By
1200, Europe was once again a place of markets, merchants and craftsmen,
though heavily dependent on the 70 per cent who worked the land to
produce food, fibre, fuel and housing material. In an unusually warm
climate the continent was enjoying an economic boom. Living standards
rose all across the continent of Europe, especially in the north, where the
Hanseatic merchants from Lübeck and other cities, equipped with new,
slow, but capacious sailing ships called cogs, did for the Baltic and the
North Sea what the Genoese had done for the Mediterranean. They brought
timber, fur, wax, herrings and resin west and south in exchange for cloth
and grain. Like the Maghribis they developed their own lex mercatoria,
merchant law, with sanctions against those who broke their contracts when
abroad, quite independent of national laws. Through the rivers of Russia
and the Black Sea, the merchants of Visby on Gotland even reestablished
contact with the Orient via Novgorod, bypassing the Arabs who controlled
the Strait of Gibraltar.
The Moloch state
China, meanwhile, was heading the other way, into stagnation and
poverty. China went from a state of economic and technological exuberance
in around AD 1000 to one of dense population, agrarian backwardness and
desperate poverty in 1950. According to Angus Maddison’s estimates, it
was the only region in the world with a lower GDP per capita in 1950 than
in 1000. The blame for this lies squarely with China’s governments.

Pause, first, to admire the exuberance. China’s best moments came
when it was fragmented, not united. The economy first truly prospered in
the unstable Zhou dynasty of the first millennium BC. Later, after the Han
empire fell apart in AD 220, the Three Kingdoms period saw a flourishing of
culture and technology. When the Tang empire came to an end in 907, and
the ‘Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms’ fought each other incessantly,
China experienced its most spectacular burst of invention and prosperity
yet, which the Song dynasty inherited. Even the rebirth of China in the late
twentieth century owes much to the fragmentation of government and to an
explosion of local autonomy. The burst of economic activity in China after
1978 was driven by ‘township and village enterprises’, agencies of the
government given local freedom to start companies. One of the paradoxical
features of modern China is the weakness of a central, would-be
authoritarian government.
By the late 1000s, the Chinese were masters of silk, tea, porcelain,
paper and printing, not to mention the compass and gunpowder. They used
multi-spindle cotton wheels, hydraulic trip hammers, as well as umbrellas,
matches, toothbrushes and playing cards. They made coke from coal to
smelt high-grade iron: they were making 125,000 tonnes of pig iron a year.
They used water power to spin hemp yarn. They had magnificent water
clocks. All across the Yangtze delta the Confucian dictum ‘men plough;
women weave’ was obeyed with industrious efficiency so that peasants
were working for cash as well as subsistence and were using that cash to
consume goods. Art, science and engineering flourished. Bridges and
pagodas sprang up everywhere. Woodblock printing quenched a raging
thirst for literature. The Song era had, in short, a highly elaborate division
of labour: many people were consuming what each other produced.
Then came the calamities of the 1200s and 1300s. First the Mongol
invasion, then the Black Death, then a series of natural disasters, followed
by the all too unnatural disaster of totalitarian Ming rule. The Black Death,
as I shall argue in the next chapter, spurred Europe into further gains from
trade and escaping the trap of self-sufficiency; why did it not have the same
effect in China, where it left the country half as populous as before and
therefore presumably rich in surplus land to support disposable income?
The blame rests squarely with the Ming dynasty. Western Europe only
bounced back from the Black Death because it had regions of independent
city states run by and for merchants, notably in Italy and Flanders. This

made it harder for landowners to reimpose serfdom and restrictions on
peasant movement after the plague had briefly empowered the labouring
classes. In Eastern Europe, Mamluk Egypt and Ming China, serfdom was
effectively restored.
Empires, indeed governments generally, tend to be good things at first
and bad things the longer they last. First they improve society’s ability to
flourish by providing central services and removing impediments to trade
and specialisation; thus, even Genghis Khan’s Pax Mongolica lubricated
Asia’s overland trade by exterminating brigands along the Silk Road, thus
lowering the cost of oriental goods in European parlours. But then, as Peter
Turchin argues following the lead of the medieval geographer Ibn Khaldun,
governments gradually employ more and more ambitious elites who capture
a greater and greater share of the society’s income by interfering more and
more in people’s lives as they give themselves more and more rules to
enforce, until they kill the goose that lays the golden eggs. There is a lesson
for today. Economists are quick to speak of ‘market failure’, and rightly so,
but a greater threat comes from ‘government failure’. Because it is a
monopoly, government brings inefficiency and stagnation to most things it
runs; government agencies pursue the inflation of their budgets rather than
the service of their customers; pressure groups form an unholy alliance with
agencies to extract more money from taxpayers for their members. Yet
despite all this, most clever people still call for government to run more
things and assume that if it did so, it would somehow be more perfect, more
selfless, next time.
Not only did the Ming emperors nationalise much of industry and trade,
creating state monopolies in salt, iron, tea, alcohol, foreign trade and
education, but they interfered with the everyday lives of their citizens and
censored expression to a totalitarian degree. Ming officials had high social
status and low salaries, a combination that inevitably bred corruption and
rent-seeking. Like all bureaucrats they instinctively mistrusted innovation
as a threat to their positions and spent more and more of their energy on
looking after their own interests rather than the goals they were put there to
pursue. As Etienne Balazs put it:
The reach of the Moloch-state, the omnipotence of the
bureaucracy, goes much further. There are clothing regulations, a
regulation of public and private construction (dimensions of houses);

the colours one wears, the music one hears, the festivals – all are
regulated. There are rules for birth and rules for death; the providential
State watches minutely over every step of its subjects, from cradle to
grave. It is a regime of paperwork and harassment, endless paperwork
and endless harassment.
Do not be fooled by the present tense: this is Ming, not Maoist, China
that Balazs is describing. The behaviour of Hongwu, the first of the Ming
emperors, is an object lesson in how to stifle the economy: forbid all trade
and travel without government permission; force merchants to register an
inventory of their goods once a month; order peasants to grow for their own
consumption and not for the market; and allow inflation to devalue the
paper currency 10,000-fold. His son Yong-Le added some more items to the
list: move the capital at vast expense; maintain a gigantic army; invade
Vietnam unsuccessfully; put your favourite eunuch in charge of a
nationalised fleet of monstrous ships with 27,000 passengers, five
astrologers and a giraffe aboard, then in a fit of pique at the failure of this
mission to make a profit, ban everybody else from building ships or trading
abroad.
Yet the Chinese people were bursting to trade with the world. In the
1500s Portuguese carracks took silk from Macao to Japan in exchange for
silver. In the 1600s junks that had slipped unofficially from the coast of
Fujian arrived in Manila laden with silk, cotton, porcelain, gunpowder,
mercury, copper, walnuts and tea. There they met a large Spanish galleon
stuffed with silver from the Potosi mine in Peru, which had crossed the
Pacific from Acapulco. It is no accident that when the Ming dynasty fell,
weakened by the silver drought caused by the loss of three Acapulco
galleons in three years, it fell to Manchu traders who financed their
conquest by the profitable exchange of goods with Korea and Japan.
Part of the problem was that a Chinese artisan could not flee to work
under a more tolerant ruler or in a more congenial republic, as Europeans
did routinely. Because of its peninsulas and mountain ranges, Europe is
much harder to unify than China: ask Charles V, Louis XIV, Napoleon or
Hitler. For a while the Romans achieved a sort of European unity, and the
result was just like the Ming: stagnation and bureaucracy. Under the
emperor Diocletian (just as under the emperor Yong-Le) ‘tax collectors
began to outnumber taxpayers’, said Lactantius, and ‘a multitude of
governors and hordes of directors oppressed every region – almost every

city; and to these were added countless collectors and secretaries and
assistants to the directors.’
Since then, Europe had been fragmented among warring states. So
Europeans took to their heels all the time, sometimes fleeing from cruel
rulers as French Huguenots and Spanish Jews did, sometimes drawn to
ambitious ones, sometimes seeking republican freedom. The Italian
Christopher Columbus gave up on Portugal and tried Spain instead. The
Sforzas lured engineers to Milan; Louis XI enticed Italian silk makers to set
up in Lyon; Johann Gutenberg moved from Mainz to Strasbourg in search
of investors; Gustavus Adolphus started the Swedish iron industry by
bringing in a Walloon named Louis de Geer; John Kay, English inventor of
the flying shuttle, was paid 2,500 livres a year by the French authorities to
tour Normandy demonstrating his machine. In one especially bizarre case of
industrial poaching in the early 1700s, Augustus the Strong of Saxony got a
monopoly on the manufacture of porcelain by the cunning ploy of
imprisoning a passing charlatan who claimed to be able to make gold – lest
any other state get him. The man in question, Johann Friedrich Bottger,
made no gold, but perfected a colleague’s technique for making fine
porcelain in the hope that this would win him back his freedom. So
Augustus locked him even more securely in a hilltop castle at Meissen and
put him to work churning out teapots and vases. In short, competition was a
grand incentive to European industrialisation, and a brake on bureaucratic
suffocation, at the national as well as the corporate level.
Repeal the corn laws again
The greatest beneficiaries of European political fragmentation were the
Dutch. By 1670, uncommanded by emperors and even fragmented among
themselves, the Dutch so dominated European international trade that their
merchant marine was bigger than that of France, England, Scotland, the
Holy Roman Empire, Spain and Portugal – combined. They brought grain
from the Baltic, herrings from the North Sea, whale blubber from the
Arctic, fruit and wine from southern Europe, spices from the Orient and of
course their own manufactures to whoever wanted them. Through efficient
ship construction (not least a new division of labour within the shipyard, as
observed by a curious William Petty) they undercut all other shipping costs
by more than one-third. It did not last long. Within a century Louis XIV and
others had ended the Dutch golden age with a mixture of war, mercantilist
retaliation and high taxes, imposed to fight wars. Yet another attempt to use

free trade to lift living standards bit the dust. But because this was not
monolithic China, the baton was picked up by others, especially the British.
Victorian Britain’s great good fortune was that at the moment of
industrial take-off Robert Peel embraced free trade, whereas Yong-Le had
banned it. Between 1846 and 1860, Britain unilaterally adopted a string of
measures to open its markets to free trade to a degree unprecedented in
history. It abolished the corn laws, terminated the navigation acts, removed
all tariffs and agreed trade treaties with France and others incorporating the
‘most favoured nation’ principle – that any liberalisation applied to all
trading parties. This spread tariff reduction like a virus through the
countries of the world and genuine global free trade arrived at last – a
planetary Phoenician experiment. So at the crucial moment America could
specialise in providing food and fibre to Britain and Europe, which could
further specialise in providing manufactures for the consumers of the world.
Both sides benefited. By 1920, for example, 80 per cent of all beef eaten in
London was imported, mostly from Argentina, which was one of the richest
countries in the world as a consequence. Both sides of the estuary of the
River Plate became a vast slaughterhouse where beef was canned, salted
and dried for export, the name of the Uruguayan town of Fray Bentos
turning into a synonym for canned meat in Britain.
The message from history is so blatantly obvious – that free trade
causes mutual prosperity while protectionism causes poverty – that it seems
incredible that anybody ever thinks otherwise. There is not a single example
of a country opening its borders to trade and ending up poorer (coerced
trade in slaves or drugs may be a different matter). Free trade works for
countries even if they do it and their neighbours do not. Imagine a situation
in which your street is prepared to accept produce from other streets but
they are only allowed what they produce: who loses? Yet in the aftermath of
the First World War, one by one countries tried beggaring their neighbours
in the twentieth century. As currencies devalued and unemployment rose in
the 1930s, government after government sought self-sufficiency and import
substitution: Greece under Ioannis Metaxas, Spain under Francisco Franco,
America under Smoot-Hawley. Global trade fell by two-thirds between
1929 and 1934. In India in the 1930s, the British government imposed
tariffs to protect wheat farmers, cotton manufacturers and sugar producers
against cheap imports from Australia, Japan and Java respectively. These
protectionist measures exacerbated the economic collapse. In five years

from 1929, Japanese silk exports collapsed from 36 per cent of the total to
13 per cent. Little wonder that with a rapidly growing population but a
shrinking opportunity to export both goods and people, the Japanese regime
began seeking imperial space instead.
Then after the Second World War, the entire continent of Latin America
broke with free trade under the influence of an Argentinian economist
named Raul Prebisch, who thought he had found the flaw in Ricardo’s
logic, and achieved decades of stagnation. India, under Jawaharlal Nehru,
went for autarky too, closing its borders to trade in the hope of sparking a
boom in import substitution. It too found stagnation. Still they tried: North
Korea under Kim Il Sung, Albania under Enver Hoxha, China under Mao
Zedong, Cuba under Fidel Castro – every country that tried protectionism
suffered. Countries that went the other way include Singapore, Hong Kong,
Taiwan, South Korea and later Mauritius, bywords for miraculous growth.
Countries that changed tack in the twentieth century include Japan,
Germany, Chile, post-Mao China, India and more recently Uganda and
Ghana. China’s Open Door policy, which cut import tariffs from 55 per cent
to 10 per cent in twenty years, transformed it from one of the most
protected to one of the most open markets in the world. The result was the
world’s greatest economic boom. Trade, says Johann Norberg, is like a
machine that turns potatoes into computers, or anything into anything: who
would not want to have such a machine at their disposal?
Trade, for example, could transform Africa’s prospects. China’s
purchases from Africa (not counting its direct investments there) quintupled
in the Nineties and quintupled again in the Noughties, yet they still account
for just 2 per cent of China’s foreign trade. China may be about to repeat
some of Europe’s colonial exploitative mistakes in Africa, but in terms of
being open to trade from the continent it puts Europe and America to
shame. Farm subsidies and import tariffs on cotton, sugar, rice and other
products cost Africa $500 billion a year in lost export opportunities – or
twelve times the entire aid budget to the continent.
Yes, of course, trade is disruptive. Cheap imports can destroy jobs at
home – though in doing so they always create far more both at home and
abroad, by freeing up consumers’ cash to buy other goods and services. If
Europeans find their shoes made cheaply in Vietnam, then they have more
to spend on getting their hair done and there are more nice jobs for
Europeans in hair salons and fewer dull ones in shoe factories. Sure,

manufacturers will and do seek out countries that tolerate lower wages and
lower standards – though, prodded by Western activists, in practice their
main effect is then to raise the wages and standards in such places, where
they most need raising. It is less of a race to the bottom, more of a race to
raise the bottom. Nike’s sweatshops in Vietnam, for example, pay wages
three times as high as local state owned factories and have far better
facilities. That drives up wages and standards. During the period of most
rapid expansion of trade and out-sourcing, child labour has halved since
1980: if that is driving down standards, let there be more of it.
The apotheosis of the city
Trade draws people to cities and swells the slums. Is this not a bad
thing? No. Satanic the mills of the industrial revolution may have looked to
romantic poets, but they were also beacons of opportunity to young people
facing the squalor and crowding of a country cottage on too small a plot of
land. As Ford Madox Ford celebrated in his Edwardian novel The Soul of
London, the city may have seemed dirty and squalid to the rich but it was
seen by the working class as a place of liberation and enterprise. Ask a
modern Indian woman why she wants to leave her rural village for a
Mumbai slum. Because the city, for all its dangers and squalor, represents
opportunity, the chance to escape from the village of her birth, where there
is drudgery without wages, suffocating family control and where work
happens in the merciless heat of the sun or the drenching downpour of the
monsoon. Just as Henry Ford said he was driven to invent the gasoline
buggy to escape the ‘crushing boredom of life on a midwest farm’, so, says
Suketa Mehta, ‘for the young person in an Indian village, the call of
Mumbai isn’t just about money. It’s also about freedom.’
All across Asia, Latin America and Africa, a tide of subsistence farmers
is leaving the land to move to cities and find paid work. To many
Westerners, suffused with nostalgie de la boue (nostalgia for mud), this is a
regrettable trend. Many charities and aid agencies see their job as helping to
prevent subsistence farmers having to move to the city by making life in the
countryside more sustainable. ‘Many of my contemporaries in the
developed world,’ writes Stewart Brand, ‘regard subsistence farming as
soulful and organic, but it is a poverty trap and an environmental disaster.’
Surely a Nairobi slum or a São Paolo favela is a worse place to be than a
tranquil rural village? Not for the people who move there. Given the chance
they eloquently express their preference for the relative freedom and

opportunity of the city, however poor the living conditions. ‘I am better off
in all facets of life compared to my peers left behind in the village,’ says
Deroi Kwesi Andrew, a teacher earning $4 a day in Accra. Rural selfsufficiency is a romantic mirage. Urban opportunity is what people want. In
2008 for the first time more than half the people in the world lived in cities.
That is not a bad thing. It is a measure of economic progress that more than
half the population can leave subsistence and seek the possibilities of a life
based on the collective brain instead. Two-thirds of economic growth
happens in cities.
Not long ago, demographers expected new technology to hollow out
cities as people began to telecommute from tranquil suburbs. But no – even
in weightless industries like finance people prefer to press into ever closer
contact with each other in glass towers to do their exchanging and
specialising, and they are prepared to pay absurdly high rents to do so. By
2025, it looks as if there will be five billion people living in cities (and rural
populations will actually be falling fast), and there will be eight cities with
more than twenty million people each: Tokyo, Mumbai, Delhi, Dhaka, São
Paolo, Mexico City, New York and Calcutta. As far as the planet is
concerned, this is good news because city dwellers take up less space, use
less energy and have less impact on natural ecosystems than country
dwellers. The world’s cities already contain half the world’s people, but
they occupy less than 3 per cent of the world’s land area. ‘Urban sprawl’
may disgust some American environmentalists, but on a global scale, the
very opposite is happening: as villages empty, people are living in denser
and denser anthills. As Edward Glaeser put it, ‘Thoreau was wrong. Living
in the country is not the right way to care for the Earth. The best thing that
we can do for the planet is build more skyscrapers.’
After a ‘stinking hot’ evening in a taxi in central Delhi in the 1960s, the
ecologist Paul Ehrlich had an epiphany. ‘The streets seemed alive with
people. People eating, people washing, people sleeping. People visiting,
arguing, and screaming. People thrusting their hands through the taxi
window, begging. People defecating and urinating. People clinging to
buses. People herding animals. People, people, people, people.’ It was then
that Ehrlich, like so many Westerners with culture shock, decided that the
world had (to quote his chapter title) ‘too many people’. However good life
might get, perhaps in the end it is all in vain because of population growth.
Was he right? It is time to understand old ‘Population Malthus’.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Six
Escaping Malthus’s trap: population after
1200
The great question is now at issue, whether man shall henceforth start
forwards with accelerated velocity towards illimitable, and hitherto
unconceived improvement; or be condemned to a perpetual oscillation
between happiness and misery.
T. R. MALTHUS
Essay on Population

Since human beings are just another kind of animal, the story of
population should be a simple one. Give us more food and we will have
more babies until we reach the density at which starvation, predators and
parasites crash the system. In some episodes of human history something
like this has indeed happened. Yet often, after the crash, population density
settles at a higher level than before. The subsistence level keeps on rising,
erratically, but inexorably. In terms of power and relative wealth, modern
Egypt may be a shadow of its pharaonic self, but it is much more heavily
populated today than it was in Ramses II’s day.

There is another odd feature. On the way up the graph, abundant food
encourages some people to specialise in something other than growing or
catching food, while others produce food for sale not for self-sufficiency.
The division of labour increases. But when the food supply becomes tight,
near the top of the graph, fewer people will be prepared to sell their food or
will have a surplus to sell. They will feed it to their families and make do
without the goods they were wont to buy from others. The non-farmers,
finding both food and customers for their services harder to come by, will
have to give up their jobs and return to growing their own food themselves.
So there is a cycle of rising and falling specialisation in human populations.
The economist Vernon Smith, in his memoirs, recalls how in the Depression
his family moved in the 1930s from Wichita, Kansas, to a farm when his
father was laid off as a machinist, because ‘we could at least grow most of
our own food and participate in a subsistence economy.’ This return to
subsistence happens often in human history.
In the animal world, this is unique. In no animal species do individuals
become more specialised as population is rising, nor less specialised as
population is stalling or falling. In fact, the whole notion of specialised
individuals is rare outside the human race, and where specialisation does
happen – in ants, for example – it does not wax and wane in this way.
This suggests that good old-fashioned Malthusian population limitation
does not really apply to human beings, because of their habit of exchange
and specialisation. That is to say, instead of dying from famine and
pestilence when too numerous for their food supply, people can increase
their specialisation, which allows more to subsist on the available resources.
On the other hand, if exchange becomes harder, they will reduce their
specialisation, which can lead to a population crisis even without an
increase in population. The Malthusian crisis comes not as a result of
population growth directly, but because of decreasing specialisation.
Increasing self-sufficiency is the very signature of a civilisation under
stress, the definition of a falling standard of living. Until 1800 this was how
every economic boom ended: with a partial return to self-sufficiency driven
by predation by elites, or diminishing returns from agriculture. It is hard to
be sure given the patchy information that this is what happened to
Mesopotamia and Egypt after 1500 BC, or India and Rome after AD 500, but
it is pretty clear that it happened to China and to Japan in later centuries. As

Greg Clark puts it, ‘In the preindustrial world, sporadic technological
advance produced people, not wealth.’
The medieval collapse
Robert Malthus and David Ricardo, though they were good friends,
disagreed on much. But in one respect they were entirely aligned – that
unchecked population could drive down the standard of living.
Malthus: ‘In some countries, the population appears to have been
forced, that is, the people have been habituated by degrees to live upon the
smallest possible quantity of food … China seems to answer this
description.’
Ricardo: ‘The land being limited in quantity, and differing in quality,
with every increased portion of capital employed on it there will be a
decreased rate of production.’
At first glance, medieval England furnishes a tidy example of such
diminishing returns. The thirteenth century, a time of mild weather across
Europe, saw a prolonged expansion of the population, which then crashed
in the following century as the weather deteriorated. The 1200s were the
golden high-water mark of the Middle Ages. Courts were richly furnished;
monasteries flourished; cathedrals rose towards the sky; troubadours
strutted their stuff. Watermills, windmills, bridges and ports were built all
over England. Fairs and markets proliferated and thrived: there was an
unprecedented surge in commercial activity between 1150 and 1300. A
good part of it was driven by the wool trade. As Flemish merchants sought
out more and more English wool to supply the cloth makers of Flanders, so
they provided livelihoods for ship owners, fullers and above all sheep
farmers. The national sheep flock boomed to perhaps ten million animals,
more than two sheep per person. The English had found a comparative
advantage in their mild, wet, grass-growing climate – a gain from trade –
supplying Europe’s fibre. Specialisation and exchange fuelled population
growth.
For example, in 1225, of the 124 people assessed for a survey in the
Wiltshire village of Damerham, fifty-nine owned sheep, with a combined
flock of 1,259 animals. That meant they sold wool for cash rather than
strove for self-sufficiency. They presumably used that cash to buy bread
from the baker who bought flour from the miller, who bought grain from
other farmers, who therefore got cash too. Instead of self-sufficiency,
everybody was now in the market and had disposable income. People

wanted to travel to the market in nearby Salisbury to buy things: so the
carter was doing well, too, and the merchants in Salisbury. In 1258 a
spectacular cathedral began to take shape in Salisbury, on the back of the
wool boom, because the Church was coining it in tithes and taxes. Put
yourself in the shoes of a grain farmer in Damerham. The miller wants all
you can grow, so you encourage both your sons to marry early and rent a
few acres off you. The carter, the miller, the baker, the merchant and the
shepherds are all doing the same: setting their children up in business.
Family formation – which had always been as much an economic as a
biological decision – increased markedly in the thirteenth century. The
consequence of all this early and frequent marriage was fecundity. In the
thirteenth century the population of England seems to have doubled, from
over two million to something like five million people.
Inevitably, and gradually, the population boom overtook the economy’s
productivity. Rents inflated and wages deflated: the rich were bidding up
land prices while the poor were bid ding down wages. By 1315 real wages
had halved in a century, although because of family formation, family
income was probably not falling as fast as individual wages. For example, a
miller in Feering in Essex in the 1290s agreed to halve his wage when his
employer took on another employee. Chances are the new employee was
the miller’s son and they were simply sharing the same income within the
family. None the less, as pay packets shrank, demand for the goods supplied
by merchants must have begun to stall. To feed the growing population,
marginal land was being ploughed, and was yielding fewer and fewer grains
for each grain sown. Diminishing returns dominated. Predatory priests and
chiefs did not help.
Before long hunger was a real risk. It came suddenly in the sodden
summers of 1315 and 1317, when wheat yields more than halved all across
the north of Europe. The crops rotted in the fields; some people were forced
to eat their own seed corn. Mothers abandoned their babies. There were
rumours of fresh corpses of criminals pulled from gallows for food. In the
years that followed, with continuing poor harvests and unusually cold
winters, a fatal murrain spread among hungry oxen, and that left some land
unploughed, further exacerbating the food shortage. The population then
stagnated for three decades until the Black Death arrived in the 1340s and
caused a crash in human numbers. The plague returned in the 1360s,
followed by more bad harvests and more plague outbreaks. By 1450, the

population of England had been reduced to roughly where it had been in
1200.
Yet neither the boom of the thirteenth century, nor the bust of the
fourteenth, can be described in simplistic Ricardian and Malthusian terms.
The carrying capacity of the land was not much increased in the first period
by Ricardian technological change, nor much diminished in the second by
Malthusian falls in yield. What changed was the economy’s, rather than the
land’s, capacity to support so many people. After all, the Black Death was
not caused by overpopulation, but by a bacterium. Ironically, the plague
may have been one of the sparks that lit the Renaissance, because the
shortage of labour shifted income from rents to wages as landlords
struggled to find both tenants and employees. With rising wages, some of
the surviving peasantry could once more just afford the oriental luxuries
and fine cloth that Lombard and Hanseatic merchants supplied. There was a
rash of financial innovation: bills of credit to solve the problem of how to
pay for goods without transporting silver through bandit country, doubleentry book-keeping, insurance. Italian bankers began to appear all across
the continent, financing kings and their wars, sometimes at a profit,
sometimes at a disastrous loss. The wealth that the Italian trading towns had
generated soon found its way into scholarship, art or science, or in the case
of Leonardo da Vinci, all three. Per capita income in England was probably
higher in 1450 than it would be again before 1820.
The point is this. In 1300, Europe was probably on a trajectory towards
a labour-intensive ‘industrious’ revolution of diminishing returns.
Remember the miller of Feering who halved his wage by sharing his job
with his son in the 1290s? Or consider the women who were paid half what
their menfolk earned when they carried water (for making mortar) to the
site of a new windmill being constructed at Dover Castle in 1294. No doubt
they were delighted to have a job and earn a little cash, but they came so
cheap they provided their employer with an incentive not to buy a cart and
bullock. Yet by 1400, Europe had partly switched to a labour-saving
‘industrial’ trajectory instead, and the pattern was repeated after the cold
and brutal seventeenth century, when famine, plague and war once more
reduced the European population: in 1692–4, perhaps 15 per cent of all
French people starved to death. Unlike Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, Mexico,
Peru, China and Rome, early modern Europe became capital-intensive, not
labour-intensive. That capital was used to get work out of animals, rivers

and breezes, rather than people. Europe was, in Joel Mokyr’s words, ‘the
first society to build an economy on non-human power rather than on the
backs of slaves and coolies’.
The industrious revolution
To imagine what would have happened to Europe without the Black
Death, consider the case of Japan in the eighteenth century. In the 1600s
Japan was a relatively prosperous and sophisticated country with a
population the size of France and Spain combined, and a strong
manufacturing industry, especially in paper products, cotton textiles and
weapons – much of them for export. In 1592, the Japanese had conquered
Korea carrying tens of thousands of home-made arquebuses copied from
Portuguese designs. Japan was none the less mainly an agrarian economy
with plentiful herds of sheep and goats, lots of pigs, some cattle and oxen
and quite a few horses. The plough was in common use, both ox-drawn and
horse-drawn.
By the 1800s, domestic farm animals had virtually disappeared. Sheep
and goats were almost unknown, horses and cattle were very rare and even
pigs were few in number. As the traveller Isabella Bird remarked in 1880,
‘As animals are not used for milk, draught or food and there are no pasture
lands, both the country and the farm-yards have a singular silence and an
inanimate look.’ Carriages, carts (and even wheelbarrows) were scarce.
Instead the power needed for transport came from human beings carrying
goods hung from poles on their shoulders and racks on their backs.
Watermills, though the technology had been known for a long time, were
little used; rice was threshed and ground by hand querns or stone-weighted
trip hammers, powered by treadle. Human rice pounders could be heard
toiling away, naked behind a curtain, for hours at a time, even in cities like
Tokyo; the irrigation pumps needed for the rice fields were often driven by
pedalling coolies. Above all, the plough was now virtually unknown in the
entire country. Fields were cultivated by men and women with hoes. Where
Europeans used animal, water and wind power, the Japanese did the work
themselves.
What seems to have happened is that some time between 1700 and
1800, the Japanese collectively gave up the plough in favour of the hoe
because people were cheaper to hire than draught animals. This was a time
of rapid population expansion, made possible by the high productivity of
paddy rice, naturally fertilised by nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria in the water

and therefore needing little manure (though human night soil was
assiduously collected, carefully stored and diligently applied to the land).
With abundant food and a fastidious approach to hygiene, the Japanese
population boomed to the point where land was scarce, labour was cheap
and it was literally more economic to use human labour to hoe the land than
to set aside precious acres for pasture to support oxen or horses to draw a
plough. So the Japanese, to a spectacular extent, retreated from technology
and trade and reduced their demands on merchants as they became more
self-sufficient. The market for technology of all kinds atrophied. They even
gave up capital-intensive guns in favour of labour-intensive swords. A good
Japanese sword had a blade of strong though soft steel, but with a brittle,
hard edge made lethally sharp by incessant hammering.
Europe probably came close to going down the same path as Japan in
the eighteenth century. Just as in the thirteenth century, the European
population boomed in the 1700s, helped by wealth generated by local and
oriental trade and agricultural improvements. New crops like the potato,
though often treated with suspicion when urged on the populace by rulers
(Marie-Antoinette’s wearing of potato flowers put the French off eating
them for decades), allowed the population of some countries such as Ireland
to boom. Potatoes could be grown using a spade rather than a plough, and
their fantastic productivity – more than thrice the calories per acre of wheat
or rye – and high nutrient content encouraged a very dense population. An
Irish acre in 1840 could yield six tonnes of potatoes, almost as much food
as an acre of rice paddy in the Yangtze delta. (Sir William Petty, lamenting
the idleness of the Irish in 1691, blamed the potato: ‘What need have they
of work, who can content themselves with potato’s [sic], whereof the labour
of one man can feed Forty?’ Adam Smith begged to differ, crediting the
potato for London having the ‘strongest men and the most beautiful women
perhaps in the British dominions’.) At the time, an English worker needed
twenty acres to grow his bread and cheese. The subsistence farmers of
Ireland, even into the 1800s, were not only dependent mainly on their own
muscle power for cultivation and transport, but were ‘out of the market’,
consuming very few manufactured goods for lack of disposable income.
(Rapacious English landlords did not help.) As the size of each family
potato plot shrank, Ireland was a Malthusian disaster waiting to happen
even before the Phytophthora famine of 1845 killed a million people and
drove a million more to America. In the Scottish Highlands too, the

population boom of the 1700s caused a retreat to subsistence, or crofting as
it was known there. Only a vast ‘clearance’ and emigration to America and
Australia, highly coerced and highly resented to this day, relieved the
Malthusian pressure.
Denmark followed Japan’s path, too, for a while. The Danes responded
to increasing ecological constraints in the eighteenth century by intensifying
their agricultural labour. They banned cattle from forests to protect the
supply of future fuel, which increased the price of manure. To maintain the
fertility of their soil, they worked extraordinarily hard at ditching, clover
growing and marling (laboriously digging up and spreading lime and clay
subsoil to neutralise and release nutrients from sandy or acid soils). Hours
of work increased by more than 50 per cent. By the 1800s, Denmark had
become a country that was trapped by its own self-sufficiency. Its people
were so busy farming that none could be spared for other industries and few
could afford to consume manufactured products. Living standards
stagnated, admittedly at a relatively decent level. Eventually in the late
nineteenth century the industrialisation of its neighbours then created a
market for Danish agricultural exports and these could slowly raise the
living standards of Danes.
British exceptionalism
It was Britain’s fate to escape the quasi-Malthusian trap into which
Japan, Ireland and Denmark fell. The reasons are many and debatable, but
here it is worth noting a surprising demographic factor. Britain, more than
any other country, had unintentionally prepared itself for industrial life in an
elemental, human way. For centuries – leaving out the aristocrats (who left
fewer heirs because they died from falling off horses) – the relatively rich
had more children than the relatively poor. On average a merchant in
Britain who left £1,000 in his will had four surviving children, while a
labourer who left £10 had only two – this was in around 1600, but the
differential was similar at other dates. Such differential reproduction
happened in China, too, but to a much lesser extent. Because there was little
or no increase in the standard of living between 1200 and 1700, this
overbreeding by the rich meant there was constant downward mobility.
Gregory Clark has shown from legal records that rare surnames of the poor
survived much less well than rare surnames of the rich.
By 1700, therefore, in Britain most of the poor were actually the
descendants of the rich. They had perhaps carried down with them into the

working classes many of the habits and customs of the rich: literacy, for
example, numeracy and perhaps industriousness or financial prudence. This
theory accounts especially well for the otherwise puzzling rise in literacy
during the early modern period. It may also account for the steady decline
in violence. Your chances of being a victim of homicide in England fell
from 0.3 per thousand in 1250 to 0.02 per thousand in 1800: you were ten
times more likely to be killed in the earlier period.
Fascinating as this demographic discovery is, it cannot fully explain the
industrial revolution. The same was not nearly as true of Holland in its
golden age; and it would, for example, struggle to explain China’s rapid and
successful industrialisation after 1980 – in the wake of a policy of
deliberate murder and humiliation of the literate and the bourgeois in the
Cultural Revolution.
What Europe achieved after 1750 – uniquely, precariously,
unexpectedly – was an increasing division of labour that meant that each
person could produce more each year and therefore could consume more
each year, which created the demand for still more production. Two things,
says the historian Kenneth Pomeranz, were vital to Europe’s achievement:
coal and America. The ultimate reason that the British economic take-off
kept on going where the Chinese – or for that matter, the Dutch, Italian,
Arab, Roman, Mauryan, Phoenician or Mesopotamian – did not was
because the British escaped the Malthusian fate. The acres they needed to
provide themselves with corn, cotton, sugar, tea and fuel just kept on
materialising elsewhere. Here are Pomeranz’s numbers: in around 1830,
Britain had seventeen million acres of arable land, twenty-five million acres
of pastureland and less than two million acres of forest. But she consumed
sugar from the West Indies equivalent (in calories) to the produce of at least
another two million acres of wheat; timber from Canada equivalent to
another one million acres of woodland, cotton from the Americas equivalent
to the wool produced on an astonishing twenty-three million acres of
pastureland, and coal from underground equivalent to fifteen million acres
of forest. Without these vast ‘ghost acres’ Britain’s industrial revolution,
which was only just starting to raise living standards in 1830, would have
already shuddered to a halt for lack of calories, cotton or coal.
Not only did the Americas ship back their produce; they also allowed a
safety valve for emigration to relieve the Malthusian pressure of the
population boom induced by industrialisation. Germany, in particular, as it

industrialised rapidly in the nineteenth century, saw a huge increase in the
birth rate, but a flood of emigrants to the United States prevented the
division of land among multiple heirs and the return to poverty and selfsufficiency that had afflicted Japan two centuries before.
When Asia experienced a population boom in the early twentieth
century, it had no such emigration safety valve. In fact, Western countries
firmly and deliberately closed the door, terrified by the ‘yellow peril’ that
might otherwise head their way. The result was a typical Malthusian
increase in self-sufficiency. By 1950 China and India were bursting with the
self-sufficient agrarian poor.
The demographic transition
It is hard now to recall just how coercive were the population policies
urged by experts in the mid-twentieth century. When President Lyndon
Johnson’s adviser Joseph Califano suggested that an increase in famine
relief should be announced before a visit by Indira Gandhi to the United
States, Johnson supposedly replied that he was not going to ‘piss away
foreign aid in nations where they refuse to deal with their own population
problems’. Garrett Hardin, in his famous essay ‘The Tragedy of the
Commons’ (remembered these days as being about collective action, but
actually a long argument for coerced population control), found ‘freedom to
breed intolerable’, coercion ‘a necessity’ and that ‘the only way we can
preserve and nurture other and more precious freedoms is by relinquishing
the freedom to breed, and that very soon.’ Hardin’s view was nearly
universal. ‘Adding a sterilant to drinking water or staple foods is a
suggestion that seems to horrify people more than most proposals for
involuntary fertility control,’ wrote John Holdren (now President Obama’s
science adviser) and Paul and Anne Ehrlich in 1977, but not to worry: ‘It
has been concluded that compulsory population-control laws, even
including laws requiring compulsory abortion, could be sustained under the
existing Constitution if the population crisis became sufficiently severe to
endanger the society.’ All right-thinking people agreed, as they so often do,
that top-down government action was needed: people must be ordered or at
least bribed to accept sterilisation and punished for refusing it.
Which is exactly what happened. Egged on by Western governments
and pressure groups such as the International Planned Parenthood
Foundation, coerced sterilisation became a pattern in many parts of Asia in
the 1970s. ‘Dalkon Shield’ contraceptive devices, the subject of safety

lawsuits in America, were bought in bulk by the American federal
government and shipped to Asia. Chinese women were forcibly taken from
their homes to be sterilised. Cheered on by Robert McNamara’s World
Bank, Sanjay Gandhi, the son of the Indian prime minister, ran a vast
campaign of rewards and coercion to force eight million poor Indians to
accept vasectomies. In one episode, recounted by the historian Matthew
Connelly, the village of Uttawar was surrounded by police and every
eligible male sterilised. In response, a crowd gathered to defend the nearby
village of Pipli, but police fired on the crowd, killing four people. A
government official was unapologetic. In this war against ‘people
pollution’, force was justified: ‘if some excesses appear, don’t blame me …
Whether you like it or not, there will be a few dead people.’ Eventually
Sanjay Gandhi’s policies proved so unpopular that his mother lost an
election by a landslide in 1977, and family planning was treated with deep
suspicion for many years thereafter.
Yet the tragedy is that this top-down coercion was not only counterproductive; it was unnecessary. Birth rates were already falling rapidly in
the 1970s all across the continent of Asia quite voluntarily. They fell just as
far and just as fast without coercion. They continue to fall today. As soon as
it felt prosperity from trade, Asia experienced precisely the same transition
to lower birth rates that Europe had experienced before.
Bangladesh today is the most densely populated large country in the
world, with more than two thousand people living on every square mile; it
has a population greater than Russia living on an area smaller than Florida.
In 1955 Bangladesh had a birth rate of 6.8 children per woman. Today, fifty
years later, that ratio has more than halved, to about 2.7 children per
woman. On current trends Bangladesh’s population will soon cease growing
altogether. Its neighbour India has seen a similar collapse in fecundity, from
5.9 to 2.6 children per woman. In Pakistan the birth rate did not start
dropping till the mid-1980s, but its decline has been catching up its
neighbours: it has halved in just twenty years to 3.2 children per woman.
Between them these three countries account for about a quarter of the
world’s population. If they had not seen their birth rates fall so fast, the
world population boom would have become deafening.
Yet they are not alone. Throughout the world, birth rates are falling.
There is no country in the world that has a higher birth rate than it had in
1960, and in the less developed world as a whole the birth rate has

approximately halved. Until 2002, the United Nations, when projecting
future world population density, assumed that birth rates would never fall
below 2.1 children per woman in most countries: that is the ‘replacement
rate’, at which a woman produces enough babies to replace her and her
husband, with 0.1 babies added in to cover childhood deaths and a slightly
male-biased sex ratio. But in 2002, the UN changed this assumption as it
became clear that in country after country the decline in baby-making went
straight through the 2.1 level and kept on dropping. If anything, the decline
may accelerate as the effect of small family size compounds. Nearly half
the world now has fertility below 2.1. Sri Lanka’s birth rate, at 1.9, is
already well below replacement level. Russia’s population is falling so fast
it will be one-third smaller in 2050 than it was at its peak in the early 1990s.
Do these statistics surprise you? Everybody knows the population of the
world is growing. But remarkably few people seem to know that the rate of
increase in world population has been falling since the early 1960s and that
the raw number of new people added each year has been falling since the
late 1980s. As the environmentalist Stewart Brand puts it, ‘Most
environmentalists still haven’t got the word. Worldwide, birth-rates are in
free fall … On every part of every continent and in every culture (even
Mormon), birth rates are headed down. They reach replacement level and
keep on dropping.’ This is happening despite people living longer and thus
swelling the ranks of the world population for longer, and despite the fact
that babies are no longer dying as frequently as they did in the early
twentieth century. Population growth is slowing even while death rates are
falling.
Frankly, this is an extraordinary bit of luck. Had the human race
continued to turn wealth into more babies as it did for so many centuries, it
would come to grief eventually. When the world population looked like it
would hit fifteen billion by 2050 and keep on rising after that, there was a
genuine risk of not feeding or watering that number comfortably, at least
not while hanging on to any natural habitats. But now that even the United
Nations’ best estimate is that world population will probably start falling
once it peaks at 9.2 billion in 2075, there is every prospect of feeding the
world for ever. After all, there are already 6.8 billion on the earth and they
are still feeding better and better every decade. Only 2.4 billion to go.
Think of it this way. After the world population first hit a billion in (best
guess) 1804, the human race had another 123 years to work out how to feed

the next billion, the two billion milestone being reached in 1927. The next
billions took thirty-three, fourteen, thirteen and twelve years respectively to
arrive. Yet despite the accelerating pace, the world food supply in calories
per head improved dramatically. The rate at which the billions are being
added is now falling. The seven billionth person won’t be born till 2013,
fourteen years after the six billionth, the eight billionth will come fifteen
years after that and the nine billionth another twenty-six years after that.
The ten billionth, it is now officially forecast, will never come at all.
In technical jargon, the entire world is experiencing the second half of a
‘demographic transition’ from high mortality and high fertility to low
mortality and low fertility. It is a process that has occurred in many
countries, starting with France at the end of the eighteenth century then
spreading to Scandinavia and Britain in the nineteenth century and to the
rest of Europe in the early twentieth century. Asia began to follow the same
path in the 1960s, Latin America in the 1970s and most of Africa in the
1980s. It is now a worldwide phenomenon: with the exception of
Kazakhstan, there is no country where birth rate is high and rising. The
pattern is always the same: mortality falls first, causing a population boom,
then a few decades later, fecundity falls quite suddenly and quite rapidly. It
usually takes about fifteen years for birth rate to fall by 40 per cent. Even
Yemen, the country with the highest birth rate in the world for most of the
1970s with an average of nearly nine babies per woman, has halved the
number. Once the demographic transition starts happening in a country it
happens at all levels of society pretty well at the same time.
Not everybody saw the demographic transition coming, but some did.
When the journalist John Maddox wrote a book in 1973 arguing that the
demographic transition was already slowing Asian birth rates, he was
treated to a condescending blast by Paul Ehrlich and John Holdren:
The most serious of Maddox’s many demographic errors is his
invocation of a ‘demographic transition’ as the cure for population
growth in Asia, Africa and Latin America. He expects that birth rates
there will drop as they did in developed countries following the
industrial revolution. Since most underdeveloped countries are
unlikely to have an industrial revolution, this seems somewhat
optimistic at best. But even if those nations should follow that course,
starting immediately, their population growth would continue for well

over a century – perhaps producing by the year 2100 a world
population of twenty thousand million.
Rarely has a paragraph proved so wrong so soon.
An unexplained phenomenon
Deliciously, nobody really knows how to explain this mysteriously
predictable phenomenon. Demographic transition theory is a splendidly
confused field. The birth-rate collapse seems to be largely a bottom-up
thing that emerges by cultural evolution, spreads by word of mouth, and is
not commanded by fiat from above. Neither governments nor churches can
take much credit. After all, the European demographic transition happened
in the nineteenth century without any official encouragement or even
knowledge. In the case of France, it happened in the teeth of official
encouragement to breed. Likewise, the modern transition began without any
government family-planning policies in many countries, especially Latin
America. China’s highly coerced (‘one child’) birth-rate decline since 1955
(from 5.59 to 1.73 children, or 69 per cent) is almost exactly mirrored by
Sri Lanka’s largely voluntary one over the same time period (5.70 to 1.88,
or 67 per cent). As for religion, Italy’s plunging birth rate (now 1.3 children
per woman) in the pope’s backyard has always seemed moderately amusing
to non-Catholics. Of course, the provision of family planning advice surely
helps, and in parts of Asia may have accelerated the transition, but on the
whole it seems to help women cheaply and easily achieve what they wish to
achieve anyway. The onset of Britain’s demographic transition in the 1870s
coincided with the publication of bestsellers on contraception by Annie
Besant and Charles Bradlaugh – but which caused which?
So what might be the cause of these episodes of quite extraordinary
downward shift in human fecundity? Top of the list of explanations,
paradoxically, comes falling child mortality. The more babies are likely to
die, the more their parents bear. Only when women think their children will
survive do they plan and complete their families rather than just keep
breeding. This remarkable fact seems to be very poorly known. Most
Western, educated people seem to think, rationally enough, that keeping
babies alive in poor countries is only making the population problem worse
and that … well, the implication is usually left unspoken. Jeffrey Sachs
recounts that on ‘countless occasions’ after a lecture a member of the
audience has ‘whispered’ to him ‘if we save all those children, won’t they
simply starve as adults?’ Answer: no. If we save children from dying,

people will have smaller families. In Niger or Afghanistan today, where
more than fifteen of every 100 babies die before their first birthdays, the
average woman will give birth seven times in her lifetime; in Nepal and
Namibia, where less than five babies out of every 100 die, the average
woman gives birth three times. But the correlation is not exact. Burma has
twice the infant mortality and half the birth rate of Guatemala, for instance.
Another factor is wealth. Having more income means you can afford
more babies, but it also means you can afford more luxuries to divert you
from constant breeding. Children are consumer goods, but rather timeconsuming and demanding ones compared with, say, cars. The transition
seems to kick in as countries grow richer, but there is no exact level of
income at which it happens, and the poor and the rich within any country
start reducing their birth rate about the same time. Once again, there are
exceptions: Yemen has almost twice the birth rate and almost twice the
income per head of Laos.
Is it female emancipation? Certainly, the correlation between
widespread female education and low birth rate is pretty tight, and the high
fecundity of many Arab countries must in part reflect women’s relative lack
of control over their own lives. Probably by far the best policy for reducing
population is to encourage female education. It is evolutionarily plausible
that in the human species, females want to have relatively few children and
give them high-quality upbringing, whereas males like to have lots of
children and care less about the quality of their upbringing. So the
empowerment of women through education gives them the upper hand. But
there are exceptions here too: 90 per cent of girls complete primary school
in Kenya, which has twice the birth rate of Morocco, where only 72 per
cent of girls complete primary school.
Is it urbanisation? Certainly, as people move from farms, where children
can help in the fields, to cities where housing is expensive and jobs are
outside the home, they find large families to be a drawback. Most cities are
– and always have been – places where death rates exceed birth rates.
Immigration sustains their numbers. Yet this cannot be the whole story:
Nigeria is twice as urbanised and twice as fecund as Bangladesh.
In other words, the best that can be said for sure about the demographic
transition is that countries lower their birth rates as they grow healthier,
wealthier, better educated, more urbanised and more emancipated. A typical
woman probably reasons thus: now I know my children will probably not

die of disease, I do not need to have so many; now I can get a job to support
those children, I do not want to interrupt my career too often; now I have an
education and a pay cheque, I can take control of contraception; now
education can get my children non-farming jobs, I shall have only as many
as I can support through school; now I can buy consumer goods, I shall be
careful not to spread my income across too large a family; now I live in a
city I will plan my family. Or some combination of such thoughts. And she
will be encouraged by the examples of others, and by family-planning
clinics.
To argue that the demographic transition is a mysterious, evolutionary,
natural phenomenon, rather than a successful government policy, is not to
say that it cannot be given a push. If Africa’s slow fall in birth rates could
be accelerated, there would be great dividends in terms of welfare. A bold
programme, driven by philanthropy or even government aid, but not tied to
teaching sexual abstinence, to cut child mortality in countries like Niger,
and hence bring forward the fall in family size, and to spread the news of
family planning out to rural villages, could mean that Africa has 300 million
fewer mouths to feed in 2050 than it otherwise would. However, politicians
should be careful not to repeat in Africa the high-minded brutality that Asia
experienced in the 1970s.
It is somewhat distasteful to the intelligentsia to accept that
consumption and commerce could be the friend of population control, or
that it is when they ‘enter the market’ as consumers that people plan their
families – this is not what most market-phobic professors, preaching
anticapitalist asceticism, want to hear. Yet the relationship is there, and it is
strong. Seth Norton found that the birth rate was more than twice as high in
countries with little economic freedom (average 4.27 children per woman)
compared with countries with high economic freedom (average 1.82
children per woman). Besides, there is quite a neat exception which proves
this rule. The Anabaptist sects in North America, the Hutterites and Amish,
have largely resisted the demographic transition; that is to say, they have
large families. This has been achieved despite – or rather because of – an
ascetic emphasis on family roles, which immunises them against the spread
of time-consuming hobbies (including higher education) and a taste for
expensive gadgets.
What a happy conclusion. Human beings are a species that stops its own
population expansions once the division of labour reaches the point at

which individuals are all trading goods and services with each other, rather
than trying to be self-sufficient. The more interdependent and well-off we
all become, the more population will stabilise well within the resources of
the planet. As Ron Bailey puts it, in complete contradiction of Garrett
Hardin: ‘There is no need to impose coercive population control measures;
economic freedom actually generates a benign invisible hand of population
control.’
Most economists are now more worried about the effects of imploding
populations than they are about exploding ones. Countries with very low
birth rates have rapidly ageing workforces. This means more and more old
people eating the savings and taxes of fewer and fewer people of working
age. They are right to be concerned, though they would be wrong to be
apocalyptic, after all, today’s 40-year-olds will surely be happier to continue
operating computers in their seventies than today’s 70-year-olds are to
continue operating machine tools. And once again, the rational optimist can
bring a measure of comfort. The latest research uncovers a second
demographic transition in which the very richest countries see a slight
increase in their birth rate once they pass a certain level of prosperity. The
United States, for example, saw its birth rate bottom out at 1.74 children per
woman in about 1976; since then it has risen to 2.05. Birth rates have risen
in eighteen of the twenty-four countries that have a Human Development
Index greater than 0.94. The puzzling exceptions are ones such as Japan and
South Korea, which see a continuing decline. Hans-Peter Kohler of the
University of Pennsylvania, who co-authored the new study, believes that
these countries lag in providing women with better opportunities for work–
life balance as they get richer.
So, all in all, the news on global population could hardly be better,
though it would be nice if the improvements were coming faster. The
explosions are petering out; and the declines are bottoming out. The more
prosperous and free that people become, the more their birth rate settles at
around two children per woman with no coercion necessary. Now, is that
not good news?
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Seven
The release of slaves: energy after 1700
With coal almost any feat is possible or easy; without it we are thrown
back in the laborious poverty of earlier times.
STANLEY JEVONS
The Coal Question

In 1807, as Parliament in London was preparing to pass at last William
Wilberforce’s bill to abolish the slave trade, the largest factory complex in
the world had just opened at Ancoats in Manchester. Powered by steam and
lit by gas, both generated by coal, Murrays’ Mills drew curious visitors
from all over country and beyond to marvel at their modern machinery.
There is a connection between these two events. The Lancashire cotton
industry was rapidly converting from water power to coal. The world would
follow suit and by the late twentieth century, 85 per cent of all the energy
used by humankind would come from fossil fuels. It was fossil fuels that
eventually made slavery – along with animal power, and wood, wind and
water – uneconomic. Wilberforce’s ambition would have been harder to
obtain without fossil fuels. ‘History supports this truth,’ writes the
economist Don Boudreaux: ‘Capitalism exterminated slavery.’

The story of energy is simple. Once upon a time all work was done by
people for themselves using their own muscles. Then there came a time
when some people got other people to do the work for them, and the result
was pyramids and leisure for a few, drudgery and exhaustion for the many.
Then there was a gradual progression from one source of energy to another:
human to animal to water to wind to fossil fuel. In each case, the amount of
work one man could do for another was amplified by the animal or the
machine. The Roman empire was built largely on human muscle power, in
the shape of slaves. It was Spartacus and his friends who built the roads and
houses, who tilled the ground and trampled the grapes. There were horses,
forges and sailing ships as well, but the chief source of watts in Rome was
people. The period that followed the Roman empire, especially in Europe,
saw the widespread replacement of that human muscle power by animal
muscle power. The European early Middle Ages were the age of the ox. The
invention of dried-grass hay enabled northern Europeans to feed oxen
through the winter. Slaves were replaced by beasts, more out of practicality
than compassion one suspects. Oxen eat simpler food, complain less and are
stronger than slaves. Oxen need to graze, so this civilisation had to be based
on villages rather than cities. With the invention of the horse collar, oxen
then gave way to horses, which can plough at nearly twice the speed of an
ox, thus doubling the productivity of a man and enabling each farmer either
to feed more people or to spend more time consuming other’s work. In
England, horses were 20 per cent of draught animals in 1086, and 60 per
cent by 1574.
In turn oxen and horses were soon being replaced by inanimate power.
The watermill, known to the Romans but comparatively little used, became
so common in the Dark Ages that by the time of the Domesday Book
(1086), there was one for every fifty people in southern England. Two
hundred years later, the number of watermills had doubled again. By 1300
there were sixty-eight watermills on a single mile of the Seine in Paris, and
others floating on barges.
The Cistercian monastic order took the watermill to its technical zenith,
not only improving and perfecting it, but aggressively suppressing rival
animal-powered mills by legal action. With gears, cams and trip hammers,
they used the water to achieve multiple ends. At Clairvaux, for example, the
water from the river first turned the mill wheel to crush the grain, then
shook the sieve to separate flour from bran, then topped up the vats to make

beer, then moved on to work the fullers’ hammers against the raw cloth,
then trickled into the tannery and was finally directed to where it could
wash away waste.
The windmill appeared first in the twelfth century and spread rapidly
throughout the Low Countries, where water power was not an option. But it
was peat, rather than wind, that gave the Dutch the power to become the
world’s workshop in the 1600s. Peat dug on a vast scale from freshly
drained bogs fuelled the brick, ceramic, beer, soap, salt and sugar industries.
Harlem bleached linen for the whole of Germany. At a time when timber
was scarce and expensive, peat gave the Dutch their chance.
Hay, water and wind are ways of drawing upon the sun’s energy: the sun
powers plants, rain and the wind. Timber is a way of drawing on a store of
the sun’s energy laid down in previous decades – on solar capital, as it were.
Peat is an older store of the sunlight – solar capital laid down over
millennia. And coal, whose high energy content enabled the British to
overtake the Dutch, is still older sunlight, mostly captured around 300
million years before. The secret of the industrial revolution was shifting
from current solar power to stored solar power. Not that human muscle
power disappeared: slavery continued, in Russia, the Caribbean and
America as well as many other places. But gradually, erratically, more and
more of the goods people made were made with fossil energy.
Fossil fuels cannot explain the start of the industrial revolution. But they
do explain why it did not end. Once fossil fuels joined in, economic growth
truly took off, and became almost infinitely capable of bursting through the
Malthusian ceiling and raising living standards. Only then did growth
become, in a word, sustainable. This leads to a shocking irony. I am about
to argue that economic growth only became sustainable when it began to
rely on non-renewable, non-green, non-clean power. Every economic boom
in history, from Uruk onwards, had ended in bust because renewable
sources of energy ran out: timber, crop land, pasture, labour, water, peat. All
self-replenishing, but far too slowly, and easily exhausted by a swelling
populace. Coal not only did not run out, no matter how much was used: it
actually became cheaper and more abundant as time went by, in marked
contrast to charcoal, which always grew more expensive once its use
expanded beyond a certain point, for the simple reason that people had to
go further in search of timber. Had England never used coal, it could still
have had an industrial miracle of sorts, because it could have (and did) use

water power to drive the frames and looms that turned Lancashire into the
cotton capital of the world. But water power, though renewable, is very
much finite, and Britain’s industrial boom would have petered out as
expansion became impossible, population pressure overtook income and
wages fell, depressing demand.
This is not to imply that non-renewable resources are infinite – of
course not. The Atlantic Ocean is not infinite, but that does not mean you
have to worry about bumping into Newfoundland if you row a dinghy out
of a harbour in Ireland. Some things are finite but vast; some things are
infinitely renewable, but very limited. Non-renewable resources such as
coal are sufficiently abundant to allow an expansion of both economic
activity and population to the point where they can generate sustainable
wealth for all the people of the planet without hitting a Malthusian ceiling,
and can then hand the baton to some other form of energy. The blinding
brightness of this realisation still amazes me: we can build a civilisation in
which everybody lives the life of the Sun King, because everybody is
served by (and serves) a thousand servants, each of whose service is
amplified by extraordinary amounts of inanimate energy and each of whom
is also living like the Sun King. I will deal in later chapters with the many
objections that pessimistic environmentalists will raise, including the
question of the atmosphere’s non-renewable capacity for absorbing carbon
dioxide.
Wealthier yet and wealthier
Before I make the case that fossil fuels, by driving pistons and
dynamos, made modern living standards possible, first, a digression about
living standards. Did industrialisation really improve them? There are still
people about, including it seems those who write the textbooks from which
my children learn history, who follow Karl Marx in believing that the
industrial revolution drove down most living standards, by cramming
carefree and merrie yokels into satanic mills and polluted tenements, where
they were worked till they broke and then coughed their way to early
deaths. Is it really necessary to point out that poverty, inequality, child
labour, disease and pollution existed before there were factories? In the case
of poverty, the rural pauper of 1700 was markedly worse off than the urban
pauper of 1850 and there were many more of him. In Gregory King’s
survey of the British population in 1688, 1.2 million labourers lived on just
£4 a year and 1.3 million ‘cottagers’ – peasants – on just £2 a year. That is

to say, half the entire nation lived in abject poverty; without charity they
would starve. During the industrial revolution, there was plenty of poverty
but not nearly as much as this nor nearly as severe. Even farm labourers’
income rose during the industrial revolution. As for inequality, in terms of
both physical stature and number of surviving children, the gap narrowed
between the richest and the poorest during industrialisation. That could not
have happened if economic inequality increased. As for child labour, a
patent for a hand-driven linen-spinning machine from 1678, long before
powered mills, happily boasts that ‘a child three or four years of age may do
as much as a child of seven or eight years old.’ As for disease, deaths from
infectious disease fell steadily throughout the period. As for pollution, smog
undoubtedly increased in industrial cities, but the sewage-filled streets of
Samuel Pepys’s London were more noisome than anything in Elizabeth
Gaskell’s Manchester of the 1850s.
The plain fact is that the mechanisation of production in the industrial
revolution raised incomes across all classes. The average Englishman’s
income, having apparently stagnated for three centuries, began to rise
around 1800 and by 1850 was 50 per cent above its 1750 level, despite a
trebling of population. The rise was steepest for unskilled workers: the
wage premium for skilled building workers fell steadily. Income inequality
fell, and gender inequality, too. The share of national income captured by
labour rose, while the share captured by land fell: the rent of an acre of
English farmland buys as many goods now as it did in the 1760s, while the
real wage of an hour of work buys immensely more. Real wages rose faster
than real output throughout the nineteenth century, meaning that the benefit
of cheaper goods was being garnered chiefly by the workers as consumers,
not by bosses or landlords. That is to say, the people who produced
manufactured goods could also increasingly afford to consume them.
While it is undoubtedly true that by modern standards the workers who
manned the factories and mills of 1800 in England laboured for inhuman
hours from an early age in conditions of terrible danger, noise and dirt,
returning to crowded and insanitary homes through polluted streets, and had
dreadful job security, diet, health care and education, it is none the less just
as undeniably true that they lived better lives than their farm-labourer
grandfathers and wool-spinning grandmothers had done. That was why they
flocked to the factories from the farms – and would do so again in New
England in the 1870s, in the American South in the 1900s, in Japan in the

1920s, in Taiwan in the 1960s, in Hong Kong in the 1970s and in China
today. That was why the jobs in the mills were denied to the Irish in New
England and the blacks in North Carolina.
Here are three anecdotes to illustrate the notion that factory jobs are
often preferable to farm ones. A farm worker named William Turnbull, born
in 1870, told my grandmother that he started work at thirteen, for sixpence a
day, working six days a week, from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., usually outdoors
whatever the weather, with just Good Friday, Christmas Day and half of
New Year’s day as his only holidays. On market days he started herding
sheep or cattle to town, carrying a lantern, at 1 or 2 a.m. A cotton picker
from North Carolina in the 1920s explained to a different historian why the
mill was so much better than the farm: ‘Once we went to work in the mill
after we moved here from the farm, we had more clothes and more kinds of
food than we did when we was a-farmin’. And we had a better house. So
yes when we came to the mill life was easier.’ And in the 1990s Liang Ying
was delighted to run away from the family rubber farm in southern China,
where she had daily to cut the bark of hundreds of rubber trees in pre-dawn
darkness, to get a job at a textile factory in Shenzhen: ‘If you were me, what
would you prefer, the factory or the farm?’ The economist Pietra Rivoli
writes, ‘As generations of mill girls and seamstresses from Europe, America
and Asia are bound together by this common sweatshop experience –
controlled, exploited, overworked, and underpaid – they are bound together
too by one absolute certainty, shared across both oceans and centuries: this
beats the hell out of life on the farm.’
The reason that the poverty of early industrial England strikes us so
forcibly is that this was the first time writers and politicians took notice of it
and took exception to it, not because it had not existed before. Mrs Gaskell
and Mr Dickens had no equivalents in previous centuries; factory acts and
child labour restrictions were unaffordable before. The industrial revolution
caused a leap in the wealth-generating capacity of the population that
greatly outstripped its breeding potential but it thereby also caused an
increase in compassion, much of which was expressed through the actions
of charities and governments.
The metal Midlands
The burst of innovation which Britain experienced quite suddenly in the
late 1700s was both the cause and consequence of mechanisation, of the
amplification of one person’s labour by machinery and fuel. The tiny nation

of Britain, with just eight million people in 1750, compared with twentyfive million in far more sophisticated France, thirty-one million in far more
populous Japan and 270 million in far more productive China, embarked
upon a phenomenal economic expansion that would propel it to world
domination within a century. Between 1750 and 1850 British men (some of
them immigrants) invented an astonishing range of labour-saving and
labour-amplifying devices, which allowed them to produce more, sell more,
earn more, spend more, live better and have more surviving children. A
famous print entitled ‘The Distinguished Men of Science of Great Britain
Living in the Year 1807–8’, the year that Parliament abolished the slave
trade, depicts fifty-one great engineers and scientists all alive at the time –
as if they were gathered together by an artist in the library of the Royal
Institution. Here are the men who made canals (Thomas Telford), tunnels
(Marc Brunel), steam engines (James Watt), locomotives (Richard
Trevithick), rockets (William Congreve), hydraulic presses (Joseph
Bramah); men who invented the machine tool (Henry Maudslay), the power
loom (Edmund Cartwright), the factory (Matthew Boulton), the miner’s
lamp (Humphry Davy) and the smallpox vaccine (Edward Jenner). Here are
astronomers like Nevil Maskelyne and William Herschel, physicists like
Henry Cavendish and Count Rumford, chemists like John Dalton and
William Henry, botanists like Joseph Banks, polymaths like Thomas Young,
and many more. You look at such a picture and wonder, ‘How did any one
country have so much talent in the same place?’
The premise is false, of course, because it was the aura of the time and
place that drew forth (and attracted from abroad – Brunel was French,
Rumford American) such talent. For all their brilliance, there are Watts,
Davys, Jenners and Youngs galore in every country at every time. But only
rarely do sufficient capital, freedom, education, culture and opportunity
come together in such a way as to draw them out. Two centuries later,
somebody could paint a picture of the great men of Silicon Valley and
posterity will stand amazed at the thought that giants like Gordon Moore
and Robert Noyce, Steve Jobs and Sergey Brin, Stanley Boyer and Leroy
Hood all lived at the same time and in the same place.
Just as the Californian is today, so in 1700 the British manufacturing
entrepreneur was unusually free, compared with both European and Asian
equivalents, to invest, invent, expand and reap the profits. His huge capital
city was unusual in being dominated by merchants, not the government, and

always had been. He also had a world market thanks to the British ships that
were plying the tropics of the world. His rural hinterland was filled with
people free to sell their labour to the highest bidder. Most of the continent
was still dominated by change-resistant lords and serfs neither of whom had
an incentive to be more productive. In much of central and eastern Europe,
serfdom gained a new lease of life in the eighteenth century following the
wars and famines of the 1600s. Peasants owed much of their labour or their
produce to seigneurs (plus a tithe to the Church) and had little freedom to
move, so they had little incentive to be more productive or commercial.
Lords, meanwhile, fiercely resisted the attempts by reforming monarchs to
free their vassals. ‘The landlord looks on the serf as a tool necessary to
cultivate his lands,’ explained one Hungarian liberal, ‘and as a chattel which
he inherited from his parents, or purchased, or acquired as a reward.’
Even where freedom to trade and prosper were obtained – around
Toulouse, in Silesia, in Bohemia – enforcers of rules and extorters of bribes
were legion, while frequent wars played havoc with commerce. Seventeen
tolls were exacted in sixteen leagues in the Limousin valley. France, three
times as populous as England, was ‘cut up by internal customs barriers into
three major trade areas and by informal custom, obsolete tolls and charges,
and above all poor communications into a mosaic of semi-autarkic cells’.
Internal smuggling was rife. Spain was ‘an archipelago, islands of local
production and consumption, isolated from each other by centuries of
internal tariffs’. The Englishman, by contrast, did not have to answer to
petty bureaucrats and pesky tax collectors to the same extent. For this he
could partly thank the upheavals of the previous century, including a civil
war and a ‘glorious revolution’ against James II’s arbitrary government. The
latter event was more than a king-swap; it was in effect a semi-hostile
management buy-in of the entire country by Dutch venture capitalists,
which resulted in a rush of Dutch capital investment, a lurch towards
foreign trade as the engine of state policy in emulation of Holland, and a
constitutional shake-up that empowered a parliament of merchants. William
III had to settle for respecting his people’s property rights if he was to keep
the throne. Add in that Britain did not support a standing army, that a
heavily indented coastline allowed seaborne trade to reach most parts of the
country, and that the administrative capital of the country was also its
commercial capital, and it becomes clear that this was not a bad place to
start or expand a business in say 1700. ‘Nowhere else,’ says David Landes,

‘was the countryside so infused with manufacture; nowhere else, the
pressures and incentives to change greater, the forces of tradition weaker.’
The small town of Birmingham, with no restrictive guilds and no civic
charter, had begun to thrive as a centre of the metalworking trade in the
early 1600s. By 1683 it had over 200 forges producing iron using coal. The
heady combination of available skills and freedom of enterprise created a
boom in an industry known as the ‘toy trade’, though the items made were
mostly buckles, pins, nails, buttons and small utensils, rather than toys
themselves. More patents were issued in Birmingham than in any other city
than London in the eighteenth century, though few would count as major
‘inventions’: this was incremental exploration of the possibilities of iron,
brass, tinplate and copper. The work was done in small workshops, with
little new-fangled machinery, but it was split into skilled, specialised trades
and organised along increasingly sophisticated lines. Manufacturers spun
out of each other’s firms and started business on their own account, just as
they would do around San Francisco Bay in the 1980s.
Demand it and they will supply
People do not start businesses unless there is demand from consumers.
One root cause of England’s miracle was that thanks to trade enough
Britons were rich enough after 1700 to buy the goods and services supplied
by manufacturers so that it paid manufacturers to go out and find more
productive technologies, and in doing so they stumbled upon something
close to an economic perpetual motion machine. ‘One of the most
extraordinary facts of the [eighteenth] century was the enlargement of the
consuming classes,’ says Robert Friedel. ‘There was a consumer revolution
in eighteenth century England,’ writes Neil McKendrick: ‘more men and
women than ever before in human history enjoyed the experience of
acquiring material possessions.’ Compared with mainland Europeans they
were wearing wool cloth (as opposed to linen), eating beef (as opposed to
cheese) and white wheat bread (as opposed to rye). For Daniel Defoe,
writing in 1728, a low level of demand from the masses was far more
important than a rich demand from a few:
Poor People, Journey-Men, working and pains-taking people …
These are the People that carry off the Gross of your Consumption; ’tis
for these your markets are kept open late on Saturday nights … Their
Numbers are not Hundreds or Thousands, or Hundreds of Thousands,

but Millions; ’tis by their Multitude, I say, that all the Wheels of Trade
are set on Foot, the Manufacture and Produce of the Land and Sea,
finished, cur’d, and fitted for the Markets Abroad; ’tis by the
Largeness of their Gettings, that they are supported, and by the
Largeness of their number that the whole country is supported.
Initially, it was the cost of luxuries that fell fastest. If you could afford
only to buy food, fuel and fibre, you were not much better off than your
medieval predecessor; but if you could afford spices, wine, silk, books,
sugar, candles, buckles and the like, then you were three times better off,
not because your income had gone up, but because the price of these goods
was coming down thanks to the efforts of traders in the East India Company
and their ilk. There was a mania for Indian cotton and Chinese porcelain
and it was by copying these Oriental imports that the industrialists got
started. Josiah Wedgwood, for instance, was not technically better at
making pottery and porcelain than many others, but he was supremely good
at making sure it was affordable, by dividing labour among skilled workers
and applying steam to the process. He was also very good at marketing
porcelain to the consuming classes by making it seem to be both posh and
affordable – the holy grail of marketing ever since.
Cotton tells the tale best, though. In the 1600s, English people wore
wool, linen and – if they were rich – silk. Cotton was almost unknown,
though some refugees from Spanish persecution in Antwerp settled in
Norwich as cotton weavers. But trade with India was bringing more and
more ‘calico’ cotton cloth into the country, where its light, soft, washable
character, and the way it could be colourfully printed and dyed, attracted
demand from the well off. The weavers of wool and silk resented this
upstart rival, and pressed Parliament for protection against it. In 1699, all
judges and students were told to wear gowns of wool; in 1700 all corpses
were ordered to wear shrouds of sheep’s wool; and from 1701 it was
decreed that ‘all calicoes painted, dyed, printed or stained … shall not be
worn’. So ladies of fashion bought plain muslin and had it dyed. Riots
broke out and women seen wearing cotton were even attacked by gangs of
silk or wool weavers. Cotton was considered unpatriotic. By 1722
Parliament had bowed to the wishes of these weavers and on Christmas day
that year, when the Calico Act took effect, it became illegal to wear cotton
of any kind, or even to use it in home furnishings. Not for the last time, the

narrow interest of producers triumphed over the broader interest of
consumers in an act of trade protectionism.
And not for the last time, protectionism would fail, even backfire. To
get round the law, East India merchants began to import raw cotton instead,
and entrepreneurs started ‘putting out’ cotton to the cottages of rural
spinsters and weavers to be made into cloth for export or even, mixed with
a little linen or wool to keep it legal (the Calico Act was eventually repealed
in 1774), for domestic sale. They had already been ‘putting out’ wool for
decades, stealing a march on the Low Countries, where powerful craft
guilds had prevented ‘putting out’ by smashing looms in rural cottages. The
putters-out were clothiers with a reputation for loan sharking who made a
living mostly by supplying raw wool to workers in their cottage homes and
paying to collect finished cloth later, minus any interest on loans. The wives
and daughters of farmers, and their menfolk in certain seasons, were in
effect prepared to add to family income by selling labour as well as
produce. Sometimes they found themselves in debt, because they borrowed
money from the putters-out to equip themselves.
You can see these folk as desperate wage slaves driven off communal
land by enclosure acts, the division of common land into private plots that
gradually spread across most of England between about 1550 and 1800. But
this is misleading. It is more accurate to see the rural textile workers as
taking the first step on the ladder of producing and consuming, of
specialisation and exchange. They were escaping self-sufficiency into the
cash economy. It is true that some people were dispossessed of their
livelihoods by enclosure, but enclosure actually increased paid employment
for farm labourers, so it was for most a shift from low-grade selfsufficiency to slightly better production and consumption. Besides, Irish
and Scottish as well as English migrants flocked to the textile districts to
join the cottage industries. These were people giving up peasant drudgery
for the chance of joining the cash economy, albeit at a low wage and for
hard work. People were marrying younger and consequently giving birth to
more children.
The result was that the very people who were joining the industry as
workers would soon begin to be its customers. Suddenly the rising income
of the average British worker met the falling cost of cotton cloth and
suddenly everybody could afford to wear (and wash) cotton underwear. The
historian Edward Baines noted in 1835 that the ‘wonderful cheapness of

cotton goods’ was now benefiting the ‘bulk of the people’: ‘a country-wake
in the nineteenth century may display as much finery as a drawing room in
the eighteenth.’ The capitalist achievement, reflected Joseph Schumpeter a
century later, ‘does not typically consist of providing more silk stockings
for queens but in bringing them within reach of factory girls in return for
steadily decreasing amounts of effort.’
But increasing supply was not easy, because even the remotest Pennine
valleys and Welsh marches were now thickly settled with the cottages of
weavers and spinsters, transport was dear and some of the workers were
earning good enough wages to take weekend holidays, occasionally even
drinking their pay away till Monday night, preferring consumption to extra
income. As the twentieth-century economist Colin Clark put it, ‘Leisure has
a real value even to very poor people.’
So, stuck between booming demand and stalling supply, the putters-out
and their suppliers were ripe customers for any kind of productivityenhancing invention, and with such an incentive, the inventors soon
obliged. John Kay’s flying shuttle, James Hargreaves’s spinning jenny,
Richard Arkwright’s water frame, Samuel Crompton’s mule – these were all
just milestones on a continuous road of incrementally improving
productivity. The jenny worked up to twenty times as fast as a spinning
wheel and produced a more consistent yarn, but it was still operated entirely
by human muscle power. Yet by 1800 the jenny was already obsolete,
because the frame was several hundred times as fast. Frames were
increasingly powered by watermills. Ten years after that the ‘mule’, a
machine that combined features of both the jenny and the frame, already
outnumbered the frame by more than ten spindles to one. And mules would
soon be powered by steam. The result was a vast expansion in the amount
of cotton worked and a steep fall in the price of woven cloth. British exports
of cotton goods quintupled in the 1780s and quintupled again in the 1790s.
The price of a pound of finespun cotton yarn fell from 38 shillings in 1786
to just 3 shillings in 1832.
Until 1800 most of the raw cotton spun in England came from Asia. But
Chinese and Indian cotton growers either could not or would not increase
their output. They had little fresh land to exploit and little incentive either:
the zemindar landlord or the imperial bureaucrat took the profit of any
productivity increase. Instead it was the southern states of America that
took up the opportunity. From producing an insignificant quantity of cotton

in 1790, America became the world’s biggest producer by the 1820s and by
1860 was growing two-thirds of the world’s cotton. Cotton accounted for
half of all American exports by value between 1815 and 1860.
Slaves did the work. Cotton was a labour-intensive crop, in which a
single man could sow, weed (again and again), harvest and clean the
product of just eighteen acres, and there were few economies of scale. In
land-rich, thinly populated America, the only way to expand production was
to kill the market in labour altogether: to force the workers to work for no
wage. As the economist Pietra Rivoli puts it: ‘It was not the perils of the
labour market, but the suppression of the market that doomed the lives of
slaves.’ The affordability of cloth for the English working class was made
possible by the buying and selling of captured Africans.
King coal
So far fossil fuels have played only a small part. Now imagine what
would have happened next if Britain had possessed no accessible coal
reserves. Coal exists all over the world, but some British coal fields were
close to the surface and close enough to navigable waterways to be cheaply
transported. The cost of transporting coal overland was prohibitive until the
railway came along. It was not that coal was a cheaper source of power than
the alternative – coal took a century to compete on price with water power
in factories – but that it was effectively limitless in supply. The harnessing
of water power soon experienced diminishing returns as it reached
saturation point in the Pennines. Nor was there any other, renewable fuel
that could supply the need. In the first half of the eighteenth century, even
the relatively tiny English iron industry was close to moribund for lack of
charcoal fuel on a largely deforested island. What timber there was in the
south of England was in demand for ship building, which bid up its price.
So in search of charcoal to feed their forges, the iron masters left the Sussex
Weald and moved to the West Midlands, then to the Welsh Marches, to
South Yorkshire and eventually to Cumberland. Imports of wrought iron
from well-forested Sweden and Russia met the growing demand from the
mechanisation of the textile industry, but even these imports could not meet
the needs of the industrial revolution. Only coal could do that. There was
never going to be enough wind, water or wood in England to power the
factories, let alone in the right place.
This was the position in which China found itself. In 1700 it had a
vibrant textile industry, perhaps equally ripe for mechanisation, but it was a

long way from coalfields, and its domestic iron industry was dependent
entirely on charcoal, whose price was rising as forests retreated. Part of the
problem was that Shanxi and Inner Mongolia, where the coal was, had been
depopulated by barbarians and plague in the three centuries after 1100, so
the country’s demographic and economic centre of gravity shifted south to
the Yangtze valley. Because none of the coal reserves were close to
navigable water, China’s iron industry gave up its early experiment with
fossil fuel. The price of iron rose in China, discouraging inventors from
using it for machinery. So industrial activity in China experienced
diminishing returns and as the population grew, people had less and less
incentive both to consume and to invent. Besides, the imperial bureaucracy
would have had an attack of the vapours if asked to allow independent
entrepreneurs to ‘put out’ work, unregulated, in the countryside, let alone
build factories.
Efficiency in the coal industry did not itself contribute significantly to
rising productivity in Britain even in the nineteenth century. Cotton
contributed thirty-four times as much as coal to productivity growth in
industrialising Britain. Coal’s cost per tonne at the pithead in Newcastle
rose slightly between the 1740s and 1860s, though the price in London fell
because of lower taxes and falling transport costs. The miner’s safety lamp
aside, coal used few new technologies after the steamdriven pump. Well
into the twentieth century, the equipment of the typical miner consisted of a
lamp, a pick-axe, wooden pit props and a pony. The great increase in coal
consumption (five-fold in the eighteenth century, fourteen-fold in the
nineteenth century) was the result mainly of more investment, not more
productivity. Contrast this with the iron industry, where the amount of coal
needed to smelt a tonne of pig iron and then refine it into wrought iron
halved every thirty years. It took almost as much human muscle power to
mine a tonne of coal in 1900 as it did in 1800. Not until opencast (strip)
mining began in the second half of the twentieth century did the tonnage
produced per miner really begin to rise steeply.
This is one reason that the coal industry, like all mining industries
before and since, was characterised by dreadful working conditions
tolerated only because of somewhat higher wages than could be got in farm
labour. They were higher, at least initially, or else Scottish and Irish people
would not have flocked to Tyneside in the nineteenth century. The wages of

a coal hewer in the North-east of England were twice as high, and rising
twice as fast, as those of a farm worker in the nineteenth century.
Without coal, innovation in England’s textile, iron and transport
industry would have had to stagnate after 1800, when all that ferment of
invention had as of yet had almost no effect on living standards. As the
historian Tony Wrigley has put it: ‘Until almost the middle of the nineteenth
century it was still reasonable to fear a fate for England similar to that
which had overtaken Holland. Hence the prominence of the stationary state
in the prognostications of the classical economists.’Wrigley made the case
that it was the transition from an organic economy, which grew its own fuel,
to a mineral economy, which mined it, that enabled Britain to escape
stagnation. It was coal that gave the industrial revolution its surprising
second wind, that kept the mills, forges and locomotives running, and that
eventually fuelled the so-called second industrial revolution of the 1860s,
when electricity, chemicals and telegraphs brought Europe unprecedented
prosperity and global power. Coal gave Britain fuel equivalent to the output
of fifteen million extra acres of forest to burn, an area nearly the size of
Scotland. By 1870, the burning of coal in Britain was generating as many
calories as would have been expended by 850 million labourers. It was as if
each worker had twenty servants at his beck and call. The capacity of the
country’s steam engines alone was equivalent to six million horses or forty
million men, who would otherwise have eaten three times the entire wheat
harvest. That is how much energy had been harnessed to the application of
the division of labour. That is how impossible the task of Britain’s
nineteenth-century miracle would have been without fossil fuels.
Now Lancashire could beat the world for both quality and price. In
1750, India’s muslins and calicoes were the envy of weavers everywhere. A
century later, despite wages that were four or five times higher than in
India, Lancashire was able to flood even India with cheap cotton cloth,
some of it manufactured from Indian raw cotton that had made a 13,000mile round trip. This was thanks entirely to the productivity of Lancashire’s
mechanised mills. That is how much difference having fossil fuels made.
No matter how low his wages, an Indian weaver could not compete with the
operator of a steamdriven Manchester mule. By 1900, 40 per cent of the
world’s cotton goods were produced within thirty miles of Manchester.
Industrialisation became contagious: the increased productivity of
cotton mills encouraged demand from the chemical industry, which

invented chlorine for bleaching, and from the printing industry, which
turned to drum printing to print coloured cloth. By cutting the price of
cotton, it also released consumer expenditure for other goods, which
stimulated other manufacturing inventions. And of course to make the new
machines, it demanded high-quality iron, which was made possible by
cheap coal.
The crucial thing about coal was that, unlike forests and streams, it did
not experience diminishing returns and rising prices. The price of coal may
not have fallen much in the 1800s, but nor did it rise despite an enormous
increase in the volume of consumption. In 1800 Britain was consuming
over twelve million tonnes of coal a year, three times what it had used in
1750. The coal was still being used for two purposes only: domestic heating
and general manufacturing, which at that date meant mostly bricks, glass,
salt and metals. By 1830, consumption of coal had doubled, with iron
manufacture taking 16 per cent and collieries themselves 5 per cent. By
1860, the country had consumed a billion tonnes and was now using it to
drive the wheels of locomotives and the paddle wheels of ships. By 1930
Britain was using sixty-eight times as much coal as it had in 1750 and was
now making electricity and gas with it as well. Today most coal is used for
generating electricity.
Dynamo
Electricity’s contribution to human welfare can hardly be exaggerated.
To my generation it is a dull utility, as inevitable, ubiquitous and mundane
as water or air. Its pylons and wires are ugly, its plugs tiresome, its failures
infuriating, its fire risks frightening, its bills annoying and its power stations
monstrous symbols of man-made climate change (complete with Al Gore
hurricanes coming from their stacks). But try to see its magic. Try to see it
through the eyes of somebody who has never known power that was
invisible and weightless, that could be transmitted miles through a slender
wire, that can do almost anything, from lighting to toasting, from
propulsion to music playing. Two billion people alive today have never
turned on a light switch.
Imagine yourself at the Vienna exhibition of 1873. There is a stand
exhibiting the work of the splendidly named semi-literate Belgian inventor
Zénobe Théophile Gramme, and it is manned by his business partner, the
equally euphonious French engineer Hippolyte Fontaine. They are showing
off the Gramme dynamo, the first electricity generator that can produce a

smooth current, and a steady light, when set spinning by hand or by a steam
engine. Over the next five years, their dynamos will power hundreds of new
industrial lighting installations all over Paris. In the Vienna exhibition, one
of the workmen makes a careless mistake. He connects the wires from the
spinning dynamo accidentally to the spare dynamo that is there to provide a
backup in case the first one fails. The reserve dynamo immediately begins
to spin all by itself, in effect it becomes a motor. Fontaine’s mind starts
spinning too. He calls for the longest wire that can be found and connects
the two dynamos by a wire that is 250 metres long. The reserve dynamo
springs to life as soon as it is connected. Suddenly it became clear that
electricity can transmit power over a distance far greater than belts, chains
or cogs could.
By 1878, Gramme dynamos, turned by water in the river Marne, were
transmitting power to two other Gramme dynamos working as motors three
miles away, which in turn were pulling ploughs by cable through a field at
the Menier estate near Paris, watched by wide-eyed grandees of the London
Institute of Mechanical Engineers. A cascade of inventions followed:
electric railways from William Siemens, better light bulbs from Joseph
Swan and Thomas Edison, alternating current from George Westinghouse,
Nikola Tesla and Sebastian de Ferranti, turbine generators from Charles
Parsons. The electrification of the world began, and although like the
computer it took decades to show up in the productivity statistics, its
triumph was inexorable and its effect far-reaching. Today, 130 years later,
electricity is still transforming people’s lives when it first reaches them,
bringing colourless, smokeless, weightless energy into the home. One
recent study in the Philippines estimated that the average household derives
$108 a month in benefits from connecting to the electricity grid – cheaper
lighting ($37), cheaper radio and television ($19), more years in education
($20), time saving ($24) and business productivity ($8). Heck, it even
affects the birth rate as television replaces procreation as an evening
activity.
The earth receives 174 million billion watts of sunlight, about 10,000
times as much as the fossil-fuel output that human beings use. Or, to put it
another way, a patch of ground roughly five yards by five yards receives as
much sunlight as you need to run your techno life. So why pay for
electricity, when there is power all about you? Because, even allowing for
inconveniently timed winter, night, clouds and the shade of trees, this

drenching rain of photons is all but useless. It does not come in the form of
electricity, let alone car fuel or plastic. Joule for joule, wood is less
convenient than coal, which is less convenient than natural gas, which is
less convenient than electricity, which is less convenient than the electricity
currently trickling through my mobile telephone. I am prepared to pay good
money for somebody to deliver me refined and applied electrons on
demand, just as I am for steaks or shirts.
Suppose you had said to my hypothetical family of 1800, eating their
gristly stew in front of a log fire, that in two centuries their descendants
would need to fetch no logs or water, and carry out no sewage, because
water, gas and a magic form of invisible power called electricity would
come into their home through pipes and wires. They would jump at the
chance to have such a home, but they would warily ask how they could
possibly afford it. Suppose that you then told them that to earn such a home,
they need only ensure that father and mother both have to go to work for
eight hours in an office, travelling roughly forty minutes each way in a
horseless carriage, and that the children need not work at all, but should go
to school to be sure of getting such jobs when they started work at twenty.
They would be more than dumbfounded; they would be delirious with
excitement. Where, they would cry, is the catch?
Heat is work and work is heat
Can I stretch the industrial revolution upon the Procrustean bed of my
hypothesis, as I have done for the upper Palaeolithic, Neolithic, urban and
commercial revolutions, too? Thanks mainly to new energy technologies,
what took a textile worker twenty minutes in 1750 took just one minute in
1850. He could therefore either supply twenty times as many people in a
day’s work, or supply each customer with twenty times as much cloth, or
free his customer to spend 19/20ths of his income on some thing other than
shirts. That was in essence why the second half of the industrial revolution
made Britain rich. It made it possible for fewer people to supply more
people with more goods and more services – in Adam Smith’s words, to
make ‘a smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work’.
There was a step change in the number of people that could be served or
supplied by one person, a great leap in the specialisation of production and
the diversification of consumption. Coal had made everybody into a little
Louis XIV.

Today, the average person on the planet consumes power at the rate of
about 2,500 watts, or to put it a different way, uses 600 calories per second.
About 85 per cent of that comes from burning coal, oil and gas, the rest
from nuclear and hydro (wind, solar and biomass are mere asterisks on the
chart, as is the food you eat). Since a reasonably fit person on an exercise
bicycle can generate about fifty watts, this means that it would take 150
slaves, working eight-hour shifts each, to peddle you to your current
lifestyle. (Americans would need 660 slaves, French 360 and Nigerians 16.)
Next time you lament human dependence on fossil fuels, pause to imagine
that for every family of four you see in the street, there should be 600
unpaid slaves back home, living in abject poverty: if they had any better
lifestyle they would need their own slaves. That is close to a trillion people.
You can take this reductio ad absurdum two ways. You can regret the
sinful profligacy of the modern world, which is the conventional reaction,
or you can conclude that were it not for fossil fuels, 99 per cent of people
would have to live in slavery for the rest to have a decent standard of living,
as indeed they did in Bronze Age empires. This is not to try to make you
love coal and oil, but to drive home how much your Louis Quatorze
standard of living is made possible by the invention of energy-substitutes
for slaves. Let me repeat a declaration of interest here: I am descended from
a long line of people who profited from the mining of coal, and I still do.
Coal has huge drawbacks – it emits carbon dioxide, radioactivity and
mercury; but my point here is to note how it contributes to human
prosperity as well. Coal makes the electricity that lights your house, spins
your washing machine and smelts the aluminium from which your
aeroplane was made; oil fuels the ships, trucks and planes that filled your
supermarket and makes the plastic from which your children’s toys are
made; gas heats your home, bakes your bread and makes the fertiliser that
grows your food. These are your slaves.
But can it last? That fossil fuels will run out soon is an anxiety as old as
fossil fuels themselves. Predicting an imminent increase in the price of coal
as demand expanded and supplies ran short, the economist Stanley Jevons
opined in 1865: ‘It is thence simply inferred that we cannot long continue
our present rate of progress’, adding: ‘it is useless to think of substituting
any other kind of fuel for coal’ and so his fellow Britons ‘must either leave
the country in a vast body or remain here to create painful pressure and
poverty’. So influential was Jevons’s jeremiad about what would now be

called ‘peak coal’ that it led to a newspaperled ‘coal panic’ of 1866, to
William Gladstone’s budgetary promise of that year to start paying down
the national debt while coal lasted and to a Royal Commission on the coal
supply. Ironically, this was the very decade when vast coal reserves were
discovered all over the world and petroleum drilling began in earnest in the
Caucasus and North America.
In the twentieth century oil has been the chief cause of anxiety. In 1914,
the United States Bureau of Mines predicted that American oil reserves
would last ten years. In 1939 the Department of the Interior said American
oil would last thirteen years. Twelve years later it said the oil would last
another thirteen years. President Jimmy Carter announced in the 1970s that:
‘We could use up all of the proven reserves of oil in the entire world by the
end of the next decade.’ In 1970, there were 550 billion barrels of oil
reserves in the world and between 1970 and 1990 the world used 600
billion barrels of oil. So reserves should have been overdrawn by fifty
billion barrels by 1990. In fact, by 1990 unexploited reserves amounted to
900 billion barrels – not counting the Athabasca tar sands of Alberta, the
Orinoco tar shales of Venezuela and the oil shale of the Rocky Mountains,
which between them contain about six trillion barrels of heavy oil, or
twenty times the proven oil reserves in Saudi Arabia. These heavy oil
reserves are costly to exploit, but it is possible that bacterial refining will
soon make them competitive with conventional oil even at ‘normal’ prices.
The same false predictions of the imminent exhaustion of the natural gas
supply have recurred throughout recent decades. Shale gas finds have
recently doubled America’s gas resources to nearly three centuries’ worth.
Oil, coal and gas are finite. But between them they will last decades,
perhaps centuries, and people will find alternatives long before they run out.
Fuel can be synthesised from water using any source of power, such as
nuclear or solar. At the moment, it costs too much to do so, but as efficiency
increases and oil prices rise, then the equation will look different.
Moreover, it is an undeniable if surprising fact, often over-looked, that
fossil fuels have spared much of the landscape from industrialisation.
Before fossil fuels, energy was grown on land and it needed lots of land to
grow it. Where I live, streams flow free; timber grows and rots in the
woods; pasture supports cows; skylines are not scarred by windmills –
where, were it not for fossil fuels, these acres would be desperately needed
to power human lives. If America were to grow all its own transport fuel as

biofuel it would need 30 per cent more farmland than it currently uses to
grow food. Where would it grow food then? To get an idea of just how
landscape-eating the renewable alternatives are, consider that to supply just
the current 300 million inhabitants of the United States with their current
power demand of roughly 10,000 watts each (2,400 calories per second)
would require:
solar panels the size of Spain
or wind farms the size of Kazakhstan
or woodland the size of India and Pakistan
or hayfields for horses the size of Russia and Canada
combined
or hydroelectric dams with catchments one-third larger than
all the continents put together
As it is, a clutch of coal and nuclear power stations and a handful of oil
refineries and gas pipelines supply the 300 million Americans with nearly
all their energy from an almost laughably small footprint – even taking into
account the land despoiled by strip mines. For example, in the Appalachian
coal region where strip mining happens, roughly 7 per cent of twelve
million acres is being affected over twenty years, or an area two-thirds the
size of Delaware. That’s a big area, but nothing like the numbers above.
Wind turbines require five to ten times as much concrete and steel per watt
as nuclear power plants, not to mention miles of paved roads and overhead
cables. To label the land-devouring monsters of renewable energy ‘green’,
virtuous or clean strikes me as bizarre. If you like wilderness, as I do, the
last thing you want is to go back to the medieval habit of using the
landscape surrounding us to make power. Just one wind farm at Altamont in
California kills twenty-four golden eagles every year: if an oil firm did that
it would be in court. Hundreds of orang-utans are killed a year because they
get in the way of oil-palm biofuel plantations. ‘Let’s stop sanctifying false
and minor gods,’ says the energy expert Jesse Ausubel, ‘and heretically
chant “Renewables are not green”.’
The truth is, it was western Europe’s incredible good fortune that just
when humankind began to bear down on its landscapes and habitats most
heavily, instead of ecological disaster as happened in Babylon, there
appeared from underground a near-magical substance so that the landscape

could be partly spared. Today you do not have to use acres to grow your
transport fuel (oil has replaced hay for horses), your heating fuel (natural
gas for timber), your power (coal for water), or your lighting (nuclear and
coal for beeswax and tallow). You still have to grow much of your clothing,
although ‘fleeces’ now come from oil. More’s the pity: if cotton could be
replaced by a synthetic substance of the same quality, the Aral Sea could be
restored and parts of India and China given back to tigers. The one thing
nobody has yet figured out how to make in factories using coal or oil is
food – thank goodness – though even here natural gas provided the energy
to fix about half the nitrogen atoms in your average meal.
The mad world of biofuels
This is what makes the ethanol and biofuel boondoggle so enraging. Not
even Jonathan Swift would dare to write a satire in which politicians argued
that – in a world where species are vanishing and more than a billion people
are barely able to afford to eat – it would somehow be good for the planet to
clear rainforests to grow palm oil, or give up food-crop land to grow
biofuels, solely so that people could burn fuel derived from carbohydrate
rather than hydrocarbons in their cars, thus driving up the price of food for
the poor. Ludicrous is too weak a word for this heinous crime. But I will
calm myself just long enough to go through the numbers in case nobody has
heard them.
In 2005, the world made roughly ten billion tonnes of ethanol, 45 per
cent of it from Brazilian sugar cane and 45 per cent from American maize.
Add in a billion tonnes of biodiesel made from European rape seed and the
result is that roughly 5 per cent of the world’s crop land has been taken out
of growing food and put into growing fuel (20 per cent in the United
States). Together with drought in Australia and more meat eating in China,
this was the key factor that helped push world food supply below world
food demand in 2008 and cause food riots all over the world. Between 2004
and 2007 the world maize harvest increased by fifty-one million tonnes, but
fifty million tonnes went into ethanol, leaving nothing to meet the increase
of demand for all other uses of thirty-three million tonnes: hence the price
rose. The poor, remember, spend 70 per cent of their incomes on food. In
effect, American car drivers were taking carbohydrates out of the mouths of
the poor to fill their tanks.
Which might just be acceptable if either biofuel had a big environmental
benefit, or it saved Americans money so they could afford to buy more

goods and services from the poor and help them out of poverty that way.
But since Americans are in effect being taxed thrice over to pay for the
ethanol industry – they subsidise the growing of maize, they subsidise the
manufacture of ethanol and they pay more for their food – the ability of
American consumers to contribute to demand for manufactured goods is
actually hurt by ethanol, not helped. Meanwhile, the environmental benefits
of biofuels are not just illusory; they are negative. Fermenting carbohydrate
is an inefficient business compared with burning hydrocarbon. Every acre
of maize or sugar cane requires tractor fuel, fertilisers, pesticides, truck fuel
and distillation fuel – all of which are fuel. So the question is: how much
fuel does it take to grow fuel? Answer: about the same amount. The US
Department of Agriculture estimated in 2002 that each unit of energy put
into growing maize ethanol produces 1.34 units of output, but only by
counting the energy of dried distillers’ grain, a by-product of the production
process that can go into cattle feed. Without that, the gain was just 9 per
cent. Other studies, though, came to less positive conclusions, including one
estimate that there was a 29 per cent loss of energy in the process. Drilling
for and refining oil, by contrast, gets you a 600 per cent energy return or
more on your energy used. Which sounds the better investment?
Even if you grant a net energy gain from ethanol – and Brazilian sugar
cane is rather better, but only thanks to the fact it employs armies of
underpaid human labour – that does not translate into environmental
benefits. Using oil to drive cars releases carbon dioxide, which is a
greenhouse gas. Using tractors to grow crops also releases nitrous oxide
from soil, which is a stronger greenhouse gas with nearly 300 times the
warming potential of carbon dioxide. And every increment in the price of
grain that the biofuel industry causes means more pressure on rainforests,
the destruction of which is the single most cost-effective way of adding
carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Converting the cerrado soils of Brazil to
soybean diesel, or the peat lands of Malaysia to palm-oil diesel, says Joseph
Fargione of the Nature Conservancy, releases ‘17–420 times more CO2 than
the annual greenhouse gas reductions that these biofuels would provide by
displacing fossil fuels’. Or, to put it another way, it would take decades or
centuries for the investment to pay back in climate terms. If you want to
reduce carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, replant a forest on former
farmland.

Moreover, it takes about 130 gallons of water to grow, and five gallons
of water to distil a single gallon of maize ethanol – assuming that only 15
per cent of the crop is irrigated. By contrast, it takes less than three gallons
of water to extract, and two gallons to refine, a gallon of gasoline. To meet
America’s stated aim of growing thirty-five billion gallons of ethanol a year
would require using as much water as is consumed each year by the entire
population of California. Be in no doubt: the biofuel industry is not just bad
for the economy. It is bad for the planet, too. The chief reason it gained such
a stranglehold on American politicians is because of the lobbying and
political funding supplied by big companies.
Now, given that I am a fan of the future, I must not dismiss the first
generation of biofuels prematurely. There are better crops coming along,
whose ability to shoot themselves in the ecological footprint may not be so
marked. Tropical sugar beet can generate huge yields using less water, and
plants like jatropha may yet prove good at getting fuel from waste ground –
if genetically engineered. And surely, algae, grown in water, have a chance
to outyield them all without requiring irrigation, of course.
But do not forget the single most important problem with biofuels, the
one that makes them so capable of making environmental problems worse –
they need land. A sustainable future for nine billion people on one planet is
going to come from using as little land as possible for each of people’s
needs. And if food yields from land continue to increase at the current rate,
the current acreage of farmland will – just – feed the world in 2050, so the
extra land for growing fuel will have to come from rainforests and other
wild habitats. Another way of putting the same point is to borrow the
familiar environmentalist lament that the human race is already, to quote the
ecologist E.O. Wilson, ‘appropriating between 20 and 40 per cent of the
solar energy captured in organic material’. Why would you want to increase
that percentage, leaving still less for other species? Ruining habitats and
landscapes and extinguishing species to fuel a civilisation is a medieval
mistake that surely need not be repeated, when there are coal seams and tar
shales and nuclear reactors to hand.
Ah, for one good reason, you reply: climate change. I will address that
issue in chapter 10. For now, simply note that if it were not for the climatechange argument, you could not begin to justify the claim that renewable
energy is green and fossil energy is not.
Efficiency and demand

Civilisation, like life itself, has always been about capturing energy.
That is to say, just as a successful species is one that converts the sun’s
energy into offspring more rapidly than another species, so the same is true
of a nation. Progressively, as the aeons passed, life as a whole has grown
gradually more and more efficient at doing this, at locally cheating the
second law of thermodynamics. The plants and animals that dominate the
earth today channel more of the sun’s energy through their bodies than their
ancestors of the Cambrian period (when, for example, there were no plants
on land). Likewise, human history is a tale of progressively discovering and
diverting sources of energy to support human lifestyle. Domesticated crops
captured more solar energy for the first farmers; draught animals channelled
more plant energy into raising human living standards; watermills took the
sun’s evaporation engine and used it to enrich medieval monks.
‘Civilisation, like life, is a Sisyphean flight from chaos,’ as Peter Huber and
Mark Mills put it. ‘The chaos will prevail in the end, but it is our mission to
postpone that day for as long as we can and to push things in the opposite
direction with all the ingenuity and determination we can muster. Energy
isn’t the problem. Energy is the solution.’
The Newcomen steam engine worked at 1 per cent efficiency – that is to
say it converted 1 per cent of the heat from burning coal into useful work.
Watt’s engine was 10 per cent efficient and rotated much faster. Otto’s
internal combustion engine was about 20 per cent efficient and faster still. A
modern combined-cycle turbine is about 60 per cent efficient at making
electricity from natural gas and runs at 1,000 rpm. Modern civilisation
therefore gets more and more work out of each tonne of fossil fuel. This
increasing efficiency would, you might think, gradually reduce the need to
burn so much coal, oil and gas. As a country goes through an industrial
revolution, at first more and more people join the fossil-fuel system – i.e.,
they start to use fossil fuels in both their work and their home – so more and
more gets used. The ‘energy intensity’ (watts per dollar of GDP) actually
rises. This happened in China in the 1990s, for example. Then later, once
most people are in the system, efficiency does start to bite and energy
intensity starts to fall. This is happening in India today. The United States
now uses one-half as much energy per unit of GDP as it did in 1950. The
world is using 1.6 per cent less energy for each dollar of GDP growth every
year. Surely now energy usage will eventually also start to fall?

That is what I thought, until one day I tried to have an unnecessary
conversation on a mobile telephone while a man was using a leaf-blower
nearby. Even if everybody lags his loft and switches to compact fluorescent
light bulbs, and throws out his patio heaters and gets his power from more
efficient power stations, and loses his job in a steel plant but gets a new one
in a call centre, the falling energy intensity of the economy will be offset by
the new opportunities wealth brings to use energy in new ways. Cheap light
bulbs let people plug in more lights. Silicon chips use so little power that
they are everywhere and in aggregate their effect mounts up. A search
engine may not use as much energy as a steam engine, but lots of them soon
add up. Energy efficiency has been rising for a very long time and so has
energy consumption. This is known as the Jevons paradox after the
Victorian economist Stanley Jevons, who put it thus: ‘It is wholly a
confusion of ideas to suppose that the economical use of fuel is equivalent
to a diminished consumption. The very contrary is the truth. As a rule, new
modes of economy will lead to an increase of consumption.’
I am not saying fossil fuels are irreplaceable. I can easily envisage a
world in 2050 in which fossil fuels have declined in importance relative to
other forms of energy. I can envisage plug-in hybrid cars that use cheap offpeak (nuclear) electricity for their first twenty miles; I can imagine vast
solar-power farms exporting electricity from sunny deserts in Algeria or
Arizona; I can imagine hot-dry-rock geothermal plants; above all, I foresee
pebble-bed, passive-safe, modular nuclear reactors everywhere. I can even
imagine wind, tide, wave and biomass energy making small contributions,
though these should be a last resort because they are so expensive and
environmentally destructive. But this I know: we will need the watts from
somewhere. They are our slaves. Thomas Edison deserves the last word: ‘I
am ashamed at the number of things around my house and shops that are
done by animals – human beings, I mean – and ought to be done by a motor
without any sense of fatigue or pain. Hereafter a motor must do all the
chores.’
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Eight
The invention of invention: increasing
returns after 1800
He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without
lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without
darkening me.
THOMAS JEFFERSON
Letter to Isaac McPherson

The phrase ‘diminishing returns’ is such a cliché that few give it much
thought. Picking out the pecans from a bowl of salted nuts (a vice of mine)
gives diminishing returns: the pieces of pecan in the bowl get rarer and
smaller. The fingers keep finding almonds, hazelnuts, cashews or even –
God forbid – Brazil nuts. Gradually the bowl, like a moribund gold mine,
ceases to yield decent returns of pecan. Now imagine a bowl of nuts that
had the opposite character. The more pecans you took, the larger and more
numerous they grew. Implausible, I admit. Yet that is precisely the character
of the human experience since 100,000 years ago. Inexorably, the global nut
bowl has yielded ever more pecans, however many get used. The pace of
acceleration of returns lurched upwards around 10,000 years ago in the

agricultural revolution. It then lurched upwards again in AD 1800 and the
acceleration continued in the twentieth century. The most fundamental
feature of the modern world since 1800 – more profound than flight, radio,
nuclear weapons or websites, more momentous than science, health, or
material well-being – has been the continuing discovery of ‘increasing
returns’ so rapid that they outpaced even the population explosion.
The more you prosper, the more you can prosper. The more you invent,
the more inventions become possible. How can this be possible? The world
of things – of pecans or power stations – is indeed often subject to
diminishing returns. But the world of ideas is not. The more knowledge you
generate, the more you can generate. And the engine that is driving
prosperity in the modern world is the accelerating generation of useful
knowledge. So, for example, a bicycle is a thing and is subject to
diminishing returns. One bicycle is very useful, but there is not much extra
gain in having two, let alone three. But the idea ‘bicycle’ does not diminish
in value. No matter how many times you tell somebody how to make or ride
a bicycle, the idea will not grow stale or useless or fray at the edges. Like
Thomas Jefferson’s candle flame, it gives without losing. Indeed, the very
opposite happens. The more people you tell about bicycles, the more people
will come back with useful new features for bicycles – mudguards, lighter
frames, racing tyres, child seats, electric motors. The dissemination of
useful knowledge causes that useful knowledge to breed more useful
knowledge.
Nobody predicted this. The pioneers of political economy expected
eventual stagnation. Adam Smith, David Ricardo and Robert Malthus all
foresaw that diminishing returns would eventually set in, that the
improvement in living standards they were seeing would peter out. ‘The
discovery, and useful application of machinery, always leads to the increase
of the net produce of the country, although it may not, and will not, after an
inconsiderable interval, increase the value of that net produce,’ said
Ricardo: all tends towards what he called a ‘stationary state’. Even John
Stuart Mill, conceding that returns were showing no signs of diminishing in
the 1840s, put it down to a miracle, innovation, he said, was an external
factor, a cause but not an effect of economic growth, an inexplicable slice of
luck. And Mill’s optimism was not shared by his successors. As discovery
began to slow, so competition would drive the profits of enterprise out of
the increasingly perfect market till all that was left was rent and monopoly.

With Smith’s invisible hand guiding infinite market participants possessed
of perfect information to profitless equilibria and vanishing returns, neoclassical economics gloomily forecast the end of growth.
It was a description of an entirely fictional world. The concept of a
steady final state, applied to a dynamic system like the economy, is as
wrong as any philosophical abstraction can be. It is Pareto piffle. As the
economist Eamonn Butler puts it, the ‘perfect market is not just an
abstraction; it’s plain daft … Whenever you see the word equilibrium in a
textbook, blot it out.’ It is wrong because it assumes perfect competition,
perfect knowledge and perfect rationality, none of which do or can exist. It
is the planned economy, not the market, that requires perfect knowledge.
The possibility of new knowledge makes the steady state impossible.
Somewhere somebody will have a new idea and that idea will enable him to
invent a new combination of atoms both to create and to exploit
imperfections in the market. As Friedrich Hayek argued, knowledge is
dispersed throughout society, because each person has a special perspective.
Knowledge can never be gathered together in one place. It is collective, not
individual. Yet the failure of any particular market to match the perfect
market no more constitutes ‘market failure’ than the failure of a particular
marriage to match the perfect marriage constitutes ‘marriage failure’.
In an exactly analogous way, the science of ecology has an enduring
fallacy that in the natural world there is some perfect state of balance to
which an ecosystem will return after disturbance. This obsession with ‘the
balance of nature’ runs right through Western science, since even before
Aristotle, and sees its recent expression in concepts like ecological climax,
the natural vegetation that will clothe an area if it is left for long enough.
But it is bunk. Take the place where I am sitting. Supposedly, its climax
vegetation is oak forest, but the oaks only arrived a few thousand years ago,
replacing the pines, the birch and before that the tundra. Just 18,000 years
ago, where I sit was under a mile of ice, and 120,000 years ago it was a
steaming swamp complete with hippos. Which of these is its ‘natural’ state?
Besides, even if the climate settled down to an unvarying stability
(something it has never done), oak saplings cannot thrive under oaks (oakeating pests rain down on them), so after a few thousand years of oak
domination an oak forest gives way to something else. Lake Victoria was
bone-dry 15,000 years ago. The Great Barrier Reef was partly a range of
coastal hills 20,000 years ago. The Amazon rainforest is in a state of

constant perturbation: from tree falls to fires and floods, its diversity
requires it to be constantly changing. There is no equilibrium in nature;
there is only constant dynamism. As Heraclitus put it, ‘Nothing endures but
change.’
Innovation is like a bush fire
To explain the modern global economy, then, you have to explain where
this perpetual innovation machine came from. What kick-started the
increasing returns? They were not planned, directed or ordered: they
emerged, evolved, bottom-up, from specialisation and exchange. The
accelerated exchange of ideas and people made possible by technology
fuelled the accelerating growth of wealth that has characterised the past
century. Politicians, capitalists and officials are flotsam bobbing upriver on
the tidal bore of invention.
Even so, the generation of new useful knowledge is very far from
routine, uniform, steady or continuous. Although the human race as a whole
has experienced incessant change, individual peoples saw a much more
intermittent flickering progress because the pace and place of that change
was itself always changing. Innovation is like a bush fire that burns brightly
for a short time, then dies down before flaring up somewhere else. At
50,000 years ago, the hottest hot-spot was west Asia (ovens, bows-andarrows), at 10,000 the Fertile Crescent (farming, pottery), at 5,000
Mesopotamia (metal, cities), at 2,000 India (textiles, zero), at 1,000 China
(porcelain, printing), at 500 Italy (double-entry book-keeping, Leonardo), at
400 the Low Countries (the Amsterdam Exchange Bank), at 300 France
(Canal du Midi), at 200 England (steam), at 100 Germany (fertiliser); at 75
America (mass production), at 50 California (credit card), at 25 Japan
(Walkman). No country remains for long the leader in knowledge creation.
At first blush, this is surprising, especially if increasing returns to
innovation are possible. Why must the torch be passed elsewhere at all? As
I have argued in the previous three chapters, the answer lies in two
phenomena: institutions and population. In the past, when societies gorged
on innovation, they soon allowed their babies to grow too numerous for
their land, reducing the leisure, wealth and market that inventors needed (in
effect, the merchant’s sons became struggling peasants again). Or they
allowed their bureaucrats to write too many rules, their chiefs to wage too
many wars, or their priests to build too many monasteries (in effect, the
merchants’ sons became soldiers, sybarites or monks). Or they sank into

finance and became parasitic rentiers. As Joel Mokyr puts it: ‘Prosperity
and success led to the emergence of predators and parasites in various forms
and guises who eventually slaughtered the geese that laid the golden eggs.’
Again and again, the flame of invention would splutter and die … only to
flare up elsewhere. The good news is that there is always a new torch lit. So
far.
Just as it is true that the bush fire breaks out in different parts of the
world at different times, so it leaps from technology to technology. Today,
just as during the printing revolution of 500 years ago, communications is
aflame with increasing returns, but transport is spluttering with diminishing
returns. That is to say, the speed and efficiency of cars and aeroplanes are
only very slowly improving and each improvement is incrementally more
expensive. A greater and greater amount of effort is needed to squeeze the
next few miles per gallon out of vehicles of any kind, whereas each tranche
of extra megabits comes more cheaply for now. Very roughly, the best
industry to be in as an innovator was: 1800 – textiles; 1830 – railways;
1860 – chemicals; 1890 – electricity; 1920 – cars; 1950 – aeroplanes; 1980
– computers; 2010 – the web. Whereas the nineteenth century saw a rash of
new ways to move people about (railways, bicycles, cars, steam ships), the
twentieth century saw a rash of new ways to move information about
(telephones, radio, television, satellites, fax, the internet, mobile
telephones). Admittedly, the telegraph came long before the aeroplane, but
the general point stands. The satellite is a neat example of a technology
invented as a by-product of a transport project (space travel), which found a
use in communications instead. Increasing returns would indeed peter out if
innovators did not have a new wave to catch every thirty years, it seems.
Note that the greatest impact of an increasing-return wave comes long
after the technology is first invented. It comes when the technology is
democratised. Gutenberg’s printing press took decades to generate the
Reformation. Today’s container ships go not much faster than a nineteenthcentury steamship and today’s internet sends each pulse little quicker than a
nineteenth-century telegraph – but everybody is using them, not just the
rich. Jets travel at the same speeds as they did in the 1970s, but budget
airlines are new. As long ago as 1944, George Orwell was tired of the way
the world appeared to be shrinking, supposedly a modern event. After
reading what he called a ‘batch of rather shallowly optimistic “progressive”
books’, he was struck by the repetition of certain phrases which had been

fashionable before 1914. The phrases included the ‘abolition of distance’
and the ‘disappearance of frontiers’.
But Orwell’s scepticism misses the point. It is not the speed but the cost
– in terms of hours of work – that counts. The death of distance may not be
new, but it has been made affordable to all. Speed was once a luxury. In
Orwell’s day only the richest or most politically powerful could afford to
travel by air or to import exotic goods or make an international telephone
call. Now almost everybody can afford the cheap goods carried by container
ships; almost everybody can afford the internet; almost everybody can
afford to travel by jet. When I was young a transatlantic telephone call was
absurdly expensive; now a transpacific email is absurdly cheap. The story
of the twentieth century was the story of giving everybody access to the
privileges of the rich, both by making people richer and by making services
cheaper.
Likewise, when the credit card took off in California in the 1960s,
driven by Joseph Williams of Bank of America, there was nothing new
about buying on credit. It was as old as Babylon. There was not even
anything new about charge cards. Diner’s Club had been issuing cards for
the convenience of restaurant users since the early 1950s and department
stores for longer than that. What the BankAmericard achieved, especially
once it emerged as Visa from the chaos of the mass mailings in the late
1960s, under Dee Hock’s reinvention, was the democratisation of credit.
The electronic possibility that your card could be authorised for a purchase
anywhere in the country or even the world was a powerful lubricant to
specialisation and exchange in the economy of the late twentieth century,
allowing consumers to express their choice to borrow against future
earnings when it made sense. There was, of course, irresponsibility, but the
credit card did not lead, as most intellectual grandees had feared, to
financial chaos. In the early 1970s, when credit cards were new, politicians
of all stripes denounced them as unsound, unsafe and predatory, a view
widely shared even by those who used the cards themselves: Lewis Mandell
discovered that Americans were ‘far more likely to use credit cards than to
approve of them’.
This nicely captures the paradox of the modern world, that people
embrace technological change and hate it at the same time. ‘People don’t
like change,’ Michael Crichton once told me, ‘and the notion that
technology is exciting is true for only a handful of people. The rest are

depressed or annoyed by the changes.’ Pity the inventor’s lot then. He is the
source of society’s enrichment and yet nobody likes what he does. ‘When a
new invention is first propounded,’ said William Petty in 1679, ‘in the
beginning every man objects and the poor inventor runs the gauntloop of all
petulant wits.’
What is the flywheel of the perpetual innovation machine that drives the
modern world? Why has innovation become routine and how was it that in
Alfred North Whitehead’s words, ‘the greatest invention of the nineteenth
century was the invention of the method of invention’? Is it down to the
expansion of science, the application of money, the granting of intellectual
property or is it something else, something much more bottom-up?
Driven by science?
Much as I love science for its own sake, I find it hard to argue that
discovery necessarily precedes invention and that most new practical
applications flow from the minting of esoteric insights by natural
philosophers. Francis Bacon was the first to make the case that inventors
are applying the work of discoverers, and that science is the father of
invention. As the scientist Terence Kealey has observed, modern politicians
are in thrall to Bacon. They believe that the recipe for making new ideas is
easy: pour public money into science, which is a public good, because
nobody will pay for the generation of ideas if the taxpayer does not, and
watch new technologies emerge from the downstream end of the pipe.
Trouble is, there are two false premises here: first, science is much more
like the daughter than the mother of technology; and second, it does not
follow that only the taxpayer will pay for ideas in science.
It used to be popular to argue that the European scientific revolution of
the seventeenth century unleashed the rational curiosity of the educated
classes, whose theories were then applied in the form of new technologies,
which in turn allowed standards of living to rise. China, on this theory,
somehow lacked this leap to scientific curiosity and philosophical
discipline, so it failed to build on its technological lead. But history shows
that this is back-to-front. Few of the inventions that made the industrial
revolution owed anything to scientific theory.
It is, of course, true that England had a scientific revolution in the late
1600s, personified in people like Harvey, Hooke and Halley, not to mention
Boyle, Petty and Newton, but their influence on what happened in
England’s manufacturing industry in the following century was negligible.

Newton had more influence on Voltaire than he did on James Hargreaves.
The industry that was transformed first and most, cotton spinning and
weaving, was of little interest to scientists and vice versa. The jennies, gins,
frames, mules and looms that revolutionised the working of cotton were
invented by tinkering businessmen, not thinking boffins: by ‘hard heads and
clever fingers’. It has been said that nothing in their designs would have
puzzled Archimedes.
Likewise, of the four men who made the biggest advances in the steam
engine – Thomas Newcomen, James Watt, Richard Trevithick and George
Stephenson – three were utterly ignorant of scientific theories, and
historians disagree about whether the fourth, Watt, derived any influence
from theory at all. It was they who made possible the theories of the
vacuum and the laws of thermodynamics, not vice versa. Denis Papin, their
Frenchborn forerunner, was a scientist, but he got his insights from building
an engine rather than the other way round. Heroic efforts by eighteenthcentury scientists to prove that Newcomen got his chief insights from
Papin’s theories proved wholly unsuccessful.
Throughout the industrial revolution, scientists were the beneficiaries of
new technology, much more than they were the benefactors. Even at the
famous Lunar Society, where the industrial entrepreneur Josiah Wedgwood
liked to rub shoulders with natural philosophers like Erasmus Darwin and
Joseph Priestley, he got his best idea – the ‘rose-turning’ lathe – from a
fellow factory owner, Matthew Boulton. And although Benjamin Franklin’s
fertile mind generated many inventions based on principles, from lightning
rods to bifocal spectacles, none led to the founding of industries.
So top-down science played little part in the early years of the industrial
revolution. In any case, English scientific virtuosity dries up at the key
moment. Can you name a single great English scientific discovery of the
first half of the eighteenth century? It was an especially barren time for
natural philosophers, even in Britain. No, the industrial revolution was not
sparked by some deus ex machina of scientific inspiration. Later science did
contribute to the gathering pace of invention and the line between discovery
and invention became increasingly blurred as the nineteenth century wore
on. Thus only when the principles of electrical transmission were
understood could the telegraph be perfected; once coal miners understood
the succession of geological strata, they knew better where to sink new
mines; once benzene’s ring structure was known, manufacturers could

design dyes rather than serendipitously stumble on them. And so on. But
even most of this was, in Joel Mokyr’s words, ‘a semidirected, groping,
bumbling process of trial and error by clever, dexterous professionals with a
vague but gradually clearer notion of the processes at work’. It is a stretch
to call most of this science, however. It is what happens today in the
garages and cafés of Silicon Valley, but not in the labs of Stanford
University.
The twentieth century, too, is replete with technologies that owe just as
little to philosophy and to universities as the cotton industry did: flight,
solid-state electronics, software. To which scientist would you give credit
for the mobile telephone or the search engine or the blog? In a lecture on
serendipity in 2007, the Cambridge physicist Sir Richard Friend, citing the
example of high-temperature superconductivity – which was stumbled upon
in the 1980s and explained afterwards – admitted that even today scientists’
job is really to come along and explain the empirical findings of
technological tinkerers after they have discovered something.
The inescapable fact is that most technological change comes from
attempts to improve existing technology. It happens on the shop floor
among apprentices and mechanicals, or in the workplace among the users of
computer programs, and only rarely as a result of the application and
transfer of knowledge from the ivory towers of the intelligentsia. This is not
to condemn science as useless. The seventeenth-century discoveries of
gravity and the circulation of the blood were splendid additions to the sum
of human knowledge. But they did less to raise standards of living than the
cotton gin and the steam engine. And even the later stages of the industrial
revolution are replete with examples of technologies that were developed in
remarkable ignorance of why they worked. This was especially true in the
biological world. Aspirin was curing headaches for more than a century
before anybody had the faintest idea of how. Penicillin’s ability to kill
bacteria was finally understood around the time bacteria learnt to defeat it.
Lime juice was preventing scurvy centuries before the discovery of vitamin
C. Food was being preserved by canning long before anybody had any germ
theory to explain why it helped.
Capital?
Perhaps money is the answer to the question of what drives the
innovation engine. The way to incentivise innovation, as any Silicon Valley
venture capitalist will tell you, is to bring capital and talent together. For

most of history, people have been adept at keeping them apart. Inventors
will always go where the money can be found to back them. One of
Britain’s advantages in the eighteenth century was that it was accumulating
a collective fortune, made from foreign trade, and a comparatively efficient
capital market to distribute funds to innovators. More specifically, the
industrial revolution required long-term investment in capital equipment
that could not easily be liquidated – factories and machines, for the most
part. More than other countries, Britain’s capital markets were in a position
to supply this investment in the eighteenth century. London had managed to
borrow from Amsterdam and nurture in the eighteenth century joint-stock,
limited liability companies, liquid markets in bonds and shares, and a
banking system capable of generating credit. These helped to give inventors
the wherewithal to turn their ideas into products. By contrast in France
capital markets were haunted by John Law’s failure, banks haunted by
Louis XIV’s defaults, and corporate law haunted by the arbitrary extortions
of tax farmers.
In an eerie repetition of the same pattern, Silicon Valley owes much of
its explosion of novelty to its venture capitalists on Sandhill Road. Where
would Amazon, Compaq, Genentech, Google, Netscape and Sun be without
Kleiner Perkins Caulfield? It is no coincidence that the growth of
technology industries took off after the mid-1970s when Congress freed
pension funds and non-profits to invest some of their assets in venture
funds. California is not the birthplace of entrepreneurs; it is the place they
go to do their enterprising; fully one-third of successful start-ups in
California between 1980 and 2000 had Indian-or Chinese-born founders.
In imperial Rome, no doubt scores of unknown slaves knew how to
make better olive presses, better watermills and better wool looms, while
scores of plutocrats knew how to save, invest and consume. But the two
lived miles apart, separated by venal middlemen who had no desire to bring
them together. A telling anecdote about glass repeated by several Roman
authors rather drives home the point. A man demonstrates to the emperor
Tiberius his invention of an unbreakable form of glass, hoping for a reward.
Tiberius asks if anybody else knows his secret and is assured nobody does.
So Tiberius beheads the man to prevent the new material reducing the
relative value of gold to that of mud. The moral of the tale – whether it is
true or not – is not just that Roman inventors receive negative reward for
their pains, but that venture capital was so scarce, the only way to get a new

idea funded was to go to the emperor. Imperial China, too, sent strong
signals of discouragement to anybody whose inventiveness challenged the
status quo. A Christian missionary in Ming China wrote: ‘Any man of
genius is paralysed immediately by the thought that his efforts will bring
him punishment rather than rewards.’
The financing of innovation gradually moved inside firms in the
twentieth century. Private sector companies, haunted by the Schumpeterian
fear that innovation can pull their whole market from them, and equally
dazzled by dreams that they can pull the whole market from under their
rivals, had gradually learnt to sew innovation into their culture and to set
aside budgets for it. Corporate research and development budgets are only a
century old and they have been growing pretty steadily all that time. The
proportion of GDP spent by firms on research and development in America
has more than doubled, to nearly 3 per cent, over the past half-century.
Little wonder that there has been a corresponding increase in invention and
application.
Delve beneath the statistical surface though, and the picture changes.
Far from being able to spend their way into novelty and growth, companies
are perpetually discovering that their R&D budgets get captured by
increasingly defensive and complacent corporate bureaucrats, who spend
them on low-risk, dull projects and fail to notice gigantic new opportunities,
which thereby turn into threats. The pharmaceutical industry, having tried
again and again to instil a sense of radical thinking into its research
departments, has largely given up the attempt and now simply buys up
small firms that have developed big ideas. The history of the computer
industry is littered with examples of big opportunities missed by dominant
players, which thereby find themselves challenged by fast-growing new
rivals – IBM, Digital Equipment, Apple, Microsoft. Even Google will suffer
this fate. The great innovators are still usually outsiders.
Though they may start out full of entrepreneurial zeal, once firms or
bureaucracies grow large, they become risk-averse to the point of Luddism.
The pioneer venture capitalist Georges Doriot said that the most dangerous
moment in the life of a company was when it had succeeded, for then it
stopped innovating. ‘This telephone has too many shortcomings to be
considered as a means of communication. The device is of inherently no
value to us,’ read a Western Union internal memo in 1876. That is why
Apple, not IBM, perfected the personal computer, why the Wright brothers,

not the French army, invented powered flight, why Jonas Salk, not the
British National Health Service, invented a polio vaccine, why Amazon, not
the Post Office, invented one-click ordering and why a Finnish lumbersupply company, not a national telephone monopoly, became the world
leader in mobile telephony.
One solution is for companies to try to set their employees free to
behave like entrepreneurs. Sony did this after it discovered in the 1990s that
its famously pioneering technologists had succumbed to a ‘not-inventedhere’ mentality. General Electric under Jack Welch managed it for a while
by fragmenting the company into smaller competing units. 3M – flush with
success after its employee Art Fry dreamed up the idea of nonstick sticky
notes (Post-its) while trying to mark the place in his hymn book in church
in 1980 – told its technologists to spend 15 per cent of their time working
on their own projects and by harvesting customers’ ideas.
Another solution is to out-source problems to be solved by a virtual
market of inventors with the promise of a prize, as the British government
did with the problem of measuring longitude at sea in the eighteenth
century. The internet has revived this possibility in recent years. Sites like
Innocentive and yet2.com allow companies both to post problems they
cannot solve, promising rewards for their solution, and to post technologies
they have invented that are looking for applications. Retired engineers can
make good money and have good fun pitting their wits on a freelance basis
through such sites. The old model of in-house R&D will surely rapidly give
way to this marketplace in innovation, or ‘idea-agora’ as Don Tapscott and
Anthony Williams call it.
Money is certainly important in driving innovation, but it is by no
means paramount. Even in the most entrepreneurial of economies, very
little saving finds its way to innovators. Victorian British inventors lived
under a regime that spent a large proportion of its outgoings on interest
payments, in effect sending a signal that the safest thing for rich folk to do
with their money was to collect rent on it from taxes on trade. Today, plenty
of money is wasted on research that does not develop, and plenty of
discoveries are made without the application of much money. When Mark
Zuckerberg invented Facebook in 2004 as a Harvard student, he needed
very little R&D expenditure. Even when expanding it into a business, his
first investment of $500,000 from Peter Thiel, founder of Paypal, was tiny
compared with what entrepreneurs needed in the age of steam or railways.

Intellectual property?
Perhaps property is the answer. Inventors will not invent unless they can
keep at least some of the proceeds of their inventions. After all, somebody
will not invest time and effort in planting a crop in his field if he cannot
expect to harvest it and keep the profit for himself – a fact Stalin, Mao and
Robert Mugabe learned the hard way – so surely nobody will invest time
and effort in developing a new tool or building a new kind of organisation if
he cannot keep at least some of the rewards for himself.
Yet intellectual property is very different from real property, because it
is useless if you keep it to yourself. The abstract concept can be infinitely
shared. This creates an apparent dilemma for those who would encourage
inventors. People get rich by selling each other things (and services), not
ideas. Manufacture the best bicycles and you profit handsomely; come up
with the idea of the bicycle and you get nothing because it is soon copied. If
innovators are people who make ideas, rather than things, how can they
profit from them? Does society need to invent a special mechanism to
surround new ideas with fences, to make them more like houses and fields?
If so, how are ideas to spread?
There are several ways to turn ideas into property. You can keep the
recipe secret, as John Pemberton did for Coca-Cola in 1886. This works
well where it is hard for rivals to ‘reverse-engineer’ your secrets by
dismantling your products. Machinery, by contrast, betrays its secrets too
easily. The British pioneers of industrial textile manufacture largely failed
in their attempts to use trade secrecy laws to protect themselves. Though
customs officers searched foreigners’ possessions for plans of machinery,
New Englanders like Francis Cabot Lowell sauntered innocently about the
mills of Lancashire and Scotland ostensibly for his health while frantically
memorising the details of Cartwright power looms, which he promptly
copied on his return to Massachusetts. The dye industry relied mostly on
secrecy till the 1860s when analytical chemistry reached the point where
rivals could find out how dyes were made; it then turned to patents.
Or, second, you can capture the first-mover advantage, as Sam Walton,
the founder of Wal-Mart, did throughout his career. Even as his retailing
rivals were catching up, he was forging ahead with new cost-cutting tactics.
Intel’s dominance of the microchip industry, and 3M’s of the diversified
technology industry, were based not on protecting their inventions so much
as on improving them faster than everyone else. Packet switching was the

invention that made the internet possible, yet nobody made any royalties
out of it. The way to keep your customers, if you are Michael Dell, Steve
Jobs or Bill Gates, is to keep making your own products obsolete.
The third way to profit from invention is a patent, a copyright or a
trademark. The various mechanisms of intellectual property are eerily
echoed in the apparently lawless and highly competitive world of real
recipes, recipes devised by French chefs for their restaurants. There is no
legal protection for recipes: they cannot be patented, copyrighted or
trademarked. But try setting up a new restaurant in Paris and pinching the
best recipes from your rivals and you will rapidly find that this is not
common land. As Emmanuelle Fauchart discovered by interviewing ten
chefs de cuisine who had restaurants near Paris, seven with Michelin stars,
the world of haute cuisine operates according to three norms, unwritten and
unenforceable by law, but no less real for that. First, no chef may copy
another chef’s recipe exactly; second, if a chef tells a recipe to another chef,
the second chef may not pass it on without permission; third, chefs must
give credit to the original inventor of a technique or idea. In effect, these
norms correspond to patents, trade secrecy contracts and copyright.
Yet there is little evidence that patents are really what drive inventors to
invent. Most innovations are never patented. In the second half of the
nineteenth century neither Holland nor Switzerland had a patent system, yet
both countries flourished and attracted inventors. And the list of significant
twentiethcentury inventions that were never patented is a long one. It
includes automatic transmission, Bakelite, ballpoint pens, cellophane,
cyclotrons, gyrocompasses, jet engines, magnetic recording, power steering,
safety razors and zippers. By contrast, the Wright brothers effectively
grounded the nascent aircraft industry in the United States by
enthusiastically defending their 1906 patent on powered flying machines. In
1920, there was a logjam in the manufacture of radios caused by the
blocking patents held by four firms (RCA, GE, AT&T and Westing house),
which prevented each firm making the best possible radios.
In the 1990s the US Patent Office flirted with the idea of allowing the
patenting of gene fragments, segments of sequenced genes that could be
used to find faulty or normal genes. Had this happened, the human genome
sequence would have become an impossible landscape in which to
innovate. Even so, modern biotechnology firms frequently encounter what
Carl Shapiro has called a ‘patent thicket’ when they try to develop a

treatment for a new disease. If each step in a metabolic pathway is subject
to a patent, a medical inventor can find himself negotiating away all his
rewards before he even tests his idea. And the last patent holder to yield
commands the highest potential pay-off.
Something similar happens in mobile telephony, where the big mobile
firms have to fight their way through patent thickets to bring any innovation
to market. At any one moment these firms are involved in scores of lawsuits
as plaintiffs, defendants or interested third parties. The result, says one
observer, is that ‘lobbying and litigating may be a more profitable way to
win market share than innovating or investing’. Today, the biggest
generators of new patents in the US system are ‘patent trolls’ – firms that
buy up weak patent applications with no intention of making the products in
question, but with every intention of making money by suing those who
infringe them. Research in Motion, the Canadian company that
manufactures BlackBerries, had to pay $600m to a small patent troll called
NTP that did no manufacturing itself but had acquired contested patents
with the aim of profiting from their defence.
Michael Heller’s analogy for the patent trolls is to the state of the river
Rhine between the decay of Holy Roman imperial power and the
emergence of modern states. Hundreds of castles grew up all along the
Rhine, one every few miles, each occupied by a little robber baron
princeling living off tolls exacted from boats travelling along the river. The
collective effect was to stifle trade on the Rhine, and repeated attempts to
form a league to lift the burden from the trade to the benefit of all came to
naught. In the twentieth century there was a possibility in the early days of
flight that every landowner would extract a toll from every aircraft that
crossed his ‘searchlight’ of vertical ownership of the air just like the Rhine
robber barons. In this case, good sense prevailed and the courts quickly
extinguished such property rights in the sky.
Modern patent systems, despite attempts at reform, are all too often a
gauntlet of phantom tollbooths, raising fees from passing inventors and thus
damaging enterprise as surely as real toll booths damage trade. Yet, of
course, some intellectual property does help. A patent can be a godsend to a
small firm trying to break into the market of an established giant. In the
pharmaceutical industry, where government insists on a massively
expensive regime of testing for safety and efficacy before a product launch,
innovation without some form of patent would be impossible. In one survey

of 650 R&D executives from 130 different industries, only those in the
chemical and pharmaceutical industries judged patents to be effective at
stimulating innovation. Yet even here there are questions to be raised. Even
when such firms spend their patent profits on research rather than on
marketing to exploit the temporary monopoly, most of the money goes
towards me-too drugs for diseases of Westerners.
Copyright law, too, is becoming a thicket. Zealous enforcement,
especially in the music and film industry has made it increasingly hard for
people to share, borrow and build upon even small snippets of invented art.
Smaller and smaller fragments of songs are copyrighted, and the US courts
have made an attempt to lengthen the lives of copyrights to the life of the
author plus seventy years (it is fifty today). Yet in the eighteenth century
when composers had no copyright in their music, Mozart was not
discouraged: only one country had allowed the copyrighting of music –
Britain – and the result was a decline in Britain’s already dismal ability to
produce composers. Just as newspapers have derived little of their income
from licensing copyrights, so there will be ways to charge people for music
and film in the digital world.
Intellectual property is an important ingredient of innovation, when
innovation is happening, but it does very little to explain why some times
and places are more innovative than others.
Government?
The government can take credit for a list of big inventions, from nuclear
weapons to the internet, from radar to satellite navigation. Yet government
is also notorious for its ability to misread technical change. When I was a
journalist in the 1980s, European government bodies bombarded me with
boastful claims for their latest initiatives in supporting various parts of the
computer industry. The programmes had catchy names like Alvey, or Esprit
or ‘fifth-generation’ computing, and they were going to help push European
industry into the lead. Usually modelled on some equally abortive idea from
MITI, the then fashionable but flat-footed Japanese ministry, they
invariably picked losers and encouraged companies down cul-de-sacs.
Mobile phones and search engines were not among their possible futures.
In America there was a truly breathtaking outburst of government-led
idiocy at the same time that went under the name of Sematech. Based on the
premise that the future lay in big companies making memory chips (which
were increasingly being made in Asia) it poured $100 million into chip

manufacturers on condition that they stopped competing with each other
and pooled their efforts to stay in what was fast becoming a commodity
business. An 1890 anti-trust act had to be revised to allow it. Even as late as
1988 dirigistes were still criticising the fragmented companies of Silicon
Valley as ‘chronically entrepreneurial’ and incapable of long-term investing.
This was when Microsoft, Apple, Intel and (later) Dell, Cisco, Yahoo,
Google and Facebook – chronically entrepreneurial all, in their garage or
bedroom beginnings – were just laying the foundations for their global
dominance at the expense of precisely the big companies dirigistes admired.
Not that any lessons were learned. In the 1990s, governments poured
their efforts into such dead-ends as high-definition television standards,
interactive television, telecommuting villages and virtual reality, while
technology quietly got on with exploring the possibilities of wi-fi,
broadband and mobile instead. Innovation is not a predictable business and
it responds poorly to dirigisme from civil servants.
So although government can pay people to stumble upon new
technologies – satnav and the internet were by-products of other projects –
it is hardly the source of most innovation. During the late twentieth century,
as companies sewed innovation into their culture and as industrial
behemoths repeatedly fell prey to upstarts, most public-sector agencies just
trundled on as before, neither trying to become especially innovative them
selves, nor dying to make way for new versions of themselves. The idea of
a government agency that fears having its mission pinched by another
government agency is so peculiar as to be unimaginable. If food retailing in
Britain had been left to a National Food Service after the Second World
War, one suspects that supermarkets would now be selling slightly better
spam at slightly higher prices from behind Formica counters.
Of course, there are some things, like large hadron colliders and moon
missions, that no private company would be allowed by its shareholders to
provide, but are we so sure that even these would not catch the fancy of a
Buffett, a Gates or Mittal if they were not already being paid for by
taxpayers? Can you doubt that if NASA had not existed some rich man
would by now have spent his fortune on a man-on-the-moon programme for
the prestige alone? Public funding crowds out the possibility of knowing an
answer to that question. A large study by the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development concluded that government spending on
R&D has no observable effect on economic growth, despite what

governments fondly believe. Indeed it ‘crowds out resources that could be
alternatively used by the private sector, including private R&D’. This rather
astonishing conclusion has been almost completely ignored by
governments.
Exchange!
The perpetual innovation machine that drives the modern economy
owes its existence not mainly to science (which is its beneficiary more than
its benefactor); nor to money (which is not always a limiting factor); nor to
patents (which often get in the way); nor to government (which is bad at
innovation). It is not a top-down process at all. Instead, I am going to try
now to persuade you that one word will suffice to explain this conundrum:
exchange. It is the ever-increasing exchange of ideas that causes the everincreasing rate of innovation in the modern world.
Go back to that word ‘spillover’. The characteristic feature of a piece of
new knowledge, whether practical or esoteric, whether technical or social,
is that you can give it away and still keep it. You can light your taper at
Jefferson’s candle without darkening him. You cannot give away your
bicycle and still ride it. But you can give away the idea of the bicycle and
still retain it. As the economist Paul Romer has argued, human progress
consists largely in accumulating recipes for rearranging atoms in ways that
raise living standards. The recipe for a bicycle, greatly abridged, might read
like this: take some iron, chromium and aluminium ore from the earth,
some sap from a tropical tree, some oil from beneath the ground, some hide
from a cow. Smelt the ores into metals, and cast into various shapes.
Vulcanise the sap into rubber and mould into hollow circular rings.
Fractionate the oil to make plastic and mould. Set aside to cool. Mould the
hide into the shape of a seat. Combine the ingredients in the form of a
bicycle, add the startlingly counter-intuitive discovery that things don’t fall
over so easily when they are moving forwards, and ride.
Innovators are therefore in the business of sharing. It is the most
important thing they do, for unless they share their innovation it can have
no benefit for them or for anybody else. And the one activity that got much
easier to do after about 1800, and has got dramatically easier recently, is
sharing. Travel and communication disseminated information much faster
and much further. Newspapers, technical journals and telegraphs spread
ideas as fast as they spread gossip. In a recent survey of forty-six major

inventions, the time it took for the first competing copy to appear fell
steadily from thirty-three years in 1895 to three years in 1975.
When Hero of Alexandria invented an ‘aeolipile’ or steam engine in the
first century AD, and employed it in opening temple doors, the chances are
that news of his invention spread so slowly and to so few people that it may
never have reached the ears of cart designers. Ptolemaic astronomy was
ingenious and precise, if not quite accurate, but it was never used for
navigation, because astronomers and sailors did not meet. The secret of the
modern world is its gigantic interconnectedness. Ideas are having sex with
other ideas from all over the planet with ever-increasing promiscuity. The
telephone had sex with the computer and spawned the internet. The first
motor cars looked as though they were ‘sired by the bicycle out of the horse
carriage’. The idea for plastics came from photographic chemistry. The
camera pill is an idea that came from a conversation between a
gastroenterologist and a guided-missile designer. Almost every technology
is a hybrid.
This is one area in which cultural evolution has an unfair advantage
over genetic evolution. For insuperable practical reasons connected with the
pairing of chromosomes during meiosis, cross fertilisation cannot happen
between different species of animal. (It can, indeed does, happen between
species of bacteria, 80 per cent of whose genes have been borrowed from
other species on average – one reason bacteria are so darned good at
evolving resistance to antibiotics, for example.) As soon as two races of
animals have diverged substantially, they find themselves able to produce
only sterile offspring – like mules – or none at all. That is the very
definition of a species.
Technologies emerge from the coming together of existing technologies
into wholes that are greater than the sum of their parts. Henry Ford once
candidly admitted that he had invented nothing new. He had ‘simply
assembled into a car the discoveries of other men behind whom were
centuries of work’. So objects betray in their design their descent from other
objects: ideas that have given birth to other ideas. The first copper axes of
5,000 years ago were the same shape as the polished stone tools then in
common use. Only later did they become much thinner as the properties of
metals became better understood. Joseph Henry’s first electric motor bore
an uncanny resemblance to a rotative-beam Watt steam engine. Even the
first transistor of the 1940s was a direct descendant of the crystal rectifiers

invented by Ferdinand Braun in the 1870s and used to make ‘cat’s whisker’
radio receivers in the early twentieth century. This is not always obvious in
the history of technology because inventors like to deny their ancestors,
exaggerating the revolutionary and unfathered nature of their
breakthroughs, the better to claim the full glory (and sometimes the patents)
for themselves. Thus Britons rightly celebrate Michael Faraday’s genius in
devising an electric motor and a dynamo – he was even recently on a
banknote for a while – but forget that he got at least half the concept from
the Dane Hans Christian Oersted. Americans learn that Edison invented the
incandescent light bulb out of thin air, when his less commercially slick
forerunners, Joseph Swan in Britain and Alexander Lodygin in Russia,
deserve at least to share the credit, if not rather more. Samuel Morse, when
applying for his patent on the telegraph, in the historian George Basalla’s
words, ‘stoutly and falsely denied’ that he had learned anything from Joseph
Henry. Technologies reproduce, and they do so sexually.
It follows that spillover – the fact that others pinch your ideas – is not an
accidental and tiresome drawback for the inventor. It is the whole point of
the exercise. By spilling over, an innovation meets other innovations and
mates with them. The history of the modern world is a history of ideas
meeting, mixing, mating and mutating. And the reason that economic
growth has accelerated so in the past two centuries is down to the fact that
ideas have been mixing more than ever before. The result is gloriously
unpredictable. When Charles Townes invented the laser in the 1950s, it was
dismissed as ‘an invention looking for a job’. Well, it has now found an
astonishing range of jobs nobody could have imagined, from sending
telephone messages down fibreglass wires to reading music off discs to
printing documents, to curing short sight.
End users, too, have joined in the mating frenzy. Adam Smith recounted
the tale of a boy whose job was to open and close the valve on a steam
engine and who, to save time, rigged up a device to do it for him. He no
doubt went to his grave without imparting the idea to others, or would have
done if not immortalised by the Scottish sage, but today he would have
shared his ‘patch’ with like-minded others on a chat site. Today, the opensource software industry, with products such as Linux and Apache, is
booming on the back of a massive wave of selflessness – programmers who
share their improvements with each other freely. Even Microsoft is being
forced to embrace open-source systems and ‘cloud computing’ – shared on

the net – blurring the line between free and proprietary computing. After all,
even the cleverest in-house programmer is unlikely to be as smart as the
collective efforts of ten thousand users at the ‘bleeding edge’ of a new idea.
Wikipedia is written by people who never expect to profit from what they
do. The computer-game industry is increasingly being taken over by its
players. In product after product on the internet, innovation is driven by
what Eric von Hippel calls ‘free-revealing lead users’: customers who are
happy to tell manufacturers of incremental improvements they can suggest,
and of unexpected things they have found they can do with new products.
Lead users are often happy to free-reveal, because they enjoy basking in the
reputation of their peers. (Eric von Hippel, incidentally, practices what he
preaches: you can read his books on his websites for free.)
This is not confined to software. When a surfer named Larry Stanley
first modified his surfboard to make jumping possible without parting
company from the board, he never dreamed of selling the idea, but he told
everybody how to do it including the manufacturers of boards and now his
innovations can be bought in the form of new surfboards. The greatest leaduser innovation of all was probably the World Wide Web, devised by Sir
Tim Berners-Lee in 1991 to solve the problem of sharing particle physics
data between computers. Incidentally, nobody has yet suggested that
research in software and surfboards must be government-funded because
innovation in them would not happen without subsidy.
In other words, we may soon be living in a post-capitalist, postcorporate world, where individuals are free to come together in temporary
aggregations to share, collaborate and innovate, where websites enable
people to find employers, employees, customers and clients anywhere in the
world. This is also, as Geoffrey Miller reminds us, a world that will put
‘infinite production ability in the service of infinite human lust, gluttony,
sloth, wrath, greed, envy and pride’. But that is roughly what the elite said
about cars, cotton factories, and – I’m guessing now – wheat and hand axes
too. The world is turning bottom-up again; the top-down years are coming
to an end.
Infinite possibility
Were it not for this inexhaustible river of invention and discovery
irrigating the fragile crop of human welfare, living standards would
undoubtedly stagnate. Even with population tamed, fossil energy tapped
and trade free, the human race could quickly discover the limits to growth if

knowledge stopped growing. Trade would sort out who was best at making
what; exchange could spread the division of labour to best effect, and fuel
could amplify the efforts of every factory hand, but eventually there would
be a slowing of growth. A menacing equilibrium would loom. In that sense,
Ricardo and Mill were right. But so long as it can hop from country to
country and from industry to industry, discovery is a fast-breeder chain
reaction; innovation is a feedback loop; invention is a self-fulfilling
prophecy. So equilibrium and stagnation are not only avoidable in a freeexchanging world; they are impossible.
Throughout history, though living standards might rise and fall, though
population might boom and crash, knowledge was one thing that has
showed inexorable upward progress. Fire, once invented, was never
forgotten. The wheel came and never left. The bow and arrow has not been
disinvented even though it is obsolete except in sport – it is better than ever.
How to make a cup of coffee, why insulin cures diabetes and whether
continental drift happens – it is a fair bet that somebody will know these
things or be able to look them up for as long as there are people on the
planet. We may have forgotten a few things along the way: nobody really
knows how to use an Acheulean hand axe, and until recently nobody knew
how to build a medieval siege catapult known as a trebuchet. (Trial-anderror by a Shropshire squire in the 1980s eventually produced full-scale
trebuchets capable of tossing pianos more than 150 yards; only rock bands
have since found a profitable application.) But these forgettings are dwarfed
by the additions to knowledge. We have accumulated far more knowledge
than we have lost. Not even the most determined pessimist would deny that
his species collectively adds more and more to the aggregate store of human
knowledge as each year passes.
Knowledge is not the same thing as material wealth. It is possible to
mint new knowledge and yet do nothing for prosperity. The knowledge of
how to fly a man to the moon, now nearly two generations old, has yet to
enrich humankind much, urban myths about nonstick frying pans
notwithstanding. The knowledge that Fermat’s Last Theorem is true, that
quasars are distant galaxies – these may never increase gross domestic
product, though contemplating them may enhance the quality of someone’s
life. It is also possible to get rich without adding to the store of human
knowledge, as many an African dictator, Russian kleptocrat or financial
fraudster can tell you.

On the other hand, a piece of new knowledge lies behind every net
advance in human economic welfare: the knowledge that electrons could be
deputed to carry both energy and information makes possible almost
everything I do, from boiling a kettle to sending a text message. The
knowledge of how to pack pre-washed salad and save everybody time; the
knowledge of how to vaccinate children against polio; the knowledge that
insecticide-impregnated mosquito nets can prevent malaria; the knowledge
that different-sized paper cups in coffee bars can still have the same-sized
lids, saving cost in manufacture and confusion in the shop – a billion such
pages of knowledge make up the book of human prosperity.
It was Paul Romer’s great achievement in the 1990s to rescue the
discipline of economics from the century-long cul-de-sac into which it had
driven by failing to incorporate innovation. From time to time its
practitioners had tried to escape into theorems of increasing returns – Mill
in the 1840s, Allyn Young in the 1920s, Joseph Schumpeter in the 1940s,
Robert Solow in the 1950s – but not until Romer’s ‘new growth theory’ in
the 1990s was economics fully back in the real world: a world where
perpetual innovation brings brief bursts of profit through temporary
monopoly to whoever can commandeer demand for new products or
services, and long bursts of growth to everybody else who eventually gets
to share the spilled-over idea. Robert Solow had concluded that innovation
accounted for growth that could not be explained by an increase in labour,
land or capital, but he saw innovation as an external force, a slice of luck
that some economies had more of than others – his was Mill’s theory with
calculus. Things like climate, geography and political institutions
determined the rate of innovation – which is bad luck for land-locked
tropical dictatorships – and not much could be done about them. Romer saw
that innovation itself was an item of investment, that new, applied
knowledge was itself a product. So long as people who are spending money
on trying to find new ideas can profit from them before they pass them on,
then increasing returns are possible.
The wonderful thing about knowledge is that it is genuinely limitless.
There is not even a theoretical possibility of exhausting the supply of ideas,
discoveries and inventions. This is the biggest cause of all for my optimism.
It is a beautiful feature of information systems that they are far vaster than
physical systems: the combinatorial vastness of the universe of possible
ideas dwarfs the puny universe of physical things. As Paul Romer puts it,

the number of different software programs that can be put on one-gigabyte
hard disks is twenty-seven million times greater than the number of atoms
in the universe. Or if you were to combine any four of the 100 chemical
elements into different alloys and compounds in different proportions
ranging from one to ten, you would have 330 billion possible chemical
compounds and alloys to test, or enough to keep a team of researchers busy
testing a thousand a day for a million years.
Yet if innovation is limitless, why is everybody so pessimistic about the
future?
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Nine
Turning points: pessimism after 1900
I have observed that not the man who hopes when others despair, but
the man who despairs when others hope, is admired by a large class of
persons as a sage.
JOHN STUART MILL
Speech on ‘perfectibility’

A constant drumbeat of pessimism usually drowns out any triumphalist
song of the kind I have vented in this book so far. If you say the world has
been getting better you may get away with being called naïve and
insensitive. If you say the world is going to go on getting better, you are
considered embarrassingly mad. When the economist Julian Simon tried it
in the 1990s, he was called everything from imbecile and Marxist to flatearther and criminal. Yet no significant error came to light in Simon’s book.
When Bjørn Lomborg tried it in the 2000s, he was temporarily ‘convicted’
of scientific dishonesty by the Danish National Academy of Sciences, with
no substantive examples given nor an opportunity to defend himself, on the
basis of an error-strewn review in Scientific American. Yet no significant
error has come to light in Lomborg’s book. ‘Implicit confidence in the

beneficence of progress’ said Hayek, ‘has come to be regarded as the sign
of a shallow mind.’
If, on the other hand, you say catastrophe is imminent, you may expect
a McArthur genius award or even the Nobel Peace Prize. The bookshops
are groaning under ziggurats of pessimism. The airwaves are crammed with
doom. In my own adult lifetime, I have listened to implacable predictions of
growing poverty, coming famines, expanding deserts, imminent plagues,
impending water wars, inevitable oil exhaustion, mineral shortages, falling
sperm counts, thinning ozone, acidifying rain, nuclear winters, mad-cow
epidemics, Y2K computer bugs, killer bees, sex-change fish, global
warming, ocean acidification and even asteroid impacts that would
presently bring this happy interlude to a terrible end. I cannot recall a time
when one or other of these scares was not solemnly espoused by sober,
distinguished and serious elites and hysterically echoed by the media. I
cannot recall a time when I was not being urged by somebody that the
world could only survive if it abandoned the foolish goal of economic
growth.
The fashionable reason for pessimism changed, but the pessimism was
constant. In the 1960s the population explosion and global famine were top
of the charts, in the 1970s the exhaustion of resources, in the 1980s acid
rain, in the 1990s pandemics, in the 2000s global warming. One by one
these scares came and (all but the last) went. Were we just lucky? Are we, in
the memorable image of the old joke, like the man who falls past the first
floor of the skyscraper and thinks ‘So far so good!’? Or was it the
pessimism that was unrealistic?
Let me make a square concession at the start: the pessimists are right
when they say that, if the world continues as it is, it will end in disaster for
all humanity. If all transport depends on oil, and oil runs out, then transport
will cease. If agriculture continues to depend on irrigation and aquifers are
depleted, then starvation will ensue. But notice the conditional: if. The
world will not continue as it is. That is the whole point of human progress,
the whole message of cultural evolution, the whole import of dynamic
change – the whole thrust of this book. The real danger comes from slowing
down change. It is my proposition that the human race has become a
collective problem-solving machine and it solves problems by changing its
ways. It does so through invention driven often by the market: scarcity
drives up price; that encourages the development of alternatives and of

efficiencies. It has happened often in history. When whales grew scarce,
petroleum was used instead as a source of oil. (As Warren Meyer has put it,
a poster of John D. Rockefeller should be on the wall of every Greenpeace
office.) The pessimists’ mistake is extrapolationism: assuming that the
future is just a bigger version of the past. As Herb Stein once said, ‘If
something cannot go on forever, then it will not.’
So, for example, the environmentalist Lester Brown, writing in 2008,
was pessimistic about what will happen if the Chinese are by 2030 as rich
as the Americans are now:
If, for example, each person in China consumes paper at the
current American rate, then in 2030 China’s 1.46 billion people will
need twice as much paper as is produced worldwide today. There go
the world’s forests. If we assume that in 2030 there are three cars for
every four people in China, as there now are in the United States,
China will have 1.1 billion cars. The world currently has 860 million
cars. To provide the needed roads, highways, and parking lots, China
would have to pave an area comparable to what it now plants in rice.
By 2030 China would need 98 million barrels of oil a day. The world
is currently producing 85 million barrels a day and may never produce
much more than that. There go the world’s oil reserves.
Brown is dead right with his extrapolations, but so was the man who
(probably apocryphally) predicted ten feet of horse manure in the streets of
London by 1950. So was IBM’s founder Thomas Watson when he said in
1943 that there was a world market for five computers, and Ken Olson, the
founder of Digital Equipment Corporation, when he said in 1977: ‘There is
no reason anyone would want a computer in their home.’ Both remarks
were true enough when computers weighed a tonne and cost a fortune. Even
when the British astronomer royal and the British government space adviser
said that space travel was respectively ‘bunk’ and ‘utter bilge’ – just before
Sputnik flew – they were not wrong when they said it; just the world
changed rather soon after they said it. It is the same with modern
predictions of impossibility, like Lester Brown’s. Paper and oil will all have
to be used more frugally, or replaced by something else, by 2030, and land
will have to be used more productively. What is the alternative? Banning
Chinese prosperity? The question is not ‘Can we go on as we are?’ because

of course the answer is ‘No’, but how best can we encourage the necessary
torrent of change that will enable the Chinese and the Indians and even the
Africans to live as prosperously as Americans do today.
A brief history of bad news
There is a tendency to believe that pessimism is new, that our current
dyspeptic view of technology and progress has emerged since Hiroshima
and got worse since Chernobyl. History contradicts this. Pessimists have
always been ubiquitous and have always been feted. ‘Five years have
seldom passed away in which some book or pamphlet has not been
published,’ wrote Adam Smith at the start of the industrial revolution,
‘pretending to demonstrate that the wealth of the nation was fast declining,
that the country was depopulated, agriculture neglected, manufactures
decaying, and trade undone.’
Take the year 1830. Northern Europe and North America were much
richer than they had ever been. They had enjoyed more than a decade of
peace for the first time in more than a generation and they were brimming
with novel inventions, discoveries and technology (a word which was
coined that year): steam boats, cotton looms, suspension bridges, the Erie
Canal, Portland cement, the electric motor, the first photograph, Fourier
analysis. It was a world, in retrospect, pregnant with possibility, ready to
explode into modernity. To be born then you would see a life of everincreasing wealth, health, wisdom and safety.
Yet was the mood of 1830 optimistic? No, it was just like today:
fashionable gloom was everywhere. Campaigners who went under the
pseudonym of ‘Captain Swing’ took precisely the same approach to
threshing machines in 1830 as their 1990s equivalents would take to
genetically modified crops: they vandalised them. Some of the vociferous
and numerous opponents of the Liverpool to Manchester Railway, which
opened that year, forecast that passing trains would cause horses to abort
their foals. Others mocked its pretensions to speed: ‘What can be more
palpably absurd and ridiculous than the prospect held out of locomotives
travelling twice as fast as stagecoaches!’ cried the Quarterly Review. ‘We
trust that Parliament will, in all rail ways it may sanction, limit the speed to
eight or nine miles an hour.’ (Dr Arnold was more enlightened about the
first steam train: ‘I rejoice to see it, and think that feudality is gone
forever.’)

In that year, 1830, the British Poet Laureate Robert Southey had just
published a book (Thomas More; or, Colloquies on the Progress and
Prospects of Society) in which he imagined his alter ego escorting the ghost
of Thomas More, the Tudor author of Utopia, round the English Lake
District. Through the ghost of More, Southey rails against the condition of
the people of England, and especially those who have left their rose-fringed
cottages for the soulless tenements and factories of the industrial cities. He
complains that their condition is worse than in the days of Henry VIII or
even than in the days of Caesar and the Druids:
Look, for example, at the great mass of your populace in town and
country – a tremendous proportion of the whole community! Are their
bodily wants better, or more easily supplied? Are they subject to fewer
calamities? Are they happier in childhood, youth, and manhood, and
more comfortably or carefully provided for in old age, than when the
land was unenclosed, and half covered with woods? … Their condition
is greatly worsened … [They] have lost rather than gained by the
alterations which have taken place during the last thousand years.
Not content with denigrating the present, Southey castigates the future.
He – in the form of his fictional ghost of More – forecasts imminent misery,
famine, plague and a decline of religion. The timing of this jeremiad was, in
retrospect, hilarious. Not only technology, but living standards themselves,
had begun their extraordinary break-out, their two centuries of
unprecedented explosion. For the first time people’s life expectancy was
rapidly rising, child mortality rapidly falling, purchasing power burgeoning
and options expanding. The rise of living standards over the next few
decades would be especially marked among the unskilled working poor.
British working-class real earnings were about to double in thirty years, an
unprecedented occurrence. All across the world countries were looking
enviously at Britain and saying ‘I want some of that.’ But for the
reactionary, Tory, nostalgic Robert Southey, the future could only get worse.
He would have been at home in the modern environmental movement,
lamenting world trade, tutting at consumerism, despairing of technology,
longing to return to the golden age of Merrie England when people ate their
local, organic veg, danced round their maypoles, sheared their own sheep
and did not clog up the airports on the way to their ghastly package

holidays. As the modern philosopher John Gray puts it, echoing Southey,
open-ended economic growth is ‘the most vulgar ideal ever put before
suffering mankind’.
Thomas Babington Macaulay was a poet, too, the author of ‘Horatius’
and other such well remembered ditties. In the Edinburgh Review of
January 1830 he reviewed Southey’s Colloquies and did not pull his
punches. Far from idyllic, the life of the rural peasant was one of hellish
poverty, he said; the factory towns were better off, which was why people
were flocking to them. The poor rate was twenty shillings a head in rural
Sussex and only five shillings in the industrial West Riding of Yorkshire.
As to the effect of the manufacturing system on the bodily health,
we must beg leave to estimate it by a standard far too low and vulgar
for a mind so imaginative as that of Mr. Southey, the proportion of
births and deaths. We know that, during the growth of this atrocious
system, this new misery, to use the phrases of Mr. Southey, this new
enormity, this birth of a portentous age, this pest which no man can
approve whose heart is not seared or whose understanding has not
been darkened, there has been a great diminution of mortality, and that
this Turning points diminution has been greater in the manufacturing
towns than any where else.
As for the notion that life was better in the past, Macaulay warmed to
his theme:
If any person had told the Parliament which met in perplexity and
terror after the crash in 1720 that in 1830 the wealth of England would
surpass all their wildest dreams …, that the rate of mortality would
have diminished to one half of what it then was …, that stagecoaches
would run from London to York in twenty-four hours, that men would
be in the habit of sailing without wind, and would be beginning to ride
without horses, our ancestors would have given as much credit to the
prediction as they gave to Gulliver’s Travels. Yet the prediction would
have been true.
He went on (twenty-five years later, in his History of England):

We too shall, in our turn, be outstripped, and in our turn be envied.
It may well be, in the twentieth century, that the peasant of Dorsetshire
may think himself miserably paid with twenty shillings a week; that
the carpenter at Greenwich may receive ten shillings a day; that
labouring men may be as little used to dine without meat as they now
are to eat rye bread; that sanitary police and medical discoveries may
have added several more years to the average length of human life;
that numerous comforts and luxuries which are now unknown, or
confined to a few, may be within the reach of every diligent and thrifty
working man.
The extraordinary thing about Macaulay’s predictions is not that they
were too barmy in their optimism but that they were far too cautious. Last
week I took a stagecoach (well, a train) from London to York in two hours,
not twenty-four, and ate a take-away salad of mango and crayfish (£3.60)
that I bought at the station before I boarded. The week before I sailed
without wind (at 37,000 feet) from London to New York in seven hours
watching Daniel Day Lewis cover himself in oil. Today I rode my trusty
Toyota without horses ten miles in fifteen minutes, listening to Schubert. A
‘peasant’ in Dorsetshire would indeed think himself miserably paid at
twenty shillings (£70 in today’s money) a week. Sanitation and medicine
have not added several years to life expectancy, as Macaulay rashly
predicted, they have doubled it. And as for comforts and luxuries, even the
indolent and spendthrift working man has a television and a refrigerator, let
alone the diligent and thrifty one.
Turning-point-itis
‘We cannot absolutely prove,’ said Macaulay in 1830, ‘that those are in
error who tell us that society has reached a turning point, that we have seen
our best days. But so said all who came before us, and with just as much
apparent reason.’ So, too, would say all that came after him. Defining
moments, tipping points, thresholds and points of no return have been
encountered, it seems, by pessimists in every generation since. A fresh crop
of pessimists springs up each decade, unabashed in its certainty that it
stands balanced upon the fulcrum of history. Throughout the half-century
between 1875 and 1925, while European living standards shot up to
unimaginable levels, while electricity and cars, typewriters and movies,
friendly societies and universities, indoor toilets and vaccines pressed their

ameliorating influence out into the lives of so many, intellectuals were
obsessed with imminent decline, degeneration and disaster. Again and
again, just as Macaulay had said, they wailed that society had reached a
turning point; we had seen our best days.
The runaway bestseller of the 1890s was a book called Degeneration,
by the German Max Nordau, which painted a picture of a society morally
collapsing because of crime, immigration and urbanisation: ‘we stand in the
midst of an epidemic, a sort of Black Death of degeneration and hysteria.’
An American bestseller of 1901 was Charles Wagner’s The Simple Life,
which argued that people had had enough of materialism and were about to
migrate back to the farm. In 1914, Britain’s Robert Tressell’s posthumous
The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists called his country ‘a nation of
ignorant, unintelligent, half-starved, broken-spirited degenerates’. The craze
for eugenics that swept the world, embraced by left and right with equal
fervour, after 1900 and caused the passage of illiberal and cruel laws in
democracies like America as well as autocracies like Germany, took as its
premise the deterioration of the blood lines caused by the overbreeding of
the poor and the less intelligent. A huge intellectual consensus gathered
around the idea that a distant catastrophe must be averted by harsh
measures today (sound familiar?). ‘The multiplication of the feeble-minded’
said Winston Churchill in a memo to the prime minister in 1910, ‘is a very
terrible danger to the race.’ Theodore Roosevelt was even more explicit: ‘I
wish very much that the wrong people could be prevented entirely from
breeding; and when the evil nature of these people is sufficiently flagrant,
this should be done. Criminals should be sterilized and feeble-minded
persons forbidden to leave offspring behind them.’ In the end, eugenics did
far more harm to members of the human race than the evil it was intended
to combat would ever have done. Or, as Isaiah Berlin put it, ‘disregard for
the preferences and interests of individuals alive today in order to pursue
some distant social goal that their rulers have claimed is their duty to
promote has been a common cause of misery for people throughout the
ages.’
It was the thing intellectuals said they needed more of – government –
that did for the golden Edwardian afternoon, by declaring world war over a
trivial issue. After it, what with inflation, unemployment, depression and
fascism, there were plenty of excuses for pessimism between the two world
wars. In 1918, in The Education of Henry Adams, Henry Adams, famously

contrasting the spiritual energy of the Virgin Mary with the material energy
of a huge dynamo seen at an exhibition, foresaw the ‘ultimate, colossal,
cosmic collapse’ of civilisation. The drone of woe from pessimistic
intellectuals was now a constant background hum: from T.S. Eliot, James
Joyce, Ezra Pound, W.B. Yeats and Aldous Huxley. They were mostly
looking the wrong way – at money and technology, not idealism and
nationalism. ‘Optimism is cowardice’ scolded Oswald Spengler in 1923 in
his bestselling polemic The Decline of the West, telling a generation of
attentive readers of his mystical prose that the Western, Faustian world was
about to follow Babylon and Rome into progressive decline as authoritarian
‘Caesarism’ at last came to rule, and blood triumphed over money.
Caesarism did indeed rise from the ruins of capitalism in Italy, Germany,
Russia and Spain, and proceeded to murder millions. By 1940, only a dozen
nations remained democratic. Yet, dreadful as it was, the double war of
1914–45 did little to interrupt the improvement of lifespan and health of
those who managed to survive. Despite the wars, in the half-century to
1950, the longevity, wealth and health of Europeans improved faster than
ever before.
Worse and worse
After the Second World War, led by Konrad Adenauer’s West Germans,
Europeans enthusiastically followed America down the path of free
enterprise. There dawned a golden age after 1950 of peace (for most),
prosperity (for many), leisure (for the young) and progress (in the form of
accelerating technological change). Did the pessimists disappear? Was
everybody cheerful? The heck they were. George Orwell kicked it off in
1942 with an essay complaining about the spiritual emptiness of the
machine age and a book in 1948 warning of a totalitarian future. The torrent
of gloomy prognostication that characterised the second half of the
twentieth century was, like everything else from that time, unprecedented in
its magnitude. Doom after doom was promised: nuclear war, pollution,
overpopulation, famine, disease, violence, grey goo, vengeful technology –
culminating in the eruption of civil chaos that would undoubtedly follow
the inability of computers to cope with the year 2000. Remember that?
Consider the opening words of Agenda 21, the 600-page dirge signed by
world leaders at a United Nations conference in Rio de Janeiro in 1992:
‘Humanity stands at a defining moment in history. We are confronted with a
perpetuation of disparities within and between nations, a worsening of

poverty, hunger, ill health and illiteracy, and the continued deterioration of
the ecosystems on which we depend for our well-being.’ The following
decade saw the sharpest decrease in poverty, hunger, ill health and illiteracy
in human history. In the 1990s numbers in poverty fell in absolute as well as
relative terms. Yet even the 1990s were marked by (in the words of Charles
Leadbetter) ‘an outpouring of self-doubt and even self-loathing from the
intelligentsia of developed liberal societies’. An unspoken alliance,
Leadbetter argued, developed between reactionaries and radicals, between
nostalgic aristocrats, religious conservatives, eco-fundamentalists and angry
anarchists, to persuade people that they should be anxious and alarmed.
Their common theme was that individualism, technology and globalisation
were leading us headlong into hell. Horrified by the rate of change, and the
undermining of the status of noble intellectuals relative to brash tradesmen,
‘the stasis-craving social critics who have shaped the western zeitgeist for
decades’ (in Virginia Postrel’s words) lashed out at the new and yearned for
stability. ‘It is the failure of modern man to observe the constraints
necessary for maintaining the integrity and stability of the various social
and ecological systems of which he is a part that is giving rise to their
disintegration and destabilization’ groaned the wealthy environmentalist
Edward Goldsmith. The price of prosperity, in the words of the Prince of
Wales, has been ‘a progressive loss of harmony with the flow and rhythm of
the natural world’.
Today, the drumbeat has become a cacophony. The generation that has
experienced more peace, freedom, leisure time, education, medicine, travel,
movies, mobile phones and massages than any generation in history is
lapping up gloom at every opportunity. In an airport bookshop recently, I
paused at the Current Affairs section and looked down the shelves. There
were books by Noam Chomsky, Barbara Ehrenreich, Al Franken, Al Gore,
John Gray, Naomi Klein, George Monbiot and Michael Moore, which all
argued to a greater or lesser degree that (a) the world is a terrible place; (b)
it’s getting worse; (c) it’s mostly the fault of commerce; and (d) a turning
point has been reached. I did not see a single optimistic book.
Even the good news is presented as bad news. Reactionaries and
radicals agree that ‘excessive choice’ is an acute and present danger – that it
is corrupting, corroding and confusing to encounter ten thousand products
in the supermarket, each reminding you of your limited budget and of the
impossibility of ever satisfying your demands. Consumers are

‘overwhelmed with relatively trivial choices’ says a professor of
psychology. This notion dates from Herbert Marcuse, who turned Marx’s
notion of the ‘immiseration of the proletariat’ by steadily declining living
standards on its head and argued that capitalism forced excessive
consumption on the working class instead. It resonates well in the academic
seminar, causing heads to nod in agreement, but it is sheer garbage in the
real world. When I go into the local superstore, I never see people driven to
misery by the impossibility of choice. I see people choosing.
The problem is partly nostalgia. Even back in the golden age itself, in
the eighth century BC, the poet Hesiod was nostalgic for a lost golden age
when people ‘dwelt in ease and peace upon their lands with many good
things’. There has probably never been a generation since the Palaeolithic
that did not deplore the fecklessness of the next and worship a golden
memory of the past. The endless modern laments about how texting and
emails are shortening the attention span go back to Plato, who deplored
writing as a destroyer of memorising. The ‘youth of today’ are shallow,
selfish, spoiled, feral good-for-nothings full of rampant narcissism and
trained to have ephemeral attention spans, says one commentator. They
spend too long in cyberspace, says another, where their grey matter is being
‘scalded and defoliated by a kind of cognitive Agent Orange, depriving
them of moral agency, imagination and awareness of consequences’.
Balderdash. Of course, there are twerps and geeks in every generation, but
today’s young are volunteering for charities, starting companies, looking
after their relatives, going to work – just like any other generation, maybe
more so. Mostly when they are staring at screens it is to indulge in rampant
social engagement. The Sims 2 game, which sold more than a million copies
in ten days when launched in 2004, is a game in which the players – often
girls – get virtual people to live complex, realistic, highly social lives and
then chat about it with their friends. Not much scalding and defoliating
there. The psychoanalyst Adam Phillips believes that ‘for increasing
numbers of Britons and Americans, the “enterprise culture” means a life of
overwork, anxiety and isolation. Competition reigns supreme, with even
small children forced to compete against each other and falling ill as a
result.’ I have news for him: small children were more overworked, and fell
a lot more ill, in the industrial, feudal, agrarian, Neolithic or hunter-gatherer
past than in the free-market present.

Or how about the ‘end of nature’? Bill McKibben’s bestselling dirge of
1989 insisted that a turning point was at hand: ‘I believe that without
recognizing it we have already stepped over the threshold of such a change;
that we are at the end of nature.’
Or the ‘coming anarchy’? Robert Kaplan told the world in 1994, in a
much discussed article in the Atlantic Monthly that became a bestselling
book, how a turning point had been reached and ‘scarcity, crime,
overpopulation, tribalism, and disease are rapidly destroying the social
fabric of our planet’. His evidence for this thesis was in essence that he had
discovered urban west Africa to be a lawless, impoverished, unhealthy and
rather dangerous place.
Or ‘our stolen future’? In 1996 a book with this title claimed that sperm
counts were falling, breast cancer was increasing, brains were becoming
malformed and fish were changing sex, all because of synthetic chemicals
that act as ‘endocrine disruptors’, which alter the hormonal balance of
bodies. As usual, the scare proved greatly exaggerated: sperm counts are not
falling, and no significant effect on human health from endocrine disruption
has been detected.
In 1995 the otherwise excellent scientist and writer Jared Diamond fell
under the spell of fashionable pessimism when he promised: ‘By the time
my young sons reach retirement age, half the world’s species will be
extinct, the air radioactive and the seas polluted with oil.’ Let me reassure
his sons that species extinction, though terrible, is so far under-shooting that
promise by a wide margin. Even if you take E.O. Wilson’s wildly
pessimistic guess that 27,000 species are dying out every year, that equates
to just 2.7 per cent a century (there are thought to be at least ten million
species), a long way short of 50 per cent in sixty years. As for Diamond’s
other worries, the trends are getting better, not worse: the radioactive dose
his sons receive today from weapons tests and nuclear accidents is 90 per
cent down on what their father received in the early 1960s and is anyway
less than 1 per cent of natural background radiation. The amount of oil
spilled in the sea has been falling steadily since before the young Diamonds
were born: it now is down by 90 per cent since 1980.
One ingenious argument for apocalypse relies on statistics. As related
by Martin Rees in his book Our Final Century, Richard Gott’s argument
goes like this: given that I am roughly the sixty billionth person to live upon
this planet, it is plausible to believe that I come roughly half way through

my species’ run on Broadway, rather than near the beginning of a millionyear run. If you pull a number from an urn and it reads sixty, you would
conclude that there are more likely to be 100 numbers in the urn than 1,000.
Therefore, we are doomed. However, I do not intend to turn pessimist on
the strength of a mathematical analogy. After all, the six billionth and six
millionth person on the planet could have made exactly the same argument.
Pessimism has always been big box office. It plays into what Greg
Easterbrook calls ‘the collective refusal to believe that life is getting better’.
People do not apply this to their own lives, interestingly: they tend to
assume that they will live longer, stay married longer and travel more than
they do. Some 19 per cent of Americans believe themselves to be in the top
1 per cent of income earners. Yet surveys consistently reveal individuals to
be personally optimistic yet socially pessimistic. Dane Stangler calls this ‘a
non-burdensome form of cognitive dissonance we all walk around with’.
About the future of society and the human race people are naturally gloomy.
It goes with the fact that they are risk-averse: a large literature confirms that
people much more viscerally dislike losing a sum of money than they like
winning the same sum. And it seems that pessimism genes might quite
literally be commoner than optimism genes: only about 20 per cent of
people are homozygous for the long version of the serotonin transporter
gene, which possibly endows them with a genetic tendency to look on the
bright side. (Willingness to take risks, a possible correlate of optimism, is
also partly heritable: the 7-repeat version of the DRD4 gene accounts for 20
per cent of financial risk taking in men – and is commoner in countries
where most people are descended from immigrants.)
As the average age of a country’s population rises, so people get more
and more neophobic and gloomy. There is immense vested interest in
pessimism, too. No charity ever raised money for its cause by saying things
are getting better. No journalist ever got the front page by telling his editor
that he wanted to write a story about how disaster was now less likely.
Good news is no news, so the media megaphone is at the disposal of any
politician, journalist or activist who can plausibly warn of a coming
disaster. As a result, pressure groups and their customers in the media go to
great lengths to search even the most cheerful of statistics for glimmers of
doom. The day I was writing a first draft of this paragraph, the BBC
reported on its morning news headlines a study that found the incidence of
heart disease among young and middle-aged British women had ‘stopped

falling’. Note what was not news: the incidence of heart disease had until
recently been falling steeply among all women, was still falling among
men, and was not yet rising even among the female age group where it had
just ‘stopped falling’. Yet all the discussion was of this ‘bad’ news. Or note
how the New York Times reported the reassuring news in 2009 that world
temperature had not risen for a decade: ‘Plateau in temperature adds
difficulty to task of reaching a solution’.
Apocaholics (the word is Gary Alexander’s – he calls himself a
recovering apocaholic) exploit and profit from the natural pessimism of
human nature, the innate reactionary in every person. For 200 years
pessimists have had all the headlines, even though optimists have far more
often been right. Archpessimists are feted, showered with honours and
rarely challenged, let alone confronted with their past mistakes.
Should you ever listen to pessimists? Certainly. In the case of the ozone
layer, a briefly fashionable scare of the early 1990s, the human race
probably did itself and its environment a favour by banning
chlorofluorocarbons, even though the excess ultraviolet light getting
through the ozone layer in the polar regions never even approached onefive-hundredth of the level that is normally experienced by somebody living
in the tropics – and even though a new theory suggests that cosmic rays are
a bigger cause of the Antarctic ozone hole than chlorine is. Still, I should
stop carping: in this case, getting chlorine out of the atmosphere was on
balance the wise course of action and the costs to human welfare, though
not negligible, were small.
And there are things that are getting worse, without doubt. Traffic
congestion and obesity would be two big ones, yet both are the products of
plenty, and your ancestors would have laughed at the idea that such
abundance of food and transport was a bad thing. There are also many
occasions on which pessimists have been ignored too much. Too few people
listened to anxieties expressed about Hitler, Mao, Al-Qaeda and subprime
mortgages – to name a handful of issues at random. But pessimism is not
without its cost. If you teach children that things can only get worse, they
will do less to make it untrue. I was a teenager in Britain in the 1970s, when
every newspaper I read told me not just that oil was running out, a chemical
cancer epidemic was on the way, food was growing scarce and an ice age
was coming, but that my own country’s relative economic decline was
inevitable and its absolute decline probable. The sudden burst of prosperity

and accelerating growth that Britain experienced in the 1980s and 1990s,
not to mention the improvements in health, lifespan and the environment,
came as quite a shock to me. I realised about the age of twenty-one that
nobody had ever said anything optimistic to me about the future of the
human race – not in a book, a film or even a pub. Yet in the decade that
followed, employment increased, especially for women, health improved,
otters and salmon returned to the local river, air quality improved, cheap
flights to Italy began from the local airport, telephones became portable,
supermarkets stocked more and more kinds of cheaper and better food. I
feel angry that I was not taught and told that the world could get much
better; I was somehow given a counsel of despair. As are my children today.
Cancer
By now this generation of human beings was supposed to be dying like
flies from cancer caused by chemicals. Starting in the late 1950s, posterity
was warned that synthetic chemicals were about to create an epidemic of
cancer. Wilhelm Hueper, chief of environmental cancer research at
America’s National Cancer Institute, so convinced himself that exposure to
small traces of synthetic chemicals was a big cause of cancer that he even
refused to believe that smoking caused cancer – lung cancer came from
pollution, he believed. Rachel Carson, influenced by Hueper, set out in her
book Silent Spring (1962) to terrify her readers as she had terrified herself
about the threat to human health caused by synthetic chemicals and
especially by the pesticide DDT. Whereas childhood cancer had once been a
medical rarity, she wrote, ‘today, more American school children die of
cancer than from any other disease’. This was actually a statistical sleight of
hand; the statement was true not because cancer was increasing among
children (it was not), but because other causes of childhood death were
declining faster. She expected DDT to cause ‘practically 100 per cent of the
human population to be wiped out from a cancer epidemic in one
generation’.
It is not much of an exaggeration to say that an entire generation of
Westerners grew up expecting Carson’s cancer epidemic to strike them
down. I was one of them: it genuinely scared me at school to know that my
life would be short and sick. Influenced by Carson and her apostles I set out
to do a biological project. I would walk the countryside and pick up the
dying birds I found, have their cancers diagnosed, and publish. It was not a
great success: I found one corpse, of a swan that had hit a power line.

‘Individuals born since 1945,’ wrote the environmentalist Paul Ehrlich in
1971, ‘and thus exposed to DDT since before birth may well have shorter
life expectancies than they would if DDT had never existed. We won’t
know until the first of these reach their forties and fifties.’ Later he was
more specific: ‘The U.S. life expectancy will drop to forty-two years by
1980, due to cancer epidemics.’
What actually happened is that – excepting lung cancer – both cancer
incidence and death rate from cancer fell steadily, reducing by 16 per cent
between 1950 and 1997, with the rate of the fall accelerating after that; even
lung cancer then joined the party as smoking retreated. The life expectancy
of those born after 1945 broke new records. The search for a widespread
epidemic of cancer caused by synthetic chemicals, relentlessly and
enthusiastically pursued by many scientists ever since the 1960s, has been
entirely in vain. By the 1980s, a study by the epidemiologists Richard Doll
and Richard Peto had concluded that age-adjusted cancer rates were falling,
that cancer is caused chiefly by cigarette smoke, infection, hormonal
imbalance and unbalanced diet – and that chemical pollution causes less
than 2 per cent of all cases of cancer. The premise on which much of the
environmental movement had grown up – that cleaning up pollution would
prevent cancer – proved false. As Bruce Ames famously demonstrated in
the late 1990s, cabbage has forty-nine natural pesticides in it, more than
half of which are carcinogens. In drinking a single cup of coffee you
encounter far more carcinogenic chemicals than in a year’s exposure to
pesticide residues in food. This does not mean that coffee is dangerous, or
contaminated: the carcinogens are nearly all natural chemicals found in the
coffee plant and the dose is too low to cause disease, as it is in the pesticide
residue. Ames says, ‘We’ve put a hundred nails in the coffin of the cancer
story and it keeps coming back out.’
DDT’s miraculous ability to halt epidemics of malaria and typhus,
saving perhaps 500 million lives in the 1950s and 1960s (according to the
US National Academy of Sciences), far outweighed any negative effect it
had on human health. Ceasing to use DDT caused a resurgence of malaria
in Sri Lanka, Madagascar and many other countries. Of course, DDT should
have been used more carefully than it was, for although it was far less toxic
to birds than previous pesticides, many of which were arsenic-based, it did
have the subversive ability to accumulate in the livers of animals and wipe
out populations of predators at the top of long food chains, such as eagles,

falcons and otters. Replacing it with less persistent chemicals has brought
otters, bald eagles and peregrine falcons bouncing back to relative
abundance after an absence of several decades. Fortunately, DDT’s modern
pyrethroid successors do not persist and accumulate. Moreover, sparing,
targeted use of DDT against malarial mosquitoes can be done without any
such threat to wildlife, for example by spraying the inside walls of houses.
Nuclear Armageddon
There were very good reasons to be a nuclear pessimist in the Cold War:
the build-up of weapons, the confrontations over Berlin and Cuba, the
gung-ho rhetoric of some military commanders. Given how most arms races
end, it seemed only a matter of time before the Cold War turned hot, very
hot. If you had said at the time that you believed that mutually assured
destruction would prevent large direct wars between the superpowers, that
the Cold War would end, the Soviet empire would disintegrate, global arms
spending would fall by 30 per cent and three-quarters of all nuclear missiles
would be dismantled, you would have been dismissed as a fool. ‘Historians
will view nuclear arms reduction as such an incredible accomplishment,’
says Greg Easterbrook, ‘that it will seem bizarre in retrospect that so little
attention was paid while it was happening.’ Perhaps this was just a stroke of
luck, and admittedly the danger is far from over (especially for Koreans and
Pakistanis), but nonetheless notice that things have got better, not worse.
Famine
One of the hoariest causes for pessimism about the fate of humanity is
the worry that food will run out. The prominent eco-pessimist Lester Brown
predicted in 1974 that a turning point had been reached and farmers could
‘no longer keep up with rising demand’. But they did. In 1981 he said that
‘global food insecurity is increasing’. It was not. In 1984, he proclaimed
that ‘the slim margin between food production and population growth
continues to narrow’. Wrong again. In 1989 ‘population growth is
exceeding farmers’ ability to keep up.’ No. In 1994, ‘Seldom has the world
faced an unfolding emergency whose dimensions are as clear as the
growing imbalance between food and people’ and ‘After forty years of
record food production gains, output per person has reversed with
unanticipated abruptness.’ (A turning point had been reached.) A series of
bumper harvests followed and the price of wheat fell to record lows, where
it stayed for a decade. Then in 2007 the wheat price suddenly doubled
because of a combination of Chinese prosperity, Australian drought,

pressure from environmentalists to encourage the growing of biofuels and
willingness of American pork-barrel politicians to oblige them by sluicing
subsidies towards ethanol producers. Sure enough Lester Brown was once
again the darling of the media, his pessimism as impregnable as it was
thirty-three years before: ‘cheap food may now be history,’ he said. A
turning point had been reached. Once again, a record harvest followed and
the wheat price halved.
The prediction of global famine has a long history, but it probably
reached its apocaholic shrillest in 1967 and 1968 with two bestselling
books. The first was by William and Paul Paddock (Famine, 1975!).
‘Population-food collision is inevitable; it is foredoomed’ was the title of
the first chapter. The Paddocks even went so far as to argue that countries
such as Haiti, Egypt and India were beyond saving and should be left to
starve; the world’s efforts should, on the Verdun principle of triage, be
focused on the less desperate cases. By 1975, with the world not yet
starving, William Paddock was calling for a moratorium on research
programmes designed to increase food production in countries with high
population growth rates – almost as if he wanted to bring about his own
prediction.
The following year saw the publication of an even bigger bestseller that
was even more misanthropic in tone. The Population Bomb allowed Paul
Ehrlich, an obscure butterfly ecologist, to metamorphose into a guru of the
environmental movement complete with MacArthur ‘genius’ award. ‘In the
1970s and 1980s,’ he promised, declaring a turning point, ‘hundreds of
millions of people will starve to death in spite of any crash programs
embarked upon now. At this late date nothing can prevent a substantial
increase in the world death rate.’ Ehrlich not only argued that mass death
was inevitable and imminent, that human numbers would fall to two billion
and that the poor would get poorer, but that those who saw that population
growth was already beginning to slow were as foolish as those who greet a
slightly less freezing day in December as a sign of approaching spring; in
later editions, he added that the Green Revolution then transforming Asian
agriculture would ‘at the very best buy us only a decade or two’. Four
decades later, Ehrlich had learnt his lesson – not to give dates: in his book
The Dominant Animal, co-written with his wife and published in 2008, he
again foresaw an ‘unhappy increase in death rates’ but this time mentioned
no timescale. Without a word about why his previous predictions of mass

starvation and mass cancer had never happened, he remains confident in
calling the top of the human happiness market: ‘The world in general seems
to be gradually awakening to a realization,’ he regretted to say, ‘that our
long evolutionary story is, through our actions but not our intentions,
coming to a turning point.’
For reasons I explained in chapter 4, famine is largely history. Where it
still occurs – Darfur, Zimbabwe – the fault lies with government policy, not
population pressure.
Resources
The history of the world is replete with examples of the extinction or
near-exhaustion of resources: mammoths, whales, herrings, passenger
pigeons, white pine forests, Lebanon cedars, guano. They are all, note,
‘renewable’. By striking contrast, there is not a single non-renewable
resource that has run out yet: not coal, oil, gas, copper, iron, uranium,
silicon, or stone. As has been said – the remark has been attributed to many
people – the Stone Age did not come to an end for lack of stone. ‘It is one
of the safest predictions,’ wrote the economist Joseph Schumpeter in 1943,
‘that in the calculable future we shall live in an embarras de richesse of
both foodstuffs and raw materials, giving all the rein to expansion of total
output that we shall know what to do with. This applies to mineral resources
as well.’ It is also one of the safest predictions that people will always be
warning that natural resources are running out.
Consider the humiliating failure of the predictions made by a computer
model called World3 in the early 1970s. World3 attempted to predict the
carrying capacity of the planet’s resources and concluded, in a report called
Limits to Growth, authored by the grandiosely titled ‘Club of Rome’, that
exponential use could exhaust known world supplies of zinc, gold, tin,
copper, oil and natural gas by 1992 and cause a collapse of civilisation and
population in the subsequent century. Limits to Growth was enormously
influential, with school textbooks soon parroting its predictions minus the
caveats. ‘Some scientists estimate that the world’s known supplies of oil,
tin, copper, and aluminium will be used up within your lifetime,’ said one.
‘Governments must help save our fossil fuel supply by passing laws
limiting their use,’ opined another. It was misleading chiefly because, like
Malthus, it underestimated the speed and magnitude of technological
change, the generation of new recipes for rearranging the world – as its
godfather, the engineer Jay Forester, has acknowledged. In 1990 the

economist Julian Simon won $576.07 in settlement of a wager from the
environmentalist Paul Ehrlich. Simon had bet him that the prices of five
metals (chosen by Ehrlich) would fall during the 1980s and Ehrlich had
accepted ‘Simon’s astonishing offer before other greedy people jump in’
(though later, while calling Simon an imbecile, he claimed he was ‘goaded’
into it).
The amount of oil left, the food-growing capacity of the world’s
farmland, even the regenerative capacity of the biosphere – these are not
fixed numbers; they are dynamic variables produced by a constant
negotiation between human ingenuity and natural constraints. Embracing
dynamism means opening your mind to the possibility of posterity making a
better world rather than preventing a worse one. We now know, as we did
not in the 1960s, that more than six billion people can live upon the planet
in improving health, food security and life expectancy and that this is
compatible with cleaner air, increasing forest cover and some booming
populations of elephants. The resources and technologies of 1960 could not
have supported six billion – but the technologies changed and so the
resources changed. Is six billion the turning point? Seven? Eight? At a time
when glass fibre is replacing copper cable, electrons are replacing paper and
most employment involves more software than hardware, only the most
static of imaginations could think so.
Clean air
In 1970, Life magazine promised its readers that scientists had ‘solid
experimental and theoretical evidence’ that ‘within a decade, urban dwellers
will have to wear gas masks to survive air pollution … by 1985 air
pollution will have reduced the amount of sunlight reaching earth by one
half.’ Urban smog and other forms of air pollution refused to follow the
script, as technology and regulation rapidly improved air quality. So by the
1980s the script switched to acid rain. It is worth exploring the history of
this episode because it was a dress rehearsal for global warming:
atmospheric, international and with fossil fuels as the villains. The
conventional story you will read in your children’s textbooks is as follows:
sulphuric and nitric acid, made mainly from smoke belched from coal-fired
power stations, fell on lakes and forests in Canada, Germany and Sweden
and devastated them. In the nick of time laws were passed limiting
emissions and ecosystems slowly recovered.

Certainly, in the mid-1980s, a combination of scientists scenting grants
and environmentalists scenting donations, led to some apocalyptic
predictions. In 1984 the German magazine Stern reported that a third of
Germany’s forests were already dead or dying, that experts believed all its
conifers would be gone by 1990 and that the Federal Ministry of the Interior
predicted all forests would be gone by 2002. All! Professor Bernd Ulrich
said it was already too late for Germany’s forests: ‘They cannot be saved.’
Across the Atlantic, similar predictions of doom were made. Trees were
said to be dying at an unnatural rate in 100 per cent of the forests on the
eastern seaboard. ‘The tops of the Blue Ridge Mountains are becoming tree
graveyards,’ said a plant pathology professor. Half of all lakes were
becoming dangerously acidified. The New York Times declared ‘a scientific
consensus’: it was time for action, not further research.
What actually happened? History shows that the biomass of European
forests actually increased during the 1980s, during the time when
unconstrained acid rain was supposed to be killing them and before any
laws were passed to limit emissions. It continued to increase in the 1990s.
Sweden’s government eventually admitted that nitric acid – a fertiliser –
had increased the overall growth rate of its trees. European forests not only
did not die; they thrived. As for North America, the official, ten-year, halfa-billion-dollar, 700-scientist, government-sponsored study did a great rash
of experiments and found that: ‘there is no evidence of a general or unusual
decline of forests in the United States or Canada due to acid rain’ and ‘there
is no case of forest decline in which acidic deposition is known to be a
predominant cause.’ When asked if he had been pressured to be optimistic,
one of the authors said the reverse was true. ‘Yes, there were political
pressures … Acid rain had to be an environmental catastrophe, no matter
what the facts revealed. Since we could not support this claim … the
[Environmental Protection Agency] worked to keep us from providing
Congress with our findings.’ The truth is that there were small pockets of
damage to forests in the 1980s some of which were caused by pests, others
by natural senescence or competition and a few by local pollution. There
was no great forest die-off due to acid rain. At all.
It would be wrong to conclude that the anti-acid rain legislation did no
good at all. The acidification of mountain lakes by distant power-station
emissions was a real (though relatively rare) phenomenon, and this was
indeed reversed by the legislation. But even this harm was vastly

exaggerated during the debate: far from 50 per cent of lakes being affected,
it was 4 per cent, said the official study. Some of these continue to be acid
even after the clean-up, because of the chemistry of the surrounding rocks.
The fact is, if you read the history of the episode carefully, acid rain was a
minor and local nuisance that could be relatively cheaply dealt with, not a
huge threat to large stretches of the planet. The ultra-pessimists were simply
wrong.
Genes
Every advance in human genetics and reproductive medicine is greeted
with predictions of Frankenstein doom. The first attempts at genetic
engineering of bacteria in the 1970s led to moratoria and bans. The activist
Jeremy Rifkin said that biotechnology threatened ‘a form of annihilation
every bit as deadly as nuclear holocaust’. Yet the result was life-saving
therapies for diabetics and haemophiliacs. Shortly after, the pioneers of invitro fertilisation, Robert Edwards and Patrick Steptoe, were vilified on all
sides, even by their fellow doctors, for their supposedly dangerous
experiments. When Louise Brown was born in 1978, the Vatican called it
‘an event that can have very grave consequences for humanity’. Yet their
invention has brought no eugenic abuse and heartfuls of individual
happiness to millions of childless couples.
When the human genome was sequenced in 2000, pessimism soon
dominated the commentary. People will fiddle with their children’s genes,
moaned some: yes, to avoid passing on terrible inherited diseases like TaySachs or Huntingdon’s. Predicting illness will make health insurance
impossible, groaned others – yet health insurers’ rates are so high precisely
because they cannot predict who will get ill, so predicting and preventing
will bring some costs down. Diagnosis will run far ahead of therapy, wailed
others, so people will know their fate but not know how to cure themselves.
In practice, there are very few diseases for which some kind of preventive
intervention cannot be tried once a predisposition is known, and knowing is
still and always should be voluntary. Then, to cap it all, within a few years
the pessimists were complaining that genetic insights were coming
disappointingly slowly.
Plague
By the late 1990s, the modish cause for doom was the resurgence of
infectious disease. The combination of an incurable and brand-new sexually
transmitted disease, AIDS, with a growing resistance to antibiotics among

hospital bacteria gave genuine cause for fear. But it also sparked a search
for the next and still more lethal plague. Book after book trumpeted the
alarm: The Hot Zone, Outbreak, Virus X, The Coming Plague. Hundreds of
millions of people were going to die. Infectious disease was on its way back
into human affairs as part of the planet’s revenge for human despoliation of
the environment. The human race was due a culling. Some of the more
misanthropic authors, sounding like Puritan preachers, even expressed
something approaching satisfaction at the thought. Yet once again, the
auction of competitively pessimistic forecasts that surrounded Ebola virus,
Lassa fever, hanta virus and SARS proved ridiculously overblown. Ebola
outbreaks – which wreaked horrible disintegration upon their victims and
wiped out whole villages in the Congo a handful of times in the 1990s
before fading away each time – proved to be very local, easily controlled
and partly man-made. That is to say, it soon emerged that what was turning
this occasional bat-borne infection into a raging local epidemic was such
things as quinine injections given by well-meaning nuns with re-usable
syringes. Even AIDS, while terrible especially in Africa, has failed to live
up to the dire predictions commonly made in the late 1980s for its global
effects. The number of new cases of HIV/AIDS worldwide has been falling
for nearly a decade, and the number of deaths from the disease has been
falling since 2005. The proportion of the population infected with HIV is
falling, even in southern Africa. The epidemic is far from over, and much
more could be done, but the news is getting slowly better, not worse.
Remember mad-cow disease? Between 1980 and 1996 about 750,000
cattle infected with the brain-destroying prion called vCJD entered the
human food chain in Britain. When it became clear in 1996 that some
people were dying of the same agent, acquired from eating infected beef,
there was perhaps understandably a competitive auction in doom-laden
predictions. The winner, whose views were broadcast repeatedly as a result,
was a bacteriology professor named Hugh Pennington who said things like
‘we have to prepare for perhaps thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of
thousands, of cases of vCJD coming down the line.’ Even the ‘official’
models warned that the true figure could be as high as 136,000 victims. In
fact, as of this writing, the number of deaths has reached 166, of which just
one was in 2008 and two in 2009. Only four people are now living with
definite or probable vCJD. Each one is a tragedy, but a threat to humanity it
is not.

(The numbers are surprisingly similar to those from Chernobyl. At least
500,000 people would die from cancers caused by the nuclear accident
there in 1986, said the sobering early reports, and there will be many birth
defects. The latest estimate is that less than 4,000 will die of Chernobyl
cancer, compared with 100,000 natural cancer deaths among the exposed
population, and that there were no extra birth defects at all. In addition,
fifty-six died during the accident itself. The evacuation of the area has
caused wildlife to flourish there to an extraordinary degree, without any
unusual genetic changes at all in the rodents that have been studied.)
In the 2000s influenza, too, proved to be a paper tiger. H5N1 strains of
the virus (‘bird flu’) jumped into human beings via free-range ducks on
Chinese farms and, in 2005, the United Nations predicted five million – 150
million deaths from bird flu. Yet, contrary to what you have read, when
H5N1 did infect human beings it proved neither especially virulent nor
especially contagious. It has so far killed fewer than 300 people worldwide.
As one commentator concluded: ‘Hysteria over an avian flu pandemic has
been very good for the Chicken Little media, authors, ambitious health
officials, drug companies … But even as many of the panic-mongers have
begun to lie low, the vestiges of hysteria remain – as do the misallocations
of billions of dollars from more serious health problems. Too bad no one
ever holds the doomsayers accountable for the damage they’ve done.’
I suspect this is too strong, and that flu may yet mount a serious
epidemic in some form. But the H1N1 swine flu epidemic of 2009 that
began in Mexico also followed the usual path of new flu strains, towards
low virulence – about one death for every 1,000–10,000 infected people.
This is no surprise. As the evolutionary biologist Paul Ewald has long
argued, viruses undergo natural selection as well as mutation once
established in a new species of host and casually transmitted viruses like flu
replicate more successfully if they cause mild disease, so that the host keeps
moving about and meeting new people. A victim lying in a darkened room
alone is not as much use to the virus as somebody who feels just well
enough to struggle into work coughing. The modern way of life, with lots of
travel but also rather more personal space, tends to encourage mild, casualcontact viruses that need their victims to be healthy enough to meet fresh
targets fleetingly. It is no accident that modern people suffer from more than
200 kinds of cold, the supreme viral exploiters of the modern world.

If this is so, why then did H1N1 flu kill perhaps fifty million people in
1918? Ewald and others think the explanation lies in the trenches of the
First World War. So many wounded soldiers, in such crowded conditions,
provided a habitat ideally suited to more virulent behaviour by the virus:
people could pass on the virus while dying. Today you are far more likely to
get the flu from a person who is well enough to go to work than one who is
ill enough to stay at home. By contrast, it is no accident that water-borne
and insect-borne diseases such as typhoid, cholera, yellow fever, typhus and
malaria are so much more virulent, because they can spread from
immobilised victims. Malaria spreads more easily if its victims are laid low
in a darkened room – bait for mosquitoes. But in most of the modern world,
people are increasingly protected from dirty water and from insects and
therefore lethal diseases that debilitate their victims are in retreat.
On top of this, the weapons in the physician’s armoury just keep on
getting better. Diseases of my childhood, like measles, mumps and rubella,
are now prevented by a single vaccine. Where it took more than ten years to
understand HIV, it took just three weeks a couple of decades later to
sequence the entire genome of the SARS virus and begin a search for its
vulnerabilities. It took just months in 2009 to generate large doses of
vaccines for swine flu.
The total eradication of many diseases is now a realistic prospect.
Although it is now more than forty years since smallpox was exterminated
and hopes of sending polio after it to the grave have been repeatedly
dashed, none the less, the retreat of infectious killers from many parts of the
world is little short of astounding. Polio is confined to a few parts of India
and West Africa, malaria is gone from Europe, North America and nearly
the whole of the Caribbean, measles is reduced to a tiny percentage of the
numbers recorded even a few decades ago; sleeping sickness, filariasis and
onchoceriasis are being steadily eliminated from country after country.
In the centuries to come there will certainly be new human diseases, but
very few of them will be both lethal and contagious. Measures to cure and
prevent them will come quicker and quicker.
Sounding the retreat
Many of today’s extreme environmentalists not only insist that the
world has reached a ‘turning point’ – quite unaware that their predecessors
have made the same claim for two hundred years about many different
issues – but also insist that the only sustainable solution is to retreat, to

cease economic growth and enter progressive economic recession. What
else can they mean by demanding a campaign to ‘de-develop the United
States’, in the words of President Obama’s science adviser John Holdren; or
‘isn’t the only hope for the planet that the industrialised civilisations
collapse? Isn’t it our responsibility to bring that about?’, in the words of
Maurice Strong, first executive director of the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP); or that what is needed is ‘an ordered and structured
down-sizing of the global economy’ in the words of the journalist George
Monbiot? This retreat must be achieved, says Monbiot, by ‘political
restraint’. This means not just that growing your company’s sales would be
a crime, but failing to shrink them; not just that travelling further than your
ration of miles would be an offence, but failing to travel fewer miles each
year; not just that inventing a new gadget would be illegal, but failing to
abandon existing technologies; not just that growing more food per acre
would be a felony, but failing to grow less – because these are the things
that constitute growth.
Here’s the rub: this future sounds awfully like the feudal past. The Ming
and Maoist emperors had rules restricting the growth of businesses;
forbidding unauthorised travel; punishing innovation; limiting family size.
They do not say so, but that is the inevitable world the pessimists want to
return to when they speak of retreat.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Ten
The two great pessimisms of today: Africa
and climate after 2010
It is possible to believe that all the past is but the beginning of a
beginning, and that all that is and has been is but the twilight of the dawn.
H.G. WELLS
The Discovery of the Future

Sooner or later, the ubiquitous pessimist will confront the rational
optimist with his two trump cards: Africa and climate. It is all very well
Asia lifting itself out of poverty, and perhaps Latin America too, but surely,
says the pessimist, it is hard to imagine Africa following suit. The continent
is doomed by its population boom, its endemic diseases, its tribalism, its
corruption, its lack of infrastructure, even – whisper some, more in sorrow
than in prejudice – its genes. ‘It’s blindingly obvious,’ says the
environmentalist Jonathan Porritt: ‘completely unsustainable population
growth in most of Africa will keep it permanently, hopelessly, stuck in
deepest, darkest poverty.’
And in any case, continues the pessimist, Africa cannot hope to boom
because climate change will devastate the continent during the coming

century before it can prosper. At the time of writing, global warming is by
far the most fashionable reason for pessimism. The earth’s atmosphere has
warmed, and it seems that the great 100,000-year experiment of human
progress is about to be tested against rising sea levels, melting ice caps,
droughts, storms, famines, pandemics and floods. Human activity is causing
much of this change, especially by the burning of fossil fuels, whose energy
has been responsible for raising the living standards of many of the world’s
nearly seven billion people, so humankind faces a stark dilemma in the
coming century between continuing a carbon-fuelled prosperity until global
warming brings it to a calamitous halt, or restricting the use of carbon and
risking a steep decline in living standards because of the lack of alternative
sources of energy that are cheap enough. Either prospect might be
catastrophic.
Africa and climate therefore confront the rational optimist with a
challenge, to say the least. For somebody who has spent 300 pages looking
on the bright side of human endeavour, arguing along the way that the
population explosion is coming to a halt, that energy will not soon run out,
that pollution, disease, hunger, war and poverty can all be expected to
continue declining if human beings are not impeded from exchanging
goods, services and ideas freely – for such a person as your author, African
poverty and rapid global warming are indeed acute challenges.
Moreover, the two issues are connected, because the models that predict
rapid global warming take as their assumption that the world will prosper
mightily, and that the poorest countries on the planet – most of which are
African – will by the end of this century be about nine times as rich as they
are today. Unless they are, carbon dioxide emissions will be insufficient to
cause such rapid warming. And at present there is no way to make Africans
as rich as Asians except by them burning more fossil fuels per head. So
Africa faces an especially stark dilemma: get rich by burning more carbon
and then suffer the climate consequences; or join the rest of the world in
taking action against climate change and continue to wallow in poverty.
That is the conventional wisdom. I think it is a false dilemma and that
an honest appraisal of the facts leads to the conclusion that by far the most
likely outcome of the next nine decades is both that Africa gets rich and that
no catastrophic climate change happens.
Africa’s bottom billion

Of course, not all poverty is in Africa. I am well aware that there is
terrible want in many other parts of the world, in Haiti and Afghanistan, in
Bolivia and Cambodia, in Calcutta and São Paolo, even in parts of Glasgow
and Detroit. But compared with a generation ago, thanks chiefly to progress
elsewhere, poverty has come to be concentrated in that one continent as
never before. Of the ‘bottom billion’ left behind by recent booms – Paul
Collier’s phrase – more than 600 million are Africans. The average African
lives on just $1 a day. Saving Africa has become both the goal of idealists
and the despair of pessimists. Not only has Africa failed to join Asia’s boom
since 1990, it has spent much of the time stagnant or going backwards.
Between 1980 and 2000, the number of Africans living in poverty doubled.
War in the west of the continent, genocide in the east, AIDS in the south,
hunger in the north, dictators in the middle, population growth all over: no
part of the continent has escaped the horror. Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia,
Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, Congo, Zimbabwe, Angola, Liberia, Sierra Leone
– the very names of countries have taken their turn as synonyms of chaos
on the lips of newsreaders in the West.
Moreover, although Africa’s demographic transition has begun, it has a
long way to go before population growth decelerates. Nigeria’s birth rate
may have halved, but it is still twice as high as ‘replacement rate’. Where
will Africa’s ghost acres, its emigration valve, or its industrial revolution
come from?
There are hopeful exceptions, like Mali, Ghana, Mauritius and South
Africa – countries that have achieved a measure of freedom, economic
progress and peace. All across the continent, economic growth has picked
up in recent years, and in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia and
Botswana even life expectancy is rising rapidly after falling while AIDS
took its toll (South Africa and Mozambique have yet to follow suit). It is a
false Western cliché that all African lives are spent dodging poverty,
corruption, violence and disease. But far too many are, and the contrast with
much of Asia grows more acute by the year. Whereas income per head
stood still in Africa in the past twenty-five years, in Asia it trebled. Then
tragically, Africa’s promising economic boom in the 2000s was cut short by
the credit crunch.
Some Westerners have been heard to say that growth is not what
matters, that what Africa needs is an improvement in the human
development index, towards the Millennium Development goals and to

erase suffering without raising income, or that it needs a new kind of
sustainable growth. Paul Collier and his colleagues at the World Bank
encountered a storm of protest from non-governmental organisations when
they published a study entitled Growth Is Good for the Poor. This suspicion
of growth is a luxury that only wealthy Westerners can indulge. What
Africans need is better living standards and these come chiefly from
economic growth.
Aid’s test
Some of the most urgent needs of Africa can surely be met by increased
aid from the rich world. Aid can save lives, reduce hunger, deliver a
medicine, a mosquito net, a meal or a metalled road. But statistics,
anecdotes and case histories all demonstrate that the one thing aid cannot
reliably do is to start or accelerate economic growth. Aid to Africa doubled
in the 1980s as a percentage of the continent’s GDP; growth simultaneously
collapsed from 2 per cent to zero. The aid that Zambia has received since
1960, if invested instead in assets giving a reasonable rate of return, would
by now have given Zambians the income per head of the Portuguese –
$20,000 instead of $500. Although in the early 2000s some studies managed
to find evidence that certain kinds of aid sometimes trigger growth in
countries with specific economic policies, even these conclusions were later
dashed by Raghuram Rajan and Arvind Subramanian of the International
Monetary Fund in 2005. They could find no evidence that aid resulted in
growth in any countries. Ever.
It is worse than that. Most aid is delivered by governments to
governments. It can therefore be a source of both corruption and
discouragement to entrepreneurship. Some ends up in dictators’ Swiss bank
accounts; some goes to make billion-dollar steel mills that never work;
some is given on condition of importing certain goods from a Western
country; some is not independently evaluated for efficacy either by the
donor or the recipient. Some African leaders are so disenchanted with
government aid that they even embraced the recommendations of the
Zambian economist Dambisa Moyo who concludes, bleakly, ‘aid doesn’t
work, hasn’t worked, and won’t work … no longer part of the potential
solution, it’s part of the problem – in fact, aid is the problem.’
Moreover, in recent years much aid has been granted on condition of
free-market economic reform, which far from kick-starting economic
growth, frequently proves damaging to local traditions, undermining the

very mechanisms that get enrichment started. As William Easterly puts it
while criticising the shock therapy that did such harm in both the Soviet
bloc and Africa, ‘you can’t plan a market’. The top-down imposition of a
bottom-up system is bound to fail.
Easterly cites the example of insecticide-treated mosquito bed nets,
which are a cheap and proven way of preventing malaria. A bed net costs
about $4. Encouraged by a flurry of publicity at the Davos World Economic
Forum in 2005 from Gordon Brown, Bono and Sharon Stone, bed nets
became a fashionable icon of the aid industry. Unfortunately, when given
out free by donor agencies, they often become fashion items instead, being
sold on the black market for wedding veils or used as fishing nets. They
undercut local merchants supplying them for money. One American charity,
Population Services International, came up with a better idea. It sold the
nets for fifty cents to mothers attending antenatal clinics in Malawi and
subsidised this price by selling the nets for $5 to richer urban Malawians.
The poor mothers who bought these nets with half a day’s wages made sure
they were used properly. In four years, the proportion of children under five
sleeping under such nets went up from 8 per cent to 55 per cent.
To do more good and less harm, says Easterly, the aid business could be
transformed into a more transparent marketplace where donations compete
to fund projects and projects compete to attract donations. Fortunately, the
internet makes this possible for the first time. Globalgiving.com, for
instance, allows projects to bid for donations from any donor. In the week I
was writing this paragraph, projects that needed funding on the site ranged
from feeding Ethiopian refugees, to building the fence around a retirement
home for a pet cheetah used to inspire underprivileged children about
conservation in South Africa.
In forums like this, aid could be democratised, taken out of the hands of
inefficient international bureaucrats and corrupt African officials, taken
away from idealistic free-market shocktherapists, separated from arms
deals, removed from big industrial projects, distanced from patronising dogooders and given person-to-person. A rich country could give each
taxpayer a tax break for each suitable donation. To those who say that this
would make an uncoordinated, unplanned business, I reply: exactly.
Grandiose goals and centralised plans have just as long and just as
disastrous a history in aid as they do in politics. Nobody planned the

industrial revolution, or China’s economic surge. The planners’ role was to
get out of the way of bottom-up evolutionary solutions.
Bound to fail?
Most economists are agreed on a list of reasons for the failure of Africa
to generate economic growth. Many African countries are more or less
landlocked, which cuts them off from world trade. They have poor and
deteriorating roads linking distant cities. They have exploding birth rates.
They suffer from epidemic malaria, AIDS and other diseases such as
sleeping sickness and guinea worm. Their institutions have never fully
recovered from the disruptions caused by the slave trade. They were once
colonies, which meant rule by minorities uninterested in allowing the
development of an entrepreneurial class. Thanks to their imperial
colonisers, their Marxist independence leaders and their monetarist aid
donors, most African countries have lost many of their informal social
traditions and institutions, so property rights and justice have become
arbitrary and insecure. Their most promising industry – agriculture – is
usually stifled by price controls and bureaucratic marketing agencies
imposed by urban elites, and stymied by trade barriers and subsidies in
Europe and America, not to mention devastated by a proliferation of overgrazing goats. Ethnic strife between the biggest tribe, which maintains oneparty rule, and its hated rival usually poisons politics. Paradoxically,
African countries are often also cursed by sudden windfalls of rich mineral
wealth, such as oil or diamonds, which serve only to corrupt democratic
politicians, strengthen the power of dictators, distract entrepreneurs, spoil
the terms of trade of exporters and encourage reckless state borrowing.
Take, therefore, one such typical African country. It is landlocked,
drought-prone and has a very high population growth rate. Its people belong
to eight different tribes speaking different tongues. When freed from
colonial rule in 1966 it had eight miles of paved road (for an area the size of
Texas), twenty-two black university graduates, and only 100 secondary
school graduates. It was later cursed by a huge diamond mine, crippled by
AIDS, devastated by cattle disease, and ruled by one party with little
effective opposition. Government spending has remained high; so has
wealth inequality. This country, the fourth poorest in the entire world in
1950, has every one of Africa’s curses. Its failure was inevitable and
predictable.

But Botswana did not fail. It succeeded not just moderately well, but
spectacularly. In the thirty years after independence it grew its per capita
GDP faster on average (nearly 8 per cent) than any other country in the
entire world – faster than Japan, China, South Korea and America during
that period. It multiplied its per capita income thirteen times so that its
average citizens are now richer than Thais, Bulgarians or Peruvians. It has
had no coups, civil wars or dictators. It has experienced no hyperinflation or
debt default. It did not wipe out its elephants. It is consistently the most
successful economy in the world in recent decades.
It is true that Botswana has a small and ethnically somewhat
homogeneous population, unlike many other countries. But its biggest
advantage is one that the rest of Africa could easily have shared: good
institutions. In particular, Botswana turns out to have secure, enforceable
property rights that are fairly widely distributed and fairly well respected.
When Daron Acemoglu and his colleagues compared property rights with
economic growth throughout the world, they found that the first explained
an astonishing three quarters of the variation in the second and that
Botswana was no outlier: the reason it had flourished was because its
people owned property without fear of confiscation by chiefs or thieves to a
much greater extent than in the rest of Africa. This is much the same
explanation for why England had a good eighteenth century while China
did not.
So give the rest of Africa good property rights and sit back and wait for
enterprise to work its magic? If only it were that easy. Good institutions
cannot usually be imposed from above: that way they are oxymorons. They
must evolve from below. And it turns out that Botswana’s institutions have
deep evolutionary roots. The Tswana people who conquered the native
Khoisan tribes in the eighteenth century (and still do not necessarily treat
them well) had a political system that was remarkably, well, democratic.
Cattle were privately owned, but land was owned collectively. The chiefs,
who in theory allocated land and grazing rights, were under a strong
obligation to consult an assembly, or kgotla. The Tswana were also
inclusive, happy to bring other tribes into their system, which stood them in
good stead when a collective army was needed to repel the Boers at the
battle of Dimawe in 1852.
This was a good start, but Botswana then had a stroke of good fortune in
its colonial experience. It was incorporated into the British empire in such a

half-hearted and inattentive fashion that it barely experienced colonial rule.
The British took it mainly to stop the Germans or Boers getting it. ‘Doing
as little in the way of administration or settlement as possible’ was
explicitly stated as government policy in 1885. Botswana was left alone,
experiencing almost as little direct European imperialism as those later
success stories of Asia – places like Thailand, Japan, Taiwan, Korea and
China. In 1895, three Tswana chiefs went to Britain and successfully
pleaded with Queen Victoria to be kept out of the clutches of Cecil Rhodes;
in the 1930s, two chiefs went to court to prevent another attempt at more
intrusive colonial rule and though they failed, the war then kept bossy
commissioners at bay. Benign neglect continued.
After independence, Botswana’s first president, Seretse Khama, one of
the chiefs, behaved like most African leaders in setting out to build a strong
state and disenfranchise the chiefs, as well as to win all future elections (so
far so good for his party under two successors). This, together with the
extreme poverty of the country and its dependence on foreign aid, foreign
labour markets (in South Africa) and the sale of mineral rights to de Beers
surely boded badly. Yet Botswana went from strength to strength by
carefully investing its cattle export income and then its diamond windfall to
develop other parts of the economy. Only a devastating AIDS epidemic,
which lowered life expectancy between 1992 and 2002, mars the picture,
and even that is now retreating.
The world is your oyster
It is not as if Africa needs to invent enterprise: the streets of Africa’s
cities are teeming with entrepreneurs, adept at doing deals, but they cannot
grow their businesses because of blockages in the system. The slums of
Nairobi and Lagos are terrible places, but the chief fault lies with
governments, which place bureaucratic barriers in the way of entrepreneurs
trying to build affordable homes for people. Unable to negotiate the maze of
regulations that govern planning, developers leave the poor to build their
own slums, brick by brick as they can afford them, outside the law – and
then await the official bulldozers. In Cairo it would take seventy-seven
bureaucratic procedures involving thirty-one agencies and up to fourteen
years to acquire and register a plot of state-owned land on which to build a
house. No wonder nearly five million Egyptians have decided to build
illegal dwellings instead. Typically, a Cairo house owner will build up to
three illegal storeys on top of his house and rent them out to relatives.

Good for him. However, entrepreneurs who start businesses in the West
usually finance them with mortgages, and you cannot get a mortgage on an
illegal dwelling. The Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto estimates that
Africans own an astonishing $1 trillion in ‘dead capital’ – savings that
cannot be used as collateral because they are invested in ill-documented
property. He draws an instructive parallel with the young United States in
the early nineteenth century, where the formal codified law was fighting a
rearguard action against an increasingly chaotic confusion of informal
squatters’ rights to property. More and more states were tolerating and even
legalising pre-emption – ownership acquired by settling land and improving
it. In the end it was the law that had to give, not the squatters – the law
allowing itself to change by bottom-up evolution, not top-down planning.
The retreat culminated in the Homestead Act of 1862, which formalised
what had been happening for many years and signified ‘the end of a long,
exhausting and bitter struggle between elitist law and a new order brought
about by massive migration and the needs of an open and sustainable
society’. The result was a property-owning democracy in which almost
everybody had ‘live’ capital, which could be used as collateral for starting a
business. Enclosure had played a similar role in Britain earlier, though lack
of unoccupied land made the result far less equitable. Revolution eventually
achieved property rights for the French poor, too, rather more bloodily, and
would probably have done the same for Russians, but for the Bolshevik
coup.
The importance of property rights can even be demonstrated in the
laboratory. Bart Wilson and his colleagues set up a land of three virtual
villages inhabited by real undergraduates of two kinds – merchants and
producers – making and needing three kinds of unit: red, blue and pink.
Since no village can make all three units, the subjects had to start trading
among themselves and did. Unlike in the previous, simpler experiment (see
pages 89–90) they graduated to impersonal, market-like exchange. But
when the players had a history of no property rights – i.e., they were able to
steal units from each other’s caches – the trading never flourished and the
undergraduates went home poorer than if they had a history of property
rights. It is exactly what de Soto and economists like Douglass North have
been saying about the real world for some time.
(Incidentally, there is now overwhelming evidence that well crafted
property rights are also the key to wildlife and nature conservation. Whether

considering fish off Iceland, kudu in Namibia, jaguars in Mexico, trees in
Niger, bees in Bolivia or water in Colorado, the same lesson applies. Give
local people the power to own, exploit and profit from natural resources in a
sustainable way and they will usually preserve and cherish those resources.
Give them no share in a wildlife resource that is controlled – nay
‘protected’ – by a distant government and they will generally neglect, ruin
and waste it. That is the real lesson of the tragedy of the commons.)
Property rights are not a silver bullet. In some countries, their
formalisation simply creates a rentier class. And China experienced an
explosion of enterprise after 1978 without ever giving its people truly
secure property rights. But it did allow people to start businesses with
relatively little bureaucratic fuss, so another of De Soto’s recommendations
is to free up the rules governing business. Whereas it takes a handful of
steps to set up a company in America or Europe, De Soto’s assistants found
that to do the same in Tanzania would take 379 days and cost $5,506.
Worse, to have a normal business career in Tanzania for fifty years, you
would have to spend more than a thousand days in government offices
petitioning for permits of one kind or another and spending $180,000 on
them.
Little wonder that a staggering 98 per cent of Tanzanian businesses are
extralegal. That does not mean they are governed by no rules: far from it.
De Soto’s study found thousands of examples of documents being used by
people on the ground to attest ownership, record loans, embody contracts
and settle disputes. Handwritten papers, sometimes signed with
thumbprints, are being drafted, witnessed, stamped, revised, filed and
adjudicated all over the country. Just as Europeans did before the formal
law gradually ‘nationalised’ their indigenous customs, Tanzanians are
evolving a system of self-organised complexity to allow them to do
business with strangers as well as neighbours. One handwritten, single-page
document, for example, records a contract for a business loan between two
individuals – the amount of the loan, the interest rate, the payment period
and the collateral (the debtor’s house) – and is signed, witnessed and
stamped by the local elder.
But these customs, these laws of the people, are a fragmented jigsaw.
They work well for sole traders in small communities, but being dependent
on local people and local rules they cannot help the ambitious entrepreneur
who tries to expand beyond his local community. What Tanzania needs to

do, as Europe and America did hundreds of years ago, is not to enforce its
unaffordable official legal system, but gradually to encourage this bottomup, informal law to broaden and standardise itself. De Soto’s team identified
sixty-seven bottlenecks that prevent the poor using the legal system to
generate wealth.
It is this kind of institutional reform that will in the end do far more for
African living standards than dams, factories, aid or population control. In
the 1930s, Nashville, Tennessee, was rescued from poverty by its music
entrepreneurs, using good local copyright laws to start recording indigenous
music, not by the giant dams of the Tennessee Valley Authority. Likewise,
Bamako in Mali could build upon its strong musical traditions given the
right copyright laws and entrepreneurial spirit. In a neat example of bottomup change, the poor have taken to mobile telephones with unexpected gusto
all across Africa, to the surprise of those who thought this a luxury
technology for a later stage of development. In Kenya, despairing of statecontrolled landlines, one-quarter of the population acquired a mobile phone
after 2000. Kenyan farmers call different markets to find the best prices
before setting out with their produce, and are better off for it. Studies of
rural villages in Botswana find that the ones that have mobile reception
have more non-farm jobs than the ones that do not. Mobile phones not only
enable people to get work, but also to pay for and be paid for services –
mobile phone credits having become in effect a form of informal banking
and payments system. In Ghana, manufacturers of T-shirts can be paid
directly by American buyers using phone credits. Micro-finance banking,
mobile telephony and the internet are now merging to produce systems that
allow individuals in the West to make small loans to entrepreneurs in Africa
(through websites like Kiva), who can then use their mobile phone credits
to deposit receipts and pay bills without waiting for banks to open and
without handling vulnerable cash. These developments offer opportunities
to the poor of Africa that were not available to the poor of Asia a generation
ago. They are one reason that Africa saw economic growth rise to Asiantiger levels in the late 2000s.
The role of the mobile phone in enriching the poor was especially well
illustrated by a study of the sardine fishermen of Kerala in southern India
(though similar stories can now be told about Africa). As documented by
the economist Robert Jensen, on 14 January 1997, a typical day, eleven
fishermen landed good catches at the village of Badagara only to find that

there were no buyers left: the local market was sated and the price of the
perishable sardines was zero. Just ten miles away in both directions along
the coast, at Chombala and Quilandi, that morning there were twenty-seven
willing buyers getting ready to leave the markets empty-handed because
they could find no sardines to buy, even at the inflated price of nearly ten
rupees per kilogram they were offering. Had the Badagara fishermen
known, they could have diverted to the other markets and pocketed on
average 3,400 rupees of profit each, after fuel costs. Later that year, using
mobile phones on the newly installed cellular network (whose signals could
be picked up twelve miles out to sea), the Kerala fishermen started doing
just that: they called ahead to find out where best to land their catch. The
result was that fishermen’s profits increased by 8 per cent, sardine prices to
consumers fell by 4 per cent and sardine wastage fell from more than 5 per
cent to virtually nil. Everybody gained (except the sardines). As Robert
Jensen commented: ‘Overall the fisheries sector was transformed from a
series of essentially autarkic fishing markets to a state of nearly perfect
spatial arbitrage.’
Using such technologies, Africa can follow the same route to prosperity
that the rest of the world is following: to specialise and exchange. Once two
individuals find ways to divide labour between them, both are better off.
The future for Africa lies in trade – in selling tea, coffee, sugar, rice, beef,
cashews, cotton, oil, bauxite, chrome, gold, diamonds, cut flowers, green
beans, mangoes and more – but it is almost impossible for poor Africans in
the informal economy to be entrepreneurs in such international trade. A
handwritten contract between two people in Tanzania may be affordable
and enforceable, but it is little help if the debtor wishes to start an export
business supplying cut flowers to a London-based supermarket.
Of course, it will not all be easy or smooth, but I refuse to be pessimistic
about Africa when such an opportunity is available at a few strokes of a pen
and when the evidence of entrepreneurial vitality in the extralegal sector is
so strong. Besides, as its population growth rates fall, Africa is about to reap
a ‘demographic dividend’ when its working-age population is large relative
to both the dependent elderly and the dependent young: such a demographic
bonanza gave Asia perhaps one third of its miracle of growth. The key
policies for Africa are to abolish Europe’s and America’s farm subsidies,
quotas and import tariffs, formalise and simplify the laws that govern
business, undermine tyrants and above all encourage the growth of free-

trading cities. In 1978 China was about as poor and despotic as Africa is
now. It changed because it deliberately allowed free-trading zones to
develop in emulation of Hong Kong. So, says the economist Paul Romer,
why not repeat the formula? Use Western aid to create a new ‘charter city’
in Africa on uninhabited land, free to trade with the rest of the world, and
allow it to draw in people from the surrounding nations. It worked for Tyre
3,000 years ago, for Amsterdam 300 years ago and for Hong Kong thirty
years ago. It can work for Africa today.
If, that is, the climate does not lurch into chaos.
Climate
In the mid-1970s it was briefly fashionable for journalists to write scare
stories about the recent cooling of the globe, which was presented as
undiluted bad news. Now it is fashionable for them to write scare stories
about the recent warming of the globe, which is presented as undiluted bad
news. Here are two quotes from the same magazine three decades apart.
Can you tell which is about cooling and which about warming?
The weather is always capricious, but last year gave new meaning
to the term. Floods, hurricanes, droughts – the only plague missing
was frogs. The pattern of extremes fit scientists’ forecasts of what a
——world would be like.
Meteorologists disagree about the cause and extent of the ——
trend, as well as over its specific impact on local weather conditions.
But they are almost unanimous in the view that the trend will reduce
agricultural productivity for the rest of the century … The longer the
planners delay, the more difficult will they find it to cope with climatic
change once the results become grim reality.
The point I am making is not that one prediction proved wrong, but that
the glass was half empty in both cases. Cooling and warming were both
predicted to be disastrous, which implies that only the existing temperature
is perfect. Yet climate has always varied; it is a special sort of narcissism to
believe that only the recent climate is perfect. (The answer by the way is
that the first one was a recent warning about warming; the second an old
warning about cooling – both are from Newsweek.)

I could plunge into the scientific debate and try to persuade you and
myself that the competitive clamour of alarm is as exaggerated as it proved
to be on eugenics, acid rain, sperm counts and cancer – that the warming
the globe faces in the next century is more likely to be mild than
catastrophic; that the last three decades of relatively slow average
temperature changes are more compatible with a low-sensitivity than a
high-sensitivity model of greenhouse warming; that clouds may slow the
warming as much as water vapour may amplify it; that the increase in
methane has been (erratically) decelerating for twenty years; that there were
warmer periods in earth’s history in medieval times and about 6,000 years
ago yet no accelerations or ‘tipping points’ were reached; and that humanity
and nature survived much faster warming lurches in climate during the ice
ages than anything predicted for this century. There are respectable
scientific arguments to support all these arguments – and in some cases
respectable scientific ripostes to them, too. But this is not a book about the
climate; it is about the human race and its capacity for change. Besides,
even if the current alarm does prove exaggerated, there is now no doubt that
the climate of this planet has been subject to natural lurches in the past, and
that though luckily there has been no huge lurch for 8,200 years, there have
been some civilisation-killing perturbations – as the ruins at both Angkor
Wat and Chichen Itza probably testify. So if only hypothetically, it is worth
asking whether civilisation could survive climate change at the rate
assumed by the consensus of scientists who comprise the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) – that is, that the earth will warm during
this century by around 3°C.
However, that is just a mid-range figure. In 2007 the IPCC used six
‘emissions scenarios’, ranging from a fossil-fuel-intensive, centennial
global boom to something that sounds more like a sustainable, groovy
fireside sing-along, to calculate how much temperature will increase during
the century. The average temperature increases predicted for the end of this
century ranged from 1.8°C to 4°C above 1990 levels. Include the 95 per
cent confidence intervals and the range is 1–6°C. In some cities the
warming will be – has already been – even more, thanks to the ‘urban heat
island’ effect. On the other hand, all experts agree that the warming will
happen disproportionately at night, in winter and in cold regions, so cold
times and places will get less cold more than hot ones will get hotter.

As for what might happen after 2100, in 2006 the British government
appointed a civil servant, Nicholas Stern, to count the potential cost of
extreme climate change far into the future. He came up with the answer that
the cost was so high that almost any price to mitigate it now would be worth
paying. But he only managed this by first cherry-picking high estimates of
harm; and second using an unusually low discount rate to measure the
present value of future loss. Where the Dutch economist Richard Tol had
estimated costs as ‘likely to be substantially smaller’ than $14 per tonne of
carbon dioxide, Stern simply doubled the figure to $29 per tonne. Tol – no
sceptic – called the Stern report alarmist, incompetent and preposterous. As
for discount rates, Stern used 2.1 per cent for the twenty-first century, 1.9
per cent for the twenty-second, and 1.4 per cent for subsequent centuries.
Compared with a typical discount rate of about 6 per cent, this multiplies
the apparent cost of harm in the twenty-second century one hundredfold. In
other words, he said that a life saved from coastal flooding in 2200 should
have almost the same spending priority now as a life saved from AIDS or
malaria today. Hordes of economists, including notable names like William
Nordhaus, quickly pointed out how this made no sense. It implies that your
impoverished great great great grandfather, whose standard of living was
roughly that of a modern Zambian, should have put aside most of his
income to pay your bills today. With a higher discount rate, Stern’s
argument collapses because, even in the worst case, harm done by climate
change in the twenty-second century is far less costly than harm done by
climate-mitigation measures today. Nigel Lawson asks, reasonably enough:
‘How great a sacrifice is it either reasonable or realistic to ask the present
generation, particularly the present generation in the developing world, to
make, in the hope of avoiding the prospect that the people of the developing
world in a hundred years time may not be 9.5 times as well off as they are
today, but only 8.5 times?’
Your grandchildren will be that rich. Do not take my word for it: all six
of the IPCC’s scenarios assume that the world will experience so much
economic growth that the people alive in 2100 will be on average four to
eighteen times as wealthy as we are today. The scenarios assume that the
entire world will have a mean standard of living somewhere between
today’s Portugal and Luxembourg, and even the citizens of developing
countries will have incomes between those of today’s Malaysians and
Norwegians. In the hottest scenario, income rises from $1,000 per head in

poor countries today to more than $66,000 in 2100 (adjusted for inflation).
Posterity in these futures is staggeringly wealthier than today, even in
Africa – an interesting starting assumption for an attempt to warn us of a
terrible future. Note that this is true even if climate change itself cuts wealth
by Stern’s 20 per cent by 2100: that would mean the world becoming ‘only’
two to ten times as rich. The paradox was stark when the Prince of Wales
said in 2009 that humanity had ‘100 months left to take the necessary steps
to avert irretrievable climate and ecosystem collapse’, then went on in the
same speech to say that, by 2050, there will be nine billion people on the
planet, mostly consuming at Western levels.
The reason for these rosy assumptions about wealth is that the only way
the world can get that hot is by getting very rich through emitting lots of
carbon dioxide. Many economists think these futures, wonderful as they
sound, are unrealistic. In one IPCC future, world population reaches fifteen
billion by 2100, nearly double what demographers expect. In another, the
poorest countries grow their per capita income four times as fast as Japan
grew in the twentieth century. All the futures use market exchange rates
instead of purchasing power parities for GDP, further exaggerating
warming. In other words, the highend projections have pretty wild
assumptions, so the 4°C warming, let alone the unlikely 6°C, will only
happen if it is also accompanied by truly astonishing increases in human
prosperity. And if it is possible to get so prosperous, then the warming
cannot have been doing much economic harm along the way.
To this some economists such as Martin Weitzman reply that even if the
risk of catastrophe is vanishingly small, the cost would be so great that the
normal rules of economics do not apply: so long as there is some possibility
of a huge disaster, the world should take all steps to avoid it. The trouble
with this reasoning is that it applies to all risks, not just climate change. The
annual risk of collision with a very large asteroid, such as wiped out the
dinosaurs, is put at about one in 100 billion. Given that such an event would
greatly reduce human prosperity, it seems to be rather cheap of humankind
to be spending as little as $4m a year to track such asteroids. Why are we
not spending large sums stockpiling food caches in cities so that people can
survive the risks from North Korean missiles, rogue robots, alien invaders,
nuclear war, pandemics, super-volcanoes? Each risk may be very unlikely,
but with the potential harm so very great, almost infinite resources deserve

to be spent on them, and almost nothing on present causes of distress, under
Weitzman’s argument.
In short, the extreme climate outcomes are so unlikely, and depend on
such wild assumptions, that they do not dent my optimism one jot. If there
is a 99 per cent chance that the world’s poor can grow much richer for a
century while still emitting carbon dioxide, then who am I to deny them that
chance? After all, the richer they get the less weather dependent their
economies will be and the more affordable they will find adaptation to
climate change.
Warmer and richer or cooler and poorer?
So much for the outlying risks. Now consider the IPCC’s much more
probable central case: a 3°C rise by 2100. (I say more probable, but note
that the rate of increase of temperature will have to be double that
experienced in the 1980s and 1990s to hit this level – and the rate has been
decelerating, not accelerating.) Count the cost – and benefit – of the extra
warmth in terms of sea level, water, storms, health, food, species and
ecosystems.
Sea level is by far the most worrisome issue, because the current sea
level is indeed the best of all possible sea levels: any change – up or down –
will leave ports unusable. The IPCC forecasts that average sea level will
rise by about 2–6 millimetres a year, compared with a recent rate of about
3.2 millimetres a year (or about a foot per century). At such rates, although
coastal flooding will increase slightly in some places (local rising of the
land causes sea level to fall in many areas), some countries will continue to
gain more land from siltation than they lose to erosion. The Greenland landbased ice cap will melt a bit around the edge – many Greenland glaciers
retreated in the last few decades of the twentieth century – but even the
highest estimates of Greenland’s melting are that it is currently losing mass
at the rate of less than 1 per cent per century. It will be gone by AD 12,000.
Of course, there is a temperature at which the Greenland and west Antarctic
ice caps would disintegrate, but according to the IPCC scenarios if it is
reached at all it is certainly not going to be reached in the twenty-first
century.
As for fresh water, the evidence suggests, remarkably, that, other things
being equal, warming will itself reduce the total population at risk from
water shortage. Say again? Yes, reduce. On average rainfall will increase in
a warmer world because of greater evaporation from the oceans, as it did in

previous warm episodes such as the Holocene (when the Arctic ocean may
have been almost ice-free in summer), the Egyptian, Roman and medieval
warm periods. The great droughts that changed history in western Asia
happened, as theory predicts, in times of cooling: 8,200 years ago and 4,200
years ago especially. If you take the IPCC’s assumptions and count the
people living in zones that will have more water versus zones that will have
less water, it is clear that the net population at risk of water shortage by
2100 falls under all their scenarios. Although water will continue to be
fought over, polluted and exhausted, while rivers and boreholes may dry up
because of over-use, that will happen in a cool world too. As climate zones
shift, southern Australia and northern Spain may get drier, but the Sahel and
northern Australia will probably continue their recent wetter trend. Nor is
there any evidence for the oft-repeated assertion that climate will be more
volatile when wetter. Ice cores confirm that volatility of climate from year
to year decreases markedly when the earth warms from an ice age. There
will probably be some increase in the amount of rain that falls in the most
extreme downpours, and perhaps more flooding as a result, but it is a sad
truth that the richer people are, the less likely they are to drown, so the
warmer and richer the world, the better the out come.
The same is true for storms. During the warming of the twentieth
century there was no increase in either the number or the maximum wind
speed of Atlantic hurricanes making landfall. Globally, tropical cyclone
intensity hit a thirty-year low in 2008. The cost of the damage done by
hurricanes has increased greatly, but that is because of the building and
insuring of expensive coastal properties, not because of storm intensity or
frequency. The global annual death rate from weather-related natural
disasters has declined by a remarkable 99 per cent since the 1920s – from
242 per million in the 1920s to three per million in the 2000s. The killing
power of hurricanes depends far more on wealth and weather forecasts than
on wind speed. Category 5 Hurricane Dean struck the well-prepared
Yucatan in 2007 and killed nobody. A similar storm struck impoverished
and ill-prepared Burma the next year and killed 200,000. If they are freed to
prosper, the future citizens of Burma will be able to afford protection,
rescue and insurance by 2100.
In measuring health, note that globally the number of excess deaths
during cold weather continues to exceed the number of excess deaths during
heat waves by a large margin – by about five to one in most of Europe.

Even the notorious one-off death rate in the European summer heat wave of
2003 failed to match the number of excess cold deaths recorded in Europe
during most winters. Besides, once again, people will adapt, as they do
today. People move happily from London to Hong Kong or Boston to
Miami and do not die from heat, so why should they die if their home city
gradually warms by a few degrees? (It already has, because of the urban
heat island effect.)
What about malaria? Even distinguished scientists have been heard to
claim that malaria will spread northwards and uphill in a warming world.
But malaria was rampant in Europe, North America and even arctic Russia
in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, when the world was nearly a
degree cooler than now. It disappeared, while the world was warming,
because people kept their cattle in barns (providing mosquitoes with an
alternative dining option), moved indoors at night behind closed windows,
and to a lesser extent because swamps were drained and pesticides used.
Today malaria is not limited by climate: there are lots of areas where it
could rampage but does not. The same is true of malaria’s mountain
limitations. Just 2 per cent of Africa is too high for malarial mosquitoes
now, and where highland areas have become malarial in the past century,
such as in Kenya and New Guinea, the cause is human migration and
habitat change, not climate change. ‘There is no evidence that climate has
played any role in the burgeoning tragedy of this disease at any altitude,’
says Paul Reiter, a malaria expert. Should we not do something to prevent a
million people dying of preventable malaria each year now, before worrying
about the possibility that global warming might increase that number by
30,000 – at the very most? Likewise, a jump in tickborne disease in eastern
Europe around 1990, initially blamed on climate change, turned out to be
caused by the fact that people who lost their jobs after the collapse of
communism spent more time foraging for mushrooms in the forests.
Many commentators seized on the World Health Organisation’s 2002
estimate that 150,000 people were dying each year as a result of climate
change. The calculation assumed that an arbitrary 2.4 per cent of diarrhoea
deaths were due to extra warmth breeding extra pathogenic bacteria; that
some proportion of malaria deaths were due to extra rainfall breeding extra
mosquitoes, and so on. But even if you accept these guesses, the WHO’s
own figures showed that climate change was dwarfed as a cause of death by
iron deficiency, cholesterol, unsafe sex, tobacco, traffic accidents and other

things, not to mention ‘ordinary’ diarrhoea and malaria. Even obesity,
according to the same report, was killing more than twice as many people
as climate change. Nor was any attempt made to estimate the number of
lives saved by carbon emissions – by the provision of electric power to a
village where people suffer from ill health due to indoor air pollution from
cooking over open fires, say, or the deaths from malnutrition prevented by
the higher productivity of agriculture using fertiliser made from natural gas.
In 2009 Kofi Annan’s Global Humanitarian Forum doubled the number of
climate deaths to 315,000 a year, but only by ignoring these points,
arbitrarily doubling the diarrhoea deaths caused by climate, and adding in
ludicrous assumptions about how climate change was responsible for ‘interclan fighting in Somalia’, Hurricane Katrina and other disasters. Remember
that every year fifty to sixty million people die: even going by the GHF
figures less than 1 per cent of those die from climate change.
The global food supply will probably increase if temperature rises by up
to 3°C. Not only will the warmth improve yields from cold lands and the
rainfall improve yields from some dry lands, but the increased carbon
dioxide will itself enhance yields, especially in dry areas. Wheat, for
example, grows 15–40 per cent faster in 600 parts per million of carbon
dioxide than it does in 295 ppm. (Glasshouses often use air enriched in
carbon dioxide to 1,000 ppm to enhance plant growth rates.) This effect,
together with greater rainfall and new techniques, means that less habitat
will probably be lost to farming in a warmer world. Indeed under the
warmest scenario, much land could revert to wilderness, leaving only 5 per
cent of the world under the plough in 2100, compared with 11.6 per cent
today, allowing more space for wilderness. The richest and warmest version
of the future will have the least hunger, and will have ploughed the least
extra land to feed itself. These calculations come not from barmy sceptics,
but from the IPCC’s lead authors. And this is before taking into account the
capacity of human societies to adapt to a changing climate.
The four horsemen of the human apocalypse, which cause the most
premature and avoidable death in poor countries, are and will be for many
years the same: hunger, dirty water, indoor smoke and malaria, which kill
respectively about seven, three, three and two people per minute. If you
want to do your fellow human beings good, spend your effort on combating
those so that people can prosper, ready to meet climate challenges as they
arrive. Economists estimate that a dollar spent on mitigating climate change

brings ninety cents of benefits compared with $20 benefits per dollar spent
on healthcare and $16 per dollar spent on hunger. Keeping climate at 1990
levels, assuming it could be done, would leave more than 90 per cent of
human mortality causes untouched.
Saving ecosystems
Ah, but that is the human race. What about other species? Will the
warmth cause a wave of extinctions? Perhaps, but not necessarily. So far,
despite two bursts of twentieth-century warming, not a single species has
unambiguously been shown to succumb to global climate trends. The
golden toad of Costa Rica, sometimes cited as the first casualty, died out
either from a fungal disease or because of the drying of its cloud forest,
probably caused by deforestation on the lower slopes of its mountain home:
a local, not a global cause. The polar bear, still thriving today (eleven of
thirteen populations are growing or steady) but threatened by the loss of
Arctic sea ice in high summer, may contract its range further north, but it
already adapts to ice-free summer months in Hudson’s Bay by fasting on
land till the sea re-freezes; and there is good evidence from northern
Greenland of a briefly almost ice-free summer sea in the Arctic about 5,500
years ago, during a period that was markedly warmer than today. Arguably,
the orang-utan, being devastated by the loss of forest to palm oil biofuel
plantations in Borneo, is under greater threat from renewable energy than
the polar bear is from global warming.
Do not get me wrong, I am not denying that species extinctions are
occurring. I passionately believe in saving threatened species from
extinction and I have twice worked on projects attempting to rescue
endangered species – the cheer pheasant and the lesser florican. But the
threats to species are all too prosaic: habitat loss, pollution, invasive
competitors and hunting being the same four horsemen of the ecological
apocalypse as always. Suddenly many of the big environmental
organisations have lost interest in these threats as they chase the illusion of
stabilising a climate that was never stable in the past. It is as if the recent
emphasis on climate change has sucked the oxygen from the conservation
movement. Conservationists, who have done tremendous good over the past
half-century protecting and restoring a few wild ecosystems, and
encouraging local people to support and value them, risk being betrayed by
the new politicised climate campaigners, whose passion for renewable

energy is eating into those very ecosystems and drawing funds away from
their efforts.
Take coral reefs, which are suffering horribly from pollution, silt,
nutrient runoff and fishing – especially the harvesting of herbivorous fishes
that otherwise keep reefs clean of algae. Yet environmentalists commonly
talk as if climate change is a far greater threat than these, and they are
cranking up the apocalyptic statements just as they did wrongly about
forests and acid rain. Charlie Veron, an Australian marine biologist: ‘There
is no hope of reefs surviving to even mid-century in any form that we now
recognise.’ Alex Rogers of the Zoological Society of London pledges ‘an
absolute guarantee of their annihilation’. No wiggle room there. It is true
that rapidly heating the water by a few degrees can devastate reefs by
‘bleaching’ out the corals’ symbiotic algae, as happened to many reefs in the
especially warm El Niño year of 1998. But bleaching depends more on rate
of change than absolute temperature. This must be true because nowhere on
the planet, not even in the Persian Gulf where water temperatures reach
35°C, is there a sea too warm for coral reefs. Lots of places are too cold for
coral reefs – the Galapagos, for example. It is now clear that corals rebound
quickly from bleaching episodes, repopulating dead reefs in just a few
years, which is presumably how they survived the warming lurches at the
end of the last ice age. It is also apparent from recent research that corals
become more resilient the more they experience sudden warmings. Some
reefs may yet die if the world warms rapidly in the twenty-first century, but
others in cooler regions may expand. Local threats are far more immediate
than climate change.
Ocean acidification looks suspiciously like a back-up plan by the
environmental pressure groups in case the climate fails to warm: another try
at condemning fossil fuels. The oceans are alkaline, with an average pH of
about 8.1, well above neutral (7). They are also extremely well buffered.
Very high carbon dioxide levels could push that number down, perhaps to
about 7.95 by 2050 – still highly alkaline and still much higher than it was
for most of the last 100 million years. Some argue that this tiny downward
shift in average alkalinity could make it harder for animals and plants that
deposit calcium carbonate in their skeletons to do so. But this flies in the
face of chemistry: the reason the acidity is increasing is that the dissolved
bicarbonate is increasing too – and increasing the bicarbonate concentration
increases the ease with which carbonate can be precipitated out with

calcium by creatures that seek to do so. Even with tripled bicarbonate
concentrations, corals show a continuing increase in both photosynthesis
and calcification. This is confirmed by a rash of empirical studies showing
that increased carbonic acid either has no effect or actually increases the
growth of calcareous plankton, cuttlefish larvae and coccolithophores.
My general optimism is therefore not dented by the undoubted
challenge of global warming by carbon dioxide. Even if the world warms as
much as the consensus expects, the net harm still looks small alongside the
real harm now being done by preventable causes; and if it does warm this
much, it will be because more people are rich enough to afford to do
something about it. As usual, optimism gets a bad press in this debate.
Optimists are dismissed as fools, pessimists as sages, by a media that likes
to be spoon-fed on scary press releases. That does not make the optimists
right, but the poor track record of pessimists should at least give one pause.
After all, we have been here before. ‘I want to stress the urgency of the
challenge,’ said Bill Clinton once: ‘This is not one of the summer movies
where you can close your eyes during the scary parts.’ He was talking not
about climate change but about Y2K: the possibility that all computers
would crash at midnight on 31 December 1999.
Decarbonising the economy
In short, a warmer and richer world will be more likely to improve the
well-being of both human beings and ecosystems than a cooler but poorer
one. As Indur Goklany puts it, ‘neither on grounds of public health nor on
ecological factors is climate change likely to be the most important problem
facing the globe this century.’ The results of thirteen economic analyses of
climate change, assuming consensus amounts of warming, conclude that it
will either add or subtract about one year of global economic growth in the
second half of the twenty-first century. Critics of this view often argue that
development and carbon reduction need not be alternatives, and that it is the
poor who are hit hardest by climate change. True, but it is a point that cuts
both ways – it is the poor who are hit hardest by high energy costs, too. If
mismanaged, climate mitigation could prove just as damaging to human
welfare as climate change. A child that dies from indoor smoke in a village
denied fossil-fuel electricity is just as great a tragedy as a child that dies in a
flood caused by climate change. A forest that is cut down by people
deprived of fossil fuels is just as felled as one lost to climate change. If
climate change proves to be mild but cutting carbon causes real pain, we

may find we have stopped a nose bleed by putting a tourniquet round our
neck.
And cutting carbon will mean costly energy: so says the IPCC. If I am
to accept the IPCC’s estimate of temperature rise for the sake of this
argument, then I should also accept its estimate of the cost of carbon
rationing – which it puts at 5.5 per cent of GDP after about 2050, and that is
after making highly unlikely assumptions of (quoting from the IPCC’s 2007
report) ‘transparent markets, no transaction costs, and thus perfect
implementation of policy measures throughout the twenty-first century,
leading to the universal adoption of cost-effective mitigations measures,
such as carbon taxes or universal capand-trade programmes’.
The world economy needs plentiful joules of energy if it is not to run on
slaves, and at the moment by far the cheapest source of those joules is the
burning of hydrocarbons. About 600 kilograms of carbon dioxide are
emitted per thousand dollars of economic activity. No country ‘is remotely
on a path’ towards cutting that number substantially, says the physicist
David MacKay. It could be done, but only at vast cost. The cost would be
environmental as well as financial. Take Britain, an ‘average rich’ country.
Burning hydrocarbon still provides 106 of the 125 kilowatt-hours per day
per person of work that give Britons their standard of living. How could
Britain power itself without fossil fuels? Suppose that an aggressive and
expensive plan of pumped heat, waste incineration and loft insulation
knocks twenty-five of that demand off, leaving 100kWh per day to find.
Divide that 100 in four and ask for twenty-five from nuclear, twenty-five
from wind, twenty-five from solar and five each from biofuel, wood, wave,
tide and hydro. What would the country look like?
There would be sixty nuclear power stations around the coasts, wind
farms would cover 10 per cent of the entire land (or a big part of the sea),
there would be solar panels covering an area the size of Lincolnshire,
eighteen Greater Londons growing biofuels, forty-seven New Forests
growing fast-rotation harvested timber, hundreds of miles of wave machines
off the coast, huge tidal barrages in the Severn estuary and Strangford
Lough, and twenty-five times as many hydro dams on rivers as there are
today. The prospect is unappetising: the entire country would look like a
power station, pylons would march across the uplands and convoys of
trucks would cart timber along the roads. Power cuts would be frequent –
imagine a still, cold foggy day in January when the slack tide in the Severn

estuary coincides with peak demand, when the solar panels are dead and the
wind turbines still. Wildlife would suffer from the loss of estuaries, freeflowing rivers and open country. Powering the world with such renewables
now is the surest way to spoil the environment. (Of course, coal mining and
oil drilling can and do spoil the environment, too, but compared with most
renewables their footprints are surprisingly small for the energy they yield.)
Besides, there is just no sign of most renewables getting cheaper. The
cost of wind power has been stuck at three times the cost of coal power for
many years. To get a toehold in the electricity market at all, wind power
requires a regressive transfer from ordinary working people to rent-seeking
rich landowners and businesses: as a rule of thumb, a wind turbine
generates more value in subsidy than it does in electricity. Even in 6,000turbine Denmark, not a single emission has been saved because intermittent
wind requires fossil-fuel back-up (Denmark’s wind power is exported to
Sweden and Norway, which can turn their hydro plants back on quickly
when the Danish wind drops). Meanwhile a Spanish study confirms that
wind power subsidies destroy jobs: for each worker who moves from
conventional electricity generation to renewable electricity generation, ‘two
jobs at a similar rate of pay must be forgone elsewhere in the economy,
otherwise the funds to pay for the excess costs of renewable generation
cannot be provided.’ Although green campaigners are wont to argue that
raising the cost of energy is a good thing, by definition it destroys jobs by
reducing investment in other sectors. ‘The suggestion that we can lift
ourselves out of the economic doldrums by spending lavishly on
exceptionally expensive new sources of energy is absurd,’ writes Peter
Huber.
But that’s today. Tomorrow, there may well be carbon-free energy
sources that do not have these disadvantages. It is possible, though unlikely,
that these will include hot, dry geothermal power, offshore wind, wave and
tide, or even ocean thermal energy conversion, using the temperature
difference between the deep sea and the surface. They may include better
biofuels from algal lagoons, though personally I would rather see a nuclear
power plant so the lagoons can be used for fish farming or nature reserves.
It is also possible that quite soon engineers will be able to use sunlight to
make hydrogen directly from water with ruthenium dye as a catalyst –
replicating photosynthesis, in effect. Clean-coal, with its carbon dioxide

reinjected into the rocks, may play a part if its cost can be brought down (a
mighty big ‘if’).
A big contribution will surely come from solar power, the least landhungry of the renewables. Once solar panels can be mass-produced at $200
per square metre and with an efficiency of 12 per cent, they could generate
the equivalent of a barrel of oil for about $30. Then, instead of drilling for
$40 oil, everybody will be rushing to cover their roofs, and large parts of
Algeria and Arizona with cheap solar panels. Most of Arizona gets about six
kilowatt-hours of sunlight per square metre per day so, assuming 12 per
cent efficiency, it would take about one-third of Arizona to supply
Americans with all their energy: a lot of land, but not unimaginable. Apart
from cost, solar’s big problem, like wind’s, is its intermittent nature: it does
not work at night, for instance.
But the obvious way to go low-carbon is nuclear. Nuclear power plants
already produce more power from a smaller footprint, with fewer fatal
accidents and less pollution than any other energy technology. The waste
they produce is not an insoluble issue. It is tiny in volume (a Coke can per
person per lifetime), easily stored and unlike every other toxin gets safer
with time – its radioactivity falls to one-billionth of the starting level in two
centuries. These advantages are growing all the time. Better kinds of
nuclear power will include small, disposable, limited-life nuclear batteries
for powering individual towns for limited periods and fast-breeder, pebblebed, inherent-safe atomic reactors capable of extracting 99 per cent of
uranium’s energy, instead of 1 per cent as at present, and generating even
smaller quantities of short-lived waste while doing so. Modern nuclear
reactors are already as different from the inherently unstable, uncontained
Chernobyl ones as a jetliner is from a biplane. Perhaps one day fusion will
contribute, too, but do not hold your breath.
The Italian engineer Cesare Marchetti once drew a graph of human
energy use over the past 150 years as it migrated from wood to coal to oil to
gas. In each case, the ratio of carbon atoms to hydrogen atoms fell, from ten
in wood to one in coal to a half in oil to a quarter in methane. In 1800
carbon atoms did 90 per cent of combustion, but by 1935 it was 50:50
carbon and hydrogen, and by 2100, 90 per cent of combustion may come
from hydrogen – made with nuclear electricity, most probably. Jesse
Ausubel predicts that ‘if the energy system is left to its own devices, most
of the carbon will be out of it by 2060 or 2070.’

The future will feature ideas that are barely glints in engineers’ eyes
right now – devices in space to harness the solar wind, say, or the rotational
energy of the earth; or devices to shade the planet with mirrors placed at the
Lagrange Point between the sun and the earth. How do I know? Because
ingenuity is rampant as never before in this massively networked world and
the rate of innovation is accelerating, through serendipitous searching, not
deliberate planning. When asked at the Chicago World Fair in 1893 which
invention would most likely have a big impact in the twentieth century,
nobody mentioned the automobile, let alone the mobile phone. So even
more today you cannot begin to imagine the technologies that will be
portentous and commonplace in 2100.
They may not even tackle man-made carbon, but may go for the natural
cycle instead. Each year more than 200 billion tonnes of carbon are
removed from the atmosphere by growing plants and plankton, and 200
billion tonnes returned to it by rotting, digestion and respiration. Human
activity adds less than ten billion tonnes to that cycle, or 5 per cent. It
cannot be beyond the wit of twenty-first century humankind to nudge the
natural carbon cycle into taking up 5 per cent more than it releases by
fertilising desert stretches of the ocean with iron or phosphorus; by
encouraging the growth of carbon-rich oceanic organisms called salps,
which sink to the bottom of the ocean; or by burying ‘biochar’ – powdered
charcoal made from crops.
The way to choose which of these technologies to adopt is probably to
enact a heavy carbon tax, and cut payroll taxes (National Insurance in
Britain) to the same extent. That would encourage employment and
discourage carbon emissions. The way not to get there is to pick losers, like
wind and biofuel, to reward speculators in carbon credits and to load the
economy with rules, restrictions, subsidies, distortions and corruption.
When I look at the politics of emissions reduction, my optimism wobbles.
The Copenhagen conference of December 2009 came worryingly close to
imposing a corruptible and futile system of carbon rationing, which would
have hurt the poor, damaged ecosystems and rewarded bootleggers and
dictators.
Remember I am not here attempting to resolve the climate debate, nor
saying that catastrophe is impossible. I am testing my optimism against the
facts, and what I find is that the probability of rapid and severe climate
change is small; the probability of net harm from the most likely climate

change is small; the probability that no adaptation will occur is small; and
the probability of no new low-carbon energy technologies emerging in the
long run is small. Multiply those small probabilities together and the
probability of a prosperous twenty-first century is therefore by definition
large. You can argue about just how large, and therefore about how much
needs to be spent on precaution; but you cannot on the IPCC’s figures make
it anything other than very probable that the world will be a better place in
2100 than it is today.
And there is every reason to think that Africa can share in that
prosperity. Despite continuing war, disease and dictators, inch by inch its
population will stabilise; its cities will flourish; its exports will grow; its
farms will prosper; its wildernesses will survive and its people will
experience peace. In the mega-droughts of the ice ages, Africa could
support very few early hunter-gatherers; in a warm and moist interglacial, it
can support a billion mostly urban exchanger-specialisers.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Eleven
The catallaxy: rational optimism about
2100

In this book I have tried to build on both Adam Smith and Charles
Darwin: to interpret human society as the product of a long history of what
the philosopher Dan Dennett calls ‘bubble-up’ evolution through natural
selection among cultural rather than genetic variations, and as an emergent
order generated by an invisible hand of individual transactions, not the
product of a top-down determinism. I have tried to show that, just as sex
made biological evolution cumulative, so exchange made cultural evolution
cumulative and intelligence collective, and that there is therefore an
inexorable tide in the affairs of men and women discernible beneath the
chaos of their actions. A flood tide, not an ebb tide.
Somewhere in Africa more than 100,000 years ago, a phenomenon new
to the planet was born. A Species began to add to its habits, generation by
generation, without (much) changing its genes. What made this possible
was exchange, the swapping of things and services between individuals.
This gave the Species an external, collective intelligence far greater than
anything it could hold in its admittedly capacious brain. Two individuals

could each have two tools or two ideas while each knowing how to make
only one. Ten individuals could know between them ten things, while each
understanding one. In this way exchange encouraged specialisation, which
further increased the number of different habits the Species could have,
while shrinking the number of things that each individual knew how to
make. Consumption could grow more diversified, while production grew
more specialised. At first, the progressive expansion of the Species’ culture
was slow, because it was limited by the size of each connected population.
Isolation on an island or devastation by a famine could reduce the
population and so diminish its collective intelligence. Bit by bit, however,
the Species expanded both in numbers and in prosperity. The more habits it
acquired, the more niches it could occupy and the more individuals it could
support. The more individuals it could support, the more habits it could
acquire. The more habits it acquired, the more niches it could create.
The cultural progress of the Species encountered impediments along the
way. Overpopulation was a constant problem: as soon as the capacity of the
local environment to support the population began to suffer, so individuals
began to retreat from specialisation and exchange into defensive selfsufficiency, broadening their production and narrowing their consumption.
This reduced the collective intelligence they could draw upon, which
reduced the size of the niche they occupied, putting further pressure on
population. So there were crashes, even local extinctions. Or the Species
found itself expanding in numbers but not in living standards. Yet, again
and again the Species found ways to recover through new kinds of
exchange and specialisation. Growth resumed.
Other impediments were of the Species’ own making. Equipped by their
animal ancestry with an ambitious and jealous nature, individuals were
often tempted to predate upon and parasitise their fellows’ productivity – to
take and not to give. They killed, they enslaved, they extorted. For
millennium after millennium this problem remained unsolved and the
expansion of the Species, both its living standards and its population, was
sporadically slowed, set back and reversed by the enervating greed of the
parasites. Not all of the hangers-on were bad: there were rulers and public
servants who lived off the traders and producers but dispensed justice and
defence, or built roads and canals and schools and hospitals, making the
lives of the specialise-and-exchange folk easier, not harder. These behaved
like symbionts, rather than parasites (government can do good, after all).

Yet still the Species grew, both in numbers and in habits, because the
parasites never quite killed the system off which they fed.
Around 10,000 years ago, the pace of the Species’ progress leapt
suddenly ahead thanks to the suddenly greater stability of the climate,
which allowed the Species to co-opt other species and enable them to
evolve into exchange-and-specialise partners, generating services for the
Species in exchange for their needs. Now, thanks to farming, each
individual had not only other members of the Species working for her (and
vice versa), but members of other species as well, such as cows and corn.
Around 200 years ago, the pace of change quickened again thanks to the
Species’ new ability to recruit extinct species to its service as well, through
the mining of fossil fuels and the releasing of their energy in ways that
generated still more services. By now the Species was the dominant large
animal on its planet and was suddenly experiencing rapidly rising living
standards because of falling birth rates. Parasites plagued it still – starting
wars, demanding obedience, building bureaucracies, committing frauds,
preaching schisms – but the exchange and specialisation continued, and the
collective intelligence of the Species reached unprecedented levels. By now
almost the entire world was connected by a web so that ideas from
everywhere could meet and mate. The pace of progress picked up once
more. The future of the Species was bright, though it did not know it.
Onward and upward
I have presented the case for sunny optimism. I have argued that now
the world is networked, and ideas are having sex with each other more
promiscuously than ever, the pace of innovation will redouble and
economic evolution will raise the living standards of the twenty-first
century to unimagined heights, helping even the poorest people of the world
to afford to meet their desires as well as their needs. I have argued that
although such optimism is distinctly unfashionable, history suggests it is
actually a more realistic attitude than apocalyptic pessimism. ‘It is the long
ascent of the past that gives the lie to our despair,’ said H.G. Wells.
These are great sins against conventional wisdom. Worse, they may
even leave the impression of callous indifference to the fact that a billion
people have not enough to eat, that a billion lack access to clean water, that
a billion are illiterate. The opposite is true. It is precisely because there is
still far more suffering and scarcity in the world than I or anybody else with
a heart would wish that ambitious optimism is morally mandatory. Even

after the best half-century for poverty reduction, there are still hundreds of
millions going blind for lack of vitamin A in their monotonous diet, or
watching their children’s bellies swell from protein deficiency, or awash
with preventable dysentery caused by contaminated water, or coughing with
avoidable pneumonia caused by the smoke of indoor fires, or wasting from
treatable AIDS, or shivering with unnecessary malaria. There are people
living in hovels of dried mud, slums of corrugated iron, or towers of
soulless concrete (including the ‘Africas within’ the West), people who
never get a chance to read a book or see a doctor. There are young boys
who carry machine guns and young girls who sell their bodies. If my great
grand-daughter reads this book in 2100 I want her to know that I am acutely
aware of the inequality of the world I inhabit, a world where I can worry
about my weight and a restaurant owner can moan about the iniquity of
importing green beans by air from Kenya in winter, while in Darfur a
child’s shrunken face is covered in flies, in Somalia a woman is stoned to
death and in Afghanistan a lone American entrepreneur builds schools while
his government drops bombs.
It is precisely this ‘evitable’ misery that is the reason for pressing on
urgently with economic progress, innovation and change, the only known
way of bringing the benefits of a rising living standard to many more
people. It is precisely because there is so much poverty, hunger and illness
that the world must be very careful not to get in the way of the things that
have bettered so many lives already – the tools of trade, technology and
trust, of specialisation and exchange. It is precisely because there is still so
much further to go that those who offer counsels of despair or calls to slow
down in the face of looming environmental disaster may be not only
factually but morally wrong.
It is a common trick to forecast the future on the assumption of no
technological change, and find it dire. This is not wrong. The future would
indeed be dire if invention and discovery ceased. As Paul Romer puts it:
‘Every generation has perceived the limits to growth that finite resources
and undesirable side effects would pose if no new recipes or ideas were
discovered. And every generation has underestimated the potential for
finding new recipes and ideas. We consistently fail to grasp how many ideas
remain to be discovered.’ By far the most dangerous, and indeed
unsustainable thing the human race could do to itself would be to turn off

the innovation tap. Not inventing, and not adopting new ideas, can itself be
both dangerous and immoral.
How good could it get?
Futurology always ends up telling you more about your own time than
about the future. H.G. Wells made the future look like Edwardian England
with machines; Aldous Huxley made it feel like 1920s New Mexico on
drugs; George Orwell made it sound like 1940s Russia with television.
Even Arthur C. Clarke and Isaac Asimov, more visionary than most, were
steeped in the transport-obsessed 1950s rather than the communicationobsessed 2000s. So in describing the world of 2100, I am bound to sound
like somebody stuck in the world of the early twenty-first century, and
make laughable errors of extrapolation. ‘It’s tough to make predictions,’
joked somebody, perhaps Yogi Berra: ‘especially about the future.’
Technologies I cannot even conceive will be commonplace and habits I
never knew human beings needed will be routine. Machines may have
become sufficiently intelligent to design themselves, in which case the rate
of economic growth may by then have changed as much as it did at the start
of the industrial revolution – so that the world economy will be doubling in
months or even weeks, and accelerating towards a technological
‘singularity’ where the rate of change is almost infinite.
But here goes, none the less. I forecast that the twenty-first century will
show a continuing expansion of catallaxy – Hayek’s word for spontaneous
order created by exchange and specialisation. Intelligence will become
more and more collective; innovation and order will become more and more
bottom-up; work will become more and more specialised, leisure more and
more diversified. Large corporations, political parties and government
bureaucracies will crumble and fragment as central planning agencies did
before them. The Bankerdämmerung of 2008 swept away a few leviathans
but fragmented and short-lived hedge funds and boutiques will spring up in
their place. The collapse of Detroit’s big car makers in 2009 leaves a flock
of entrepreneurial startups in charge of the next generation of cars and
engines. Monolithic behemoths, whether private or nationalised, are
vulnerable as never before to this Lilliputian assault. They are steadily
being driven extinct not just by small firms, but by ephemeral aggregations
of people that form and reform continuously. The big firms that survive will
do so by turning themselves into bottom-up evolvers. Google, dependent on
millions of instantaneous auctions to raise revenue from its AdWords, is ‘an

economy unto itself, a seething laboratory’, says Stephen Levy. But Google
will seem monolithic compared with what comes next.
The bottom-up world is to be the great theme of this century. Doctors
are having to get used to well-informed patients who have researched their
own illnesses. Journalists are adjusting to readers and viewers who select
and assemble their news on demand. Broadcasters are learning to let their
audiences choose the talent that will entertain them. Engineers are sharing
problems to find solutions. Manufacturers are responding to consumers who
order their products à la carte. Genetic engineering is going to become
open-source, where people, not corporations, decide what combinations of
genes they want. Politicians are increasingly corks tossed on the waves of
public opinion. Dictators are learning that their citizens can organise riots
by text message. ‘Here comes everybody’ says the author Clay Shirky.
People will more and more freely find ways to exchange their
specialised production for diversified consumption. This world can already
be glimpsed on the web, in what John Barlow calls ‘dot-communism’: a
workforce of free agents bartering their ideas and efforts barely interested in
whether the barter yields ‘real’ money. The explosion of interest in the free
sharing of ideas that the internet has spawned has taken everybody by
surprise. ‘The online masses have an incredible willingness to share’ says
Kevin Kelly. Instead of money, ‘peer producers who create the stuff gain
credit, status, reputation, enjoyment, satisfaction and experience’. People
are willing to share their photographs on Flickr, their thoughts on Twitter,
their friends on Facebook, their knowledge on Wikipedia, their software
patches on Linux, their donations on GlobalGiving, their community news
on Craigslist, their pedigrees on Ancestry.com, their genomes on 23andMe,
even their medical records on PatientsLikeMe. Thanks to the internet, each
is giving according to his ability to each according to his needs, to a degree
that never happened in Marxism.
This catallaxy will not go smoothly, or without resistance. Natural and
unnatural disasters will still happen. Governments will bail out big
corporations and big bureaucracies, hand them special favours such as
subsidies or carbon rations and regulate them in such a way as to create
barriers to entry, slowing down creative destruction. Chiefs, priests, thieves,
financiers, consultants and others will appear on all sides, feeding off the
surplus generated by exchange and specialisation, diverting the life-blood
of the catallaxy into their own reactionary lives. It happened in the past.

Empires bought stability at the price of creating a parasitic court;
monotheistic religions bought social cohesion at the price of a parasitic
priestly class; nationalism bought power at the expense of a parasitic
military; socialism bought equality at the price of a parasitic bureaucracy;
capitalism bought efficiency at the price of parasitic financiers. The online
world will attract parasites too: from regulators and cyber-criminals to
hackers and plagiarists. Some of them may temporarily throttle their
generous hosts.
It is just possible that the predators and parasites will actually win
altogether, or rather that ambitious ideological busybodies will succeed in
shutting down the catallaxy and crashing the world back into pre-industrial
poverty some time during the coming century. There is even a new reason
for such pessimism: the integrated nature of the world means that it may
soon be possible to capture the entire world on behalf of a foolish idea,
where before you could only capture a country, or perhaps if you were
lucky an empire. (The great religions all needed empires within which to
flourish and become powerful: Buddhism within the Mauryan and Chinese,
Christianity within the Roman, Islam within the Arab.)
Take the twelfth century as an example of how close the world once
came to turning its back on the catallaxy. In one fifty-year period, between
1100 and 1150, three great nations shut down innovation, enterprise and
freedom all at once. In Baghdad, the religious teacher Al-Ghazali almost
single-handedly destroyed the tradition of rational enquiry in the Arab
world and led a return to mysticism intolerant of new thinking. In Peking,
Su-Sung’s astronomical clock, the ‘cosmic engine’, probably the most
sophisticated mechanical device ever built at that date, was destroyed by a
politician suspicious of novelty and (t)reason, setting the tone for the retreat
to autarky and tradition that would be China’s fate for centuries to come. In
Paris, St Bernard of Clairvaux persecuted the scholar Peter Abelard,
criticised the rational renaissance centred on the University of Paris and
supported the disastrous fanaticism of the second crusade. Fortunately, the
flames of free thought and reason and catallaxy were kept burning – in Italy
and North Africa, especially. But imagine if they had not been. Imagine if
the entire world had turned its back on the catallaxy then. Imagine if the
globalised world of the twenty-first century allows a globalised retreat from
reason. It is a worrying thought. The wrong kind of chiefs, priests and
thieves could yet snuff out future prosperity on earth. Already lords don

boiler suits to destroy genetically modified crops, presidents scheme to
prevent stem-cell research, prime ministers trample on habeas corpus using
the excuse of terrorism, metastasising bureaucracies interfere with
innovation on behalf of reactionary pressure groups, superstitious
creationists stop the teaching of good science, air-headed celebrities rail
against free trade, mullahs inveigh against the empowerment of women,
earnest princes lament the loss of old ways and pious bishops regret the
coarsening effects of commerce. So far they are all sufficiently localised in
their effects to achieve no more than limited pauses in the happy progress of
the species, but could one of them go global?
I doubt it. It will be hard to snuff out the flame of innovation, because it
is such an evolutionary, bottom-up phenomenon in such a networked world.
However reactionary and cautious Europe and the Islamic world and
perhaps even America become, China will surely now keep the torch of
catallaxy alight, and India, and maybe Brazil, not to mention a host of
smaller free cities and states. By 2050, China’s economy may well be
double the size of America’s. The experiment will go on. So long as human
exchange and specialisation are allowed to thrive somewhere, then culture
evolves whether leaders help it or hinder it, and the result is that prosperity
spreads, technology progresses, poverty declines, disease retreats, fecundity
falls, happiness increases, violence atrophies, freedom grows, knowledge
flourishes, the environment improves and wilderness expands. Said Lord
Macaulay, ‘We see in almost every part of the annals of mankind how the
industry of individuals, struggling up against wars, taxes, famines,
conflagrations, mischievous prohibitions, and more mischievous
protections, creates faster than governments can squander, and repairs
whatever invaders can destroy.’
Human nature will not change. The same old dramas of aggression and
addiction, of infatuation and indoctrination, of charm and harm, will play
out, but in an ever more prosperous world. In Thornton Wilder’s play The
Skin of Our Teeth, the Antrobus family (representing humankind) just
manages to survive the ice age, the flood and a world war, but their natures
do not change. History repeats itself as a spiral not a circle, Wilder implied,
with an ever-growing capacity for both good and bad, played out through
unchanging individual character. So the human race will continue to expand
and enrich its culture, despite setbacks and despite individual people having

much the same evolved, unchanging nature. The twenty-first century will be
a magnificent time to be alive.
Dare to be an optimist.
OceanofPDF.com

