Praise for THE MORAL LANDSCAPE

“Sam Harris breathes intellectual fire into an ancient debate. Reading this
thrilling, audacious book, you feel the ground shifting beneath your feet. Reason has
never had a more passionate advocate.”
—Ian McEwan, author of Atonement and winner of the Man Booker Prize for
Amsterdam

“A lively, provocative, and timely new look at one of the deepest problems in the
world of ideas. Harris makes a powerful case for a morality that is based on human
flourishing and thoroughly enmeshed with science and rationality. It is a tremendously
appealing vision, and one that no thinking person can afford to ignore.”
—Steven Pinker, Professor of Psychology at Harvard University and author of
How the Mind Works and The Blank Slate

“Beautifully written as they were (the elegance of his prose is a distilled blend of
honesty and clarity) there was little in Sam Harris’s previous books that couldn’t have
been written by any of his fellow ‘horsemen’ of the ‘new atheism.’ This book is different,
though every bit as readable as the other two. I was one of those who had unthinkingly
bought into the hectoring myth that science can say nothing about morals. To my
surprise, The Moral Landscape has changed all that for me. It should change it for
philosophers too. Philosophers of mind have already discovered that they can’t duck the
study of neuroscience, and the best of them have raised their game as a result. Sam Harris
shows that the same should be true of moral philosophers, and it will turn their world
exhilaratingly upside down. As for religion, and the preposterous idea that we need God
to be good, nobody wields a sharper bayonet than Sam Harris.”
—Richard Dawkins, University of Oxford

“Reading Sam Harris is like drinking water from a cool stream on a hot day. He
has the rare ability to frame arguments that are not only stimulating, they are downright
nourishing, even if you don’t always agree with him! In this new book he argues from a
philosophical and a neurobiological perspective that science can and should determine
morality. His discussions will provoke secular liberals and religious conservatives alike,
who jointly argue from different perspectives that there always will be an unbridgeable
chasm between merely knowing what is and discerning what should be. As was the case
with Harris’s previous books, readers are bound to come away with previously firm
convictions about the world challenged, and a vital new awareness about the nature and
value of science and reason in our lives.”
—Lawrence M. Krauss, Foundation Professor and Director of the Origins
Project at Arizona State University and author of The Physics of Star Trek and Quantum
Man: Richard Feynman’s Life in Science

ALSO BY SAM HARRIS
The End of Faith
Letter to a Christian Nation

Free Press
A Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2010 by Sam Harris
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book
or portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information address
Free Press Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of
the Americas, New York, NY 10020
This Free Press export edition October 2010
FREE PRESS and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases,
please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or
business@simonandschuster.com
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to
your live event. For more information or to book an event
contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at
1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at
www.simonspeakers.com.
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN 978-1-4516-1278-3
ISBN 978-1-4391-7123-3 (ebook)

For Emma

CONTENTS

Introduction The Moral Landscape
Chapter 1 Moral Truth
Chapter 2 Good and Evil
Chapter 3 Belief
Chapter 4 Religion
Chapter 5 The Future of Happiness
Acknowledgments
Notes
References
Index

Introduction
THE MORAL LANDSCAPE

The people of Albania have a venerable tradition of vendetta called Kanun: if a
man commits a murder, his victim’s family can kill any one of his male relatives in
reprisal. If a boy has the misfortune of being the son or brother of a murderer, he must
spend his days and nights in hiding, forgoing a proper education, adequate health care,
and the pleasures of a normal life. Untold numbers of Albanian men and boys live as
prisoners of their homes even now. 1 Can we say that the Albanians are morally wrong to
have structured their society in this way? Is their tradition of blood feud a form of evil?
Are their values inferior to our own?
Most people imagine that science cannot pose, much less answer, questions of this
sort. How could we ever say, as a matter of scientific fact, that one way of life is better,
or more moral, than another? Whose definition of “better” or “moral” would we use?
While many scientists now study the evolution of morality, as well as its underlying
neurobiology, the purpose of their research is merely to describe how human beings think
and behave. No one expects science to tell us how we ought to think and behave.
Controversies about human values are controversies about which science officially has no
opinion. 2
I will argue, however, that questions about values—about meaning, morality, and
life’s larger purpose—are really questions about the well-being of conscious creatures.
Values, therefore, translate into facts that can be scientifically understood: regarding
positive and negative social emotions, retributive impulses, the effects of specific laws
and social institutions on human relationships, the neurophysiology of happiness and
suffering, etc. The most important of these facts are bound to transcend culture—just as
facts about physical and mental health do. Cancer in the highlands of New Guinea is still
cancer; cholera is still cholera; schizophrenia is still schizophrenia; and so, too, I will
argue, compassion is still compassion, and well-being is still well-being. 3 And if there
are important cultural differences in how people flourish—if, for instance, there are
incompatible but equivalent ways to raise happy, intelligent, and creative children—these
differences are also facts that must depend upon the organization of the human brain. In
principle, therefore, we can account for the ways in which culture defines us within the
context of neuroscience and psychology. The more we understand ourselves at the level
of the brain, the more we will see that there are right and wrong answers to questions of
human values.
Of course, we will have to confront some ancient disagreements about the status
of moral truth: people who draw their worldview from religion generally believe that
moral truth exists, but only because God has woven it into the very fabric of reality;
while those who lack such faith tend to think that notions of “good” and “evil” must be
the products of evolutionary pressure and cultural invention. On the first account, to
speak of “moral truth” is, of necessity, to invoke God; on the second, it is merely to give

voice to one’s apish urges, cultural biases, and philosophical confusion. My purpose is to
persuade you that both sides in this debate are wrong. The goal of this book is to begin a
conversation about how moral truth can be understood in the context of science.
While the argument I make in this book is bound to be controversial, it rests on a
very simple premise: human well-being entirely depends on events in the world and on
states of the human brain. Consequently, there must be scientific truths to be known
about it. A more detailed understanding of these truths will force us to draw clear
distinctions between different ways of living in society with one another, judging some to
be better or worse, more or less true to the facts, and more or less ethical. Clearly, such
insights could help us to improve the quality of human life—and this is where academic
debate ends and choices affecting the lives of millions of people begin.
I am not suggesting that we are guaranteed to resolve every moral controversy
through science. Differences of opinion will remain—but opinions will be increasingly
constrained by facts. And it is important to realize that our inability to answer a question
says nothing about whether the question itself has an answer. Exactly how many people
were bitten by mosquitoes in the last sixty seconds? How many of these people will
contract malaria? How many will die as a result? Given the technical challenges
involved, no team of scientists could possibly respond to such questions. And yet we
know that they admit of simple numerical answers. Does our inability to gather the
relevant data oblige us to respect all opinions equally? Of course not. In the same way,
the fact that we may not be able to resolve specific moral dilemmas does not suggest that
all competing responses to them are equally valid. In my experience, mistaking no
answers in practice for no answers in principle is a great source of moral confusion.
There are, for instance, twenty-one U.S. states that still allow corporal punishment
in their schools. These are places where it is actually legal for a teacher to beat a child
with a wooden board hard enough to raise large bruises and even to break the skin.
Hundreds of thousands of children are subjected to this violence each year, almost
exclusively in the South. Needless to say, the rationale for this behavior is explicitly
religious: for the Creator of the Universe Himself has told us not to spare the rod, lest we
spoil the child (Proverbs 13:24, 20:30, and 23:13–14). However, if we are actually
concerned about human well-being, and would treat children in such a way as to promote
it, we might wonder whether it is generally wise to subject little boys and girls to pain,
terror, and public humiliation as a means of encouraging their cognitive and emotional
development. Is there any doubt that this question has an answer? Is there any doubt that
it matters that we get it right? In fact, all the research indicates that corporal punishment
is a disastrous practice, leading to more violence and social pathology—and, perversely,
to greater support for corporal punishment. 4
But the deeper point is that there simply must be answers to questions of this kind,
whether we know them or not. And these are not areas where we can afford to simply
respect the “traditions” of others and agree to disagree. Why will science increasingly
decide such questions? Because the discrepant answers people give to them—along with
the consequences that follow in terms of human relationships, states of mind, acts of
violence, entanglements with the law, etc.—translate into differences in our brains, in the
brains of others, and in the world at large. I hope to show that when talking about values,
we are actually talking about an interdependent world of facts.
There are facts to be understood about how thoughts and intentions arise in the

human brain; there are facts to be learned about how these mental states translate into
behavior; there are further facts to be known about how these behaviors influence the
world and the experience of other conscious beings. We will see that facts of this sort
exhaust what we can reasonably mean by terms like “good” and “evil.” They will also
increasingly fall within the purview of science and run far deeper than a person’s
religious affiliation. Just as there is no such thing as Christian physics or Muslim algebra,
we will see that there is no such thing as Christian or Muslim morality. Indeed, I will
argue that morality should be considered an undeveloped branch of science.
Since the publication of my first book, The End of Faith, I have had a privileged
view of the “culture wars”—both in the United States, between secular liberals and
Christian conservatives, and in Europe, between largely irreligious societies and their
growing Muslim populations. Having received tens of thousands of letters and emails
from people at every point on the continuum between faith and doubt, I can say with
some confidence that a shared belief in the limitations of reason lies at the bottom of
these cultural divides. Both sides believe that reason is powerless to answer the most
important questions in human life. And how a person perceives the gulf between facts
and values seems to influence his views on almost every issue of social importance—
from the fighting of wars to the education of children.
This rupture in our thinking has different consequences at each end of the political
spectrum: religious conservatives tend to believe that there are right answers to questions
of meaning and morality, but only because the God of Abraham deems it so. 5 They
concede that ordinary facts can be discovered through rational inquiry, but they believe
that values must come from a voice in a whirlwind. Scriptural literalism, intolerance of
diversity, mistrust of science, disregard for the real causes of human and animal
suffering—too often, this is how the division between facts and values expresses itself on
the religious right.
Secular liberals, on the other hand, tend to imagine that no objective answers to
moral questions exist. While John Stuart Mill might conform to our cultural ideal of
goodness better than Osama bin Laden does, most secularists suspect that Mill’s ideas
about right and wrong reach no closer to the Truth. Multiculturalism, moral relativism,
political correctness, tolerance even of intolerance—these are the familiar consequences
of separating facts and values on the left.
It should concern us that these two orientations are not equally empowering.
Increasingly, secular democracies are left supine before the unreasoning zeal of old-time
religion. The juxtaposition of conservative dogmatism and liberal doubt accounts for the
decade that has been lost in the United States to a ban on federal funding for embryonic
stem-cell research; it explains the years of political distraction we have suffered, and will
continue to suffer, over issues like abortion and gay marriage; it lies at the bottom of
current efforts to pass antiblasphemy laws at the United Nations (which would make it
illegal for the citizens of member states to criticize religion); it has hobbled the West in
its generational war against radical Islam; and it may yet refashion the societies of Europe
into a new Caliphate.6 Knowing what the Creator of the Universe believes about right and
wrong inspires religious conservatives to enforce this vision in the public sphere at
almost any cost; not knowing what is right—or that anything can ever be truly right—
often leads secular liberals to surrender their intellectual standards and political freedoms
with both hands.

The scientific community is predominantly secular and liberal—and the
concessions that scientists have made to religious dogmatism have been breathtaking. As
we will see, the problem reaches as high as the National Academies of Science and the
National Institutes of Health. Even the journal Nature, the most influential scientific
publication on earth, has been unable to reliably police the boundary between reasoned
discourse and pious fiction. I recently reviewed every appearance of the term “religion”
in the journal going back ten years and found that Nature’s editors have generally
accepted Stephen J. Gould’s doomed notion of “nonoverlapping magisteria”—the idea
that science and religion, properly construed, cannot be in conflict because they constitute
different domains of expertise. 7 As one editorial put it, problems arise only when these
disciplines “stray onto each other’s territories and stir up trouble.” 8 The underlying claim
is that while science is the best authority on the workings of the physical universe,
religion is the best authority on meaning, values, morality, and the good life. I hope to
persuade you that this is not only untrue, it could not possibly be true. Meaning, values,
morality, and the good life must relate to facts about the well-being of conscious
creatures—and, in our case, must lawfully depend upon events in the world and upon
states of the human brain. Rational, open-ended, honest inquiry has always been the true
source of insight into such processes. Faith, if it is ever right about anything, is right by
accident.
The scientific community’s reluctance to take a stand on moral issues has come at
a price. It has made science appear divorced, in principle, from the most important
questions of human life. From the point of view of popular culture, science often seems
like little more than a hatchery for technology. While most educated people will concede
that the scientific method has delivered centuries of fresh embarrassment to religion on
matters of fact, it is now an article of almost unquestioned certainty, both inside and
outside scientific circles, that science has nothing to say about what constitutes a good
life. Religious thinkers in all faiths, and on both ends of the political spectrum, are united
on precisely this point; the defense one most often hears for belief in God is not that there
is compelling evidence for His existence, but that faith in Him is the only reliable source
of meaning and moral guidance. Mutually incompatible religious traditions now take
refuge behind the same non sequitur.
It seems inevitable, however, that science will gradually encompass life’s deepest
questions—and this is guaranteed to provoke a backlash. How we respond to the resulting
collision of worldviews will influence the progress of science, of course, but it may also
determine whether we succeed in building a global civilization based on shared values.
The question of how human beings should live in the twenty-first century has many
competing answers—and most of them are surely wrong. Only a rational understanding
of human well-being will allow billions of us to coexist peacefully, converging on the
same social, political, economic, and environmental goals. A science of human
flourishing may seem a long way off, but to achieve it, we must first acknowledge that
the intellectual terrain actually exists.9
Throughout this book I make reference to a hypothetical space that I call “the
moral landscape”—a space of real and potential outcomes whose peaks correspond to the
heights of potential well-being and whose valleys represent the deepest possible
suffering. Different ways of thinking and behaving—different cultural practices, ethical
codes, modes of government, etc.—will translate into movements across this landscape

and, therefore, into different degrees of human flourishing. I’m not suggesting that we
will necessarily discover one right answer to every moral question or a single best way
for human beings to live. Some questions may admit of many answers, each more or less
equivalent. However, the existence of multiple peaks on the moral landscape does not
make them any less real or worthy of discovery. Nor would it make the difference
between being on a peak and being stuck deep in a valley any less clear or consequential.
To see that multiple answers to moral questions need not pose a problem for us,
consider how we currently think about food: no one would argue that there must be one
right food to eat. And yet there is still an objective difference between healthy food and
poison. There are exceptions—some people will die if they eat peanuts, for instance—but
we can account for these within the context of a rational discussion about chemistry,
biology, and human health. The world’s profusion of foods never tempts us to say that
there are no facts to be known about human nutrition or that all culinary styles must be
equally healthy in principle.
Movement across the moral landscape can be analyzed on many levels—ranging
from biochemistry to economics—but where human beings are concerned, change will
necessarily depend upon states and capacities of the human brain. While I fully support
the notion of “consilience” in science10—and, therefore, view the boundaries between
scientific specialties as primarily a function of university architecture and limitations on
how much any one person can learn in a lifetime—the primacy of neuroscience and the
other sciences of mind on questions of human experience cannot be denied. Human
experience shows every sign of being determined by, and realized in, states of the human
brain.
Many people seem to think that a universal conception of morality requires that
we find moral principles that admit of no exceptions. If, for instance, it is truly wrong to
lie, it must always be wrong to lie—and if one can find a single exception, any notion of
moral truth must be abandoned. But the existence of moral truth—that is, the connection
between how we think and behave and our well-being—does not require that we define
morality in terms of unvarying moral precepts. Morality could be a lot like chess: there
are surely principles that generally apply, but they might admit of important exceptions.
If you want to play good chess, a principle like “Don’t lose your Queen” is almost always
worth following. But it admits of exceptions: sometimes sacrificing your Queen is a
brilliant thing to do; occasionally, it is the only thing you can do. It remains a fact,
however, that from any position in a game of chess there will be a range of objectively
good moves and objectively bad ones. If there are objective truths to be known about
human well-being—if kindness, for instance, is generally more conducive to happiness
than cruelty is—then science should one day be able to make very precise claims about
which of our behaviors and uses of attention are morally good, which are neutral, and
which are worth abandoning.
While it is too early to say that we have a full understanding of how human beings
flourish, a piecemeal account is emerging. Consider, for instance, the connection between
early childhood experience, emotional bonding, and a person’s ability to form healthy
relationships later in life. We know, of course, that emotional neglect and abuse are not
good for us, psychologically or socially. We also know that the effects of early childhood
experience must be realized in the brain. Research on rodents suggests that parental care,
social attachment, and stress regulation are governed, in part, by the hormones

vasopressin and oxytocin, 11 because they influence activity in the brain’s reward system.
When asking why early childhood neglect is harmful to our psychological and social
development, it seems reasonable to think that it might result from a disturbance in this
same system.
While it would be unethical to deprive young children of normal care for the
purposes of experiment, society inadvertently performs such experiments every day. To
study the effects of emotional deprivation in early childhood, one group of researchers
measured the blood concentrations of oxytocin and vasopressin in two populations:
children raised in traditional homes and children who spent their first years in an
orphanage.12 As you might expect, children raised by the State generally do not receive
normal levels of nurturing. They also tend to have social and emotional difficulties later
in life. As predicted, these children failed to show a normal surge of oxytocin and
vasopressin in response to physical contact with their adoptive mothers.
The relevant neuroscience is in its infancy, but we know that our emotions, social
interactions, and moral intuitions mutually influence one another. We grow attuned to our
fellow human beings through these systems, creating culture in the process. Culture
becomes a mechanism for further social, emotional, and moral development. There is
simply no doubt that the human brain is the nexus of these influences. Cultural norms
influence our thinking and behavior by altering the structure and function of our brains.
Do you feel that sons are more desirable than daughters? Is obedience to parental
authority more important than honest inquiry? Would you cease to love your child if you
learned that he or she was gay? The ways parents view such questions, and the
subsequent effects in the lives of their children, must translate into facts about their
brains.
My goal is to convince you that human knowledge and human values can no
longer be kept apart. The world of measurement and the world of meaning must
eventually be reconciled. And science and religion—being antithetical ways of thinking
about the same reality—will never come to terms. As with all matters of fact, differences
of opinion on moral questions merely reveal the incompleteness of our knowledge; they
do not oblige us to respect a diversity of views indefinitely.

Facts and Values

The eighteenth-century Scottish philosopher David Hume famously argued that
no description of the way the world is (facts) can tell us how we ought to behave
(morality).13 Following Hume, the philosopher G. E. Moore declared that any attempt to
locate moral truths in the natural world was to commit a “naturalistic fallacy.” 14 Moore
argued that goodness could not be equated with any property of human experience (e.g.,
pleasure, happiness, evolutionary fitness) because it would always be appropriate to ask
whether the property on offer was itself good. If, for instance, we were to say that
goodness is synonymous with whatever gives people pleasure, it would still be possible
to worry whether a specific instance of pleasure is actually good. This is known as
Moore’s “open question argument.” And while I think this verbal trap is easily avoided
when we focus on human well-being, most scientists and public intellectuals appear to

have fallen into it. Other influential philosophers, including Karl Popper, 15 have echoed
Hume and Moore on this point, and the effect has been to create a firewall between facts
and values throughout our intellectual discourse. 16
While psychologists and neuroscientists now routinely study human happiness,
positive emotions, and moral reasoning, they rarely draw conclusions about how human
beings ought to think or behave in light of their findings. In fact, it seems to be generally
considered intellectually disreputable, even vaguely authoritarian, for a scientist to
suggest that his or her work offers some guidance about how people should live. The
philosopher and psychologist Jerry Fodor crystallizes the view:
Science is about facts, not norms; it might tell us how we are, but it couldn’t tell
us what is wrong with how we are. There couldn’t be a science of the human condition.17

While it is rarely stated this clearly, this faith in the intrinsic limits of reason is
now the received opinion in intellectual circles.
Despite the reticence of most scientists on the subject of good and evil, the
scientific study of morality and human happiness is well underway. This research is
bound to bring science into conflict with religious orthodoxy and popular opinion—just
as our growing understanding of evolution has—because the divide between facts and
values is illusory in at least three senses: (1) whatever can be known about maximizing
the well-being of conscious creatures—which is, I will argue, the only thing we can
reasonably value—must at some point translate into facts about brains and their
interaction with the world at large; (2) the very idea of “objective” knowledge (i.e.,
knowledge acquired through honest observation and reasoning) has values built into it, as
every effort we make to discuss facts depends upon principles that we must first value
(e.g., logical consistency, reliance on evidence, parsimony, etc.); (3) beliefs about facts
and beliefs about values seem to arise from similar processes at the level of the brain: it
appears that we have a common system for judging truth and falsity in both domains. I
will discuss each of these points in greater detail below. Both in terms of what there is to
know about the world and the brain mechanisms that allow us to know it, we will see that
a clear boundary between facts and values simply does not exist.
Many readers might wonder how can we base our values on something as difficult
to define as “well-being”? It seems to me, however, that the concept of well-being is like
the concept of physical health: it resists precise definition, and yet it is indispensable. 18
In fact, the meanings of both terms seem likely to remain perpetually open to revision as
we make progress in science. Today, a person can consider himself physically healthy if
he is free of detectable disease, able to exercise, and destined to live into his eighties
without suffering obvious decrepitude. But this standard may change. If the
biogerontologist Aubrey de Grey is correct in viewing aging as an engineering problem
that admits of a full solution, 19 being able to walk a mile on your hundredth birthday will
not always constitute “health.” There may come a time when not being able to run a
marathon at age five hundred will be considered a profound disability. Such a radical
transformation of our view of human health would not suggest that current notions of
health and sickness are arbitrary, merely subjective, or culturally constructed. Indeed, the
difference between a healthy person and a dead one is about as clear and consequential a
distinction as we ever make in science. The differences between the heights of human

fulfillment and the depths of human misery are no less clear, even if new frontiers await
us in both directions.
If we define “good” as that which supports well-being, as I will argue we must,
the regress initiated by Moore’s “open question argument” really does stop. While I agree
with Moore that it is reasonable to wonder whether maximizing pleasure in any given
instance is “good,” it makes no sense at all to ask whether maximizing well-being is
“good.” It seems clear that what we are really asking when we wonder whether a certain
state of pleasure is “good,” is whether it is conducive to, or obstructive of, some deeper
form of well-being. This question is perfectly coherent; it surely has an answer (whether
or not we are in a position to answer it); and yet, it keeps notions of goodness anchored to
the experience of sentient beings.20
Defining goodness in this way does not resolve all questions of value; it merely
directs our attention to what values actually are—the set of attitudes, choices, and
behaviors that potentially affect our well-being, as well as that of other conscious minds.
While this leaves the question of what constitutes well-being genuinely open, there is
every reason to think that this question has a finite range of answers. Given that change in
the well-being of conscious creatures is bound to be a product of natural laws, we must
expect that this space of possibilities—the moral landscape—will increasingly be
illuminated by science.
It is important to emphasize that a scientific account of human values—i.e., one
that places them squarely within the web of influences that link states of the world and
states of the human brain—is not the same as an evolutionary account. Most of what
constitutes human well-being at this moment escapes any narrow Darwinian calculus.
While the possibilities of human experience must be realized in the brains that evolution
has built for us, our brains were not designed with a view to our ultimate fulfillment.
Evolution could never have foreseen the wisdom or necessity of creating stable
democracies, mitigating climate change, saving other species from extinction, containing
the spread of nuclear weapons, or of doing much else that is now crucial to our happiness
in this century.
As the psychologist Steven Pinker has observed,21 if conforming to the dictates of
evolution were the foundation of subjective well-being, most men would discover no
higher calling in life than to make daily contributions to their local sperm bank. After all,
from the perspective of a man’s genes, there could be nothing more fulfilling than
spawning thousands of children without incurring any associated costs or responsibilities.
But our minds do not merely conform to the logic of natural selection. In fact, anyone
who wears eyeglasses or uses sunscreen has confessed his disinclination to live the life
that his genes have made for him. While we have inherited a multitude of yearnings that
probably helped our ancestors survive and reproduce in small bands of hunter-gatherers,
much of our inner life is frankly incompatible with our finding happiness in today’s
world. The temptation to start each day with several glazed donuts and to end it with an
extramarital affair might be difficult for some people to resist, for reasons that are easily
understood in evolutionary terms, but there are surely better ways to maximize one’s
long-term well-being. I hope it is clear that the view of “good” and “bad” I am
advocating, while fully constrained by our current biology (as well as by its future
possibilities), cannot be directly reduced to instinctual drives and evolutionary
imperatives. As with mathematics, science, art, and almost everything else that interests

us, our modern concerns about meaning and morality have flown the perch built by
evolution.

The Importance of Belief

The human brain is an engine of belief. Our minds continually consume, produce,
and attempt to integrate ideas about ourselves and the world that purport to be true: Iran
is developing nuclear weapons; the seasonal flu can be spread through casual contact; I
actually look better with gray hair. What must we do to believe such statements? What,
in other words, must a brain do to accept such propositions as true? This question marks
the intersection of many fields: psychology, neuroscience, philosophy, economics,
political science, and even jurisprudence. 22
Belief also bridges the gap between facts and values. We form beliefs about facts:
and belief in this sense constitutes most of what we know about the world—through
science, history, journalism, etc. But we also form beliefs about values: judgments about
morality, meaning, personal goals, and life’s larger purpose. While they might differ in
certain respects, beliefs in these two domains share very important features. Both types of
belief make tacit claims about right and wrong: claims not merely about how we think
and behave, but about how we should think and behave. Factual beliefs like “water is two
parts hydrogen and one part oxygen” and ethical beliefs like “cruelty is wrong” are not
expressions of mere preference. To really believe either proposition is also to believe that
you have accepted it for legitimate reasons. It is, therefore, to believe that you are in
compliance with certain norms—that you are sane, rational, not lying to yourself, not
confused, not overly biased, etc. When we believe that something is factually true or
morally good, we also believe that another person, similarly placed, should share our
belief. This seems unlikely to change. In chapter 3, we will see that both the logical and
neurological properties of belief further suggest that the divide between facts and values
is illusory.

The Bad Life and the Good Life

For my argument about the moral landscape to hold, I think one need only grant
two points: (1) some people have better lives than others, and (2) these differences relate,
in some lawful and not entirely arbitrary way, to states of the human brain and to states of
the world. To make these premises less abstract, consider two generic lives that lie
somewhere near the extremes on this continuum:
The Bad Life
You are a young widow who has lived her entire life in the midst of civil war.
Today, your seven-year-old daughter was raped and dismembered before your eyes.
Worse still, the perpetrator was your fourteen-year-old son, who was goaded to this evil

at the point of a machete by a press gang of drug-addled soldiers. You are now running
barefoot through the jungle with killers in pursuit. While this is the worst day of your life,
it is not entirely out of character with the other days of your life: since the moment you
were born, your world has been a theater of cruelty and violence. You have never learned
to read, taken a hot shower, or traveled beyond the green hell of the jungle. Even the
luckiest people you have known have experienced little more than an occasional respite
from chronic hunger, fear, apathy, and confusion. Unfortunately, you’ve been very
unlucky, even by these bleak standards. Your life has been one long emergency, and now
it is nearly over.
The Good Life
You are married to the most loving, intelligent, and charismatic person you have
ever met. Both of you have careers that are intellectually stimulating and financially
rewarding. For decades, your wealth and social connections have allowed you to devote
yourself to activities that bring you immense personal satisfaction. One of your greatest
sources of happiness has been to find creative ways to help people who have not had your
good fortune in life. In fact, you have just won a billion-dollar grant to benefit children in
the developing world. If asked, you would say that you could not imagine how your time
on earth could be better spent. Due to a combination of good genes and optimal
circumstances, you and your closest friends and family will live very long, healthy lives,
untouched by crime, sudden bereavements, and other misfortunes.
The examples I have picked, while generic, are nonetheless real—in that they
represent lives that some human beings are likely to be leading at this moment. While
there are surely ways in which this spectrum of suffering and happiness might be
extended, I think these cases indicate the general range of experience that is accessible, in
principle, to most of us. I also think it is indisputable that most of what we do with our
lives is predicated on there being nothing more important, at least for ourselves and for
those closest to us, than the difference between the Bad Life and the Good Life.
Let me simply concede that if you don’t see a distinction between these two lives
that is worth valuing (premise 1 above), there may be nothing I can say that will attract
you to my view of the moral landscape. Likewise, if you admit that these lives are
different, and that one is surely better than the other, but you believe these differences
have no lawful relationship to human behavior, societal conditions, or states of the brain
(premise 2), then you will also fail to see the point of my argument. While I don’t see
how either premise 1 or 2 can be reasonably doubted, my experience discussing these
issues suggests that I should address such skepticism, however far-fetched it may seem.
There are actually people who claim to be unimpressed by the difference between
the Bad Life and the Good Life. I have even met people who will go so far as to deny that
any difference exists. While they will acknowledge that we habitually speak and act as if
there were a continuum of experience that can be described by words like “misery,”
“terror,” “agony,” “madness,” etc., on one end and “well-being,” “happiness,” “peace,”
“bliss,” etc., on the other, when the conversation turns to philosophical and scientific
matters, such people will say learned things like, “but, of course, that is just how we play
our particular language game. It doesn’t mean there is a difference in reality.” One hopes
that these people take life’s difficulties in stride. They also use words like “love” and

“happiness,” from time to time, but we should wonder what these terms could signify that
does not entail a preference for the Good Life over the Bad Life. Anyone who claims to
see no difference between these two states of being (and their concomitant worlds),
should be just as likely to consign himself and those he “loves” to one or the other at
random and call the result “happiness.”
Ask yourself, if the difference between the Bad Life and the Good Life doesn’t
matter to a person, what could possibly matter to him? Is it conceivable that something
might matter more than this difference, expressed on the widest possible scale? What
would we think of a person who said, “Well, I could have delivered all seven billion of us
into the Good Life, but I had other priorities.” Would it be possible to have other
priorities? Wouldn’t any real priority be best served amid the freedom and opportunity
afforded by the Good Life? Even if you happen to be a masochist who fancies an
occasional taunting with a machete, wouldn’t this desire be best satisfied in the context of
the Good Life?
Imagine someone who spends all his energy trying to move as many people as
possible toward the Bad Life, while another person is equally committed to undoing this
damage and moving people in the opposite direction: Is it conceivable that you or anyone
you know could overlook the differences between these two projects? Is there any
possibility of confusing them or their underlying motivations? And won’t there
necessarily be objective conditions for these differences? If, for instance, one’s goal were
to place a whole population securely in the Good Life, wouldn’t there be more and less
effective ways of doing this? How would forcing boys to rape and murder their female
relatives fit into the picture?
I do not mean to belabor the point, but the point is crucial—and there is a
pervasive assumption among educated people that either such differences don’t exist, or
that they are too variable, complex, or culturally idiosyncratic to admit of general value
judgments. However, the moment one grants there is a difference between the Bad Life
and the Good Life that lawfully relates to states of the human brain, to human behavior,
and to states of the world, one has admitted that there are right and wrong answers to
questions of morality. To make sure this point is nailed down, permit me to consider a
few more objections:
What if, seen in some larger context, the Bad Life is actually better than the Good
Life—e.g., what if all those child soldiers will be happier in some afterlife, because they
have been purified of sin or have learned to call God by the right name, while the people
in the Good Life will get tortured in some physical hell for eternity?

If the universe is really organized this way, much of what I believe will stand
corrected on the Day of Judgment. However, my basic claim about the connection
between facts and values would remain unchallenged. The rewards and punishments of
an afterlife would simply alter the temporal characteristics of the moral landscape. If the
Bad Life is actually better over the long run than the Good Life—because it wins you
endless happiness, while the Good Life represents a mere dollop of pleasure presaging an
eternity of suffering—then the Bad Life would surely be better than the Good Life. If this
were the way the universe worked, we would be morally obligated to engineer an
appropriately pious Bad Life for as many people as possible. Under such a scheme, there

would still be right and wrong answers to questions of morality, and these would still be
assessed according to the experience of conscious beings. The only thing left to be
decided is how reasonable it is to worry that the universe might be structured in so bizarre
a way. It is not reasonable at all, I think—but that is a different discussion.
What if certain people would actually prefer the Bad Life to the Good Life?
Perhaps there are psychopaths and sadists who can expect to thrive in the context of the
Bad Life and would enjoy nothing more than killing other people with machetes.
Worries like this merely raise the question of how we should value dissenting
opinions. Jeffrey Dahmer’s idea of a life well lived was to kill young men, have sex with
their corpses, dismember them, and keep their body parts as souvenirs. We will confront
the problem of psychopathy in greater detail in chapter 3. For the moment, it seems
sufficient to notice that in any domain of knowledge, we are free to say that certain
opinions do not count. In fact, we must say this for knowledge or expertise to count at all.
Why should it be any different on the subject of human well-being?
Anyone who doesn’t see that the Good Life is preferable to the Bad Life is
unlikely to have anything to contribute to a discussion about human well-being. Must we
really argue that beneficence, trust, creativity, etc., enjoyed in the context of a prosperous
civil society are better than the horrors of civil war endured in a steaming jungle filled
with aggressive insects carrying dangerous pathogens? I don’t think so. In the next
chapter, I will argue that anyone who would seriously maintain that the opposite is the
case—or even that it might be the case—is either misusing words or not taking the time
to consider the details.
If we were to discover a new tribe in the Amazon tomorrow, there is not a
scientist alive who would assume a priori that these people must enjoy optimal physical
health and material prosperity. Rather, we would ask questions about this tribe’s average
lifespan, daily calorie intake, the percentage of women dying in childbirth, the prevalence
of infectious disease, the presence of material culture, etc. Such questions would have
answers, and they would likely reveal that life in the Stone Age entails a few
compromises. And yet news that these jolly people enjoy sacrificing their firstborn
children to imaginary gods would prompt many (even most) anthropologists to say that
this tribe was in possession of an alternate moral code every bit as valid and impervious
to refutation as our own. However, the moment one draws the link between morality and
well-being, one sees that this is tantamount to saying that the members of this tribe must
be as fulfilled, psychologically and socially, as any people on earth. The disparity
between how we think about physical health and mental/societal health reveals a bizarre
double standard: one that is predicated on our not knowing—or, rather, on our pretending
not to know—anything at all about human well-being.
Of course, some anthropologists have refused to follow their colleagues over the
cliff. Robert Edgerton performed a book-length exorcism on the myth of the “noble
savage,” detailing the ways in which the most influential anthropologists of the 1920s and
1930s—such as Franz Boas, Margaret Mead, and Ruth Benedict—systematically
exaggerated the harmony of folk societies and ignored their all too frequent barbarism or
reflexively attributed it to the malign influence of colonialists, traders, missionaries, and
the like. 23 Edgerton details how this romance with mere difference set the course for the
entire field. Thereafter, to compare societies in moral terms was deemed impossible.

Rather, it was believed that one could only hope to understand and accept a culture on its
own terms. Such cultural relativism became so entrenched that by 1939 one prominent
Harvard anthropologist wrote that this suspension of judgment was “probably the most
meaningful contribution which anthropological studies have made to general
knowledge.” 24 Let’s hope not. In any case, it is a contribution from which we are still
struggling to awaken.
Many social scientists incorrectly believe that all long-standing human practices
must be evolutionarily adaptive: for how else could they persist? Thus, even the most
bizarre and unproductive behaviors—female genital excision, blood feuds, infanticide,
the torture of animals, scarification, foot binding, cannibalism, ceremonial rape, human
sacrifice, dangerous male initiations, restricting the diet of pregnant and lactating
mothers, slavery, potlatch, the killing of the elderly, sati, irrational dietary and
agricultural taboos attended by chronic hunger and malnourishment, the use of heavy
metals to treat illness, etc.—have been rationalized, or even idealized, in the fire-lit
scribblings of one or another dazzled ethnographer. But the mere endurance of a belief
system or custom does not suggest that it is adaptive, much less wise. It merely suggests
that it hasn’t led directly to a society’s collapse or killed its practitioners outright.
The obvious difference between genes and memes (e.g., beliefs, ideas, cultural
practices) is also important to keep in view. The latter are communicated; they do not
travel with the gametes of their human hosts. The survival of memes, therefore, is not
dependent on their conferring some actual benefit (reproductive or otherwise) on
individuals or groups. It is quite possible for people to traffic in ideas and other cultural
products that diminish their well-being for centuries on end.
Clearly, people can adopt a form of life that needlessly undermines their physical
health—as the average lifespan in many primitive societies is scarcely a third of what it
has been in the developed world since the middle of the twentieth century.25 Why isn’t it
equally obvious that an ignorant and isolated people might undermine their psychological
well-being or that their social institutions could become engines of pointless cruelty,
despair, and superstition? Why is it even slightly controversial to imagine that some tribe
or society could harbor beliefs about reality that are not only false but demonstrably
harmful?
Every society that has ever existed has had to channel and subdue certain aspects
of human nature—envy, territorial violence, avarice, deceit, laziness, cheating, etc.—
through social mechanisms and institutions. It would be a miracle if all societies—
irrespective of size, geographical location, their place in history, or the genomes of their
members—had done this equally well. And yet the prevailing bias of cultural relativism
assumes that such a miracle has occurred not just once, but always.
Let’s take a moment to get our bearings. From a factual point of view, is it
possible for a person to believe the wrong things? Yes. It is possible for a person to value
the wrong things (that is, to believe the wrong things about human well-being)? I am
arguing that the answer to this question is an equally emphatic “yes” and, therefore, that
science should increasingly inform our values. Is it possible that certain people are
incapable of wanting what they should want? Of course—just as there will always be
people who are unable to grasp specific facts or believe certain true propositions. As with
every other description of a mental capacity or incapacity, these are ultimately statements
about the human brain.

Can Suffering Be Good?

It seems clear that ascending the slopes of the moral landscape may sometimes
require suffering. It may also require negative social emotions, like guilt and indignation.
Again, the analogy with physical health seems useful: we must occasionally experience
some unpleasantness—medication, surgery, etc.—in order to avoid greater suffering or
death. This principle seems to apply throughout our lives. Merely learning to read or to
play a new sport can produce feelings of deep frustration. And yet there is little question
that acquiring such skills generally improves our lives. Even periods of depression may
lead to better life decisions and to creative insights. 26 This seems to be the way our
minds work. So be it.
Of course, this principle also applies to civilization as a whole. Merely making
necessary improvements to a city’s infrastructure greatly inconveniences millions of
people. And unintended effects are always possible. For instance, the most dangerous
road on earth now appears to be a two-lane highway between Kabul and Jalalabad. When
it was unpaved, cratered, and strewn with boulders, it was comparatively safe. But once
some helpful Western contractors improved it, the driving skills of the local Afghans
were finally liberated from the laws of physics. Many now have a habit of passing slowmoving trucks on blind curves, only to find themselves suddenly granted a lethally
unimpeded view of a thousand-foot gorge.27 Are there lessons to be learned from such
missteps in the name of progress? Of course. But they do not negate the reality of
progress. Again, the difference between the Good Life and the Bad Life could not be
clearer: the question, for both individuals and groups, is how can we most reliably move
in one direction and avoid moving in the other?

The Problem of Religion

Anyone who wants to understand the world should be open to new facts and new
arguments, even on subjects where his or her views are very well established. Similarly,
anyone truly interested in morality—in the principles of behavior that allow people to
flourish—should be open to new evidence and new arguments that bear upon questions
of happiness and suffering. Clearly, the chief enemy of open conversation is dogmatism
in all its forms. Dogmatism is a well-recognized obstacle to scientific reasoning; and yet,
because scientists have been reluctant even to imagine that they might have something
prescriptive to say about values, dogmatism is still granted remarkable scope on
questions of both truth and goodness under the banner of religion.
In the fall of 2006, I participated in a three-day conference at the Salk Institute
entitled Beyond Belief: Science, Religion, Reason, and Survival. This event was
organized by Roger Bingham and conducted as a town-hall meeting before an audience
of invited guests. Speakers included Steven Weinberg, Harold Kroto, Richard Dawkins,
and many other scientists and philosophers who have been, and remain, energetic
opponents of religious dogmatism and superstition. It was a room full of highly
intelligent, scientifically literate people—molecular biologists, anthropologists,

physicists, and engineers—and yet, to my amazement, three days were insufficient to
force agreement on the simple question of whether there is any conflict at all between
religion and science. Imagine a meeting of mountaineers unable to agree about whether
their sport ever entails walking uphill, and you will get a sense of how bizarre our
deliberations began to seem.
While at Salk, I witnessed scientists giving voice to some of the most dishonest
religious apologies I have ever heard. It is one thing to be told that the pope is a peerless
champion of reason and that his opposition to embryonic stem-cell research is both
morally principled and completely uncontaminated by religious dogmatism; it is quite
another to be told this by a Stanford physician who sits on the President’s Council on
Bioethics.28 Over the course of the conference, I had the pleasure of hearing that Hitler,
Stalin, and Mao were examples of secular reason run amok, that the Islamic doctrines of
martyrdom and jihad are not the cause of Islamic terrorism, that people can never be
argued out of their beliefs because we live in an irrational world, that science has made
no important contributions to our ethical lives (and cannot), and that it is not the job of
scientists to undermine ancient mythologies and, thereby, “take away people’s hope”—all
from atheist scientists who, while insisting on their own skeptical hardheadedness, were
equally adamant that there was something feckless and foolhardy, even indecent, about
criticizing religious belief. There were several moments during our panel discussions that
brought to mind the final scene of Invasion of the Body Snatchers: people who looked
like scientists, had published as scientists, and would soon be returning to their labs,
nevertheless gave voice to the alien hiss of religious obscurantism at the slightest
prodding. I had previously imagined that the front lines in our culture wars were to be
found at the entrance to a megachurch. I now realized that we have considerable work to
do in a nearer trench.
I have made the case elsewhere that religion and science are in a zero-sum
conflict with respect to facts.29 Here, I have begun to argue that the division between
facts and values is intellectually unsustainable, especially from the perspective of
neuroscience. Consequently, it should come as no surprise that I see very little room for
compromise between faith and reason on questions of morality. While religion is not the
primary focus of this book, any discussion about the relationship between facts and
values, the nature of belief, and the role of science in public discourse must continually
labor under the burden of religious opinion. I will, therefore, examine the conflict
between religion and science in greater depth in chapter 4.
But there is no mystery why many scientists feel that they must pretend that
religion and science are compatible. We have recently emerged—some of us leaping,
some shuffling, others crawling—out of many dark centuries of religious bewilderment
and persecution, into an age when mainstream science is still occasionally treated with
overt hostility by the general public and even by governments. 30 While few scientists
living in the West now fear torture or death at the hands of religious fanatics, many will
voice concerns about losing their funding if they give offense to religion, particularly in
the United States. It also seems that, given the relative poverty of science, wealthy
organizations like the Templeton Foundation (whose endowment currently stands at $1.5
billion) have managed to convince some scientists and science journalists that it is wise to
split the difference between intellectual integrity and the fantasies of a prior age.
Because there are no easy remedies for social inequality, many scientists and

public intellectuals also believe that the great masses of humanity are best kept sedated
by pious delusions. Many assert that, while they can get along just fine without an
imaginary friend, most human beings will always need to believe in God. In my
experience, people holding this opinion never seem to notice how condescending,
unimaginative, and pessimistic a view it is of the rest of humanity—and of generations to
come.
There are social, economic, environmental, and geopolitical costs to this strategy
of benign neglect—ranging from personal hypocrisy to public policies that needlessly
undermine the health and safety of millions. Nevertheless, many scientists seem to worry
that subjecting people’s religious beliefs to criticism will start a war of ideas that science
cannot win. I believe that they are wrong. More important, I am confident that we will
eventually have no choice in the matter. Zero-sum conflicts have a way of becoming
explicit.
Here is our situation: if the basic claims of religion are true, the scientific
worldview is so blinkered and susceptible to supernatural modification as to be rendered
nearly ridiculous; if the basic claims of religion are false, most people are profoundly
confused about the nature of reality, confounded by irrational hopes and fears, and
tending to waste precious time and attention—often with tragic results. Is this really a
dichotomy about which science can claim to be neutral?
The deference and condescension of most scientists on these subjects is part of a
larger problem in public discourse: people tend not to speak honestly about the nature of
belief, about the invidious gulf between science and religion as modes of thought, or
about the real sources of moral progress. Whatever is true about us, ethically and
spiritually, is discoverable in the present and can be talked about in terms that are not an
outright affront to our growing understanding of the world. It makes no sense at all to
have the most important features of our lives anchored to divisive claims about the
unique sanctity of ancient books or to rumors of ancient miracles. There is simply no
question that how we speak about human values—and how we study or fail to study the
relevant phenomena at the level of the brain—will profoundly influence our collective
future.

Chapter 1
MORAL TRUTH

Many people believe that something in the last few centuries of intellectual
progress prevents us from speaking in terms of “moral truth” and, therefore, from making
cross-cultural moral judgments—or moral judgments at all. Having discussed this subject
in a variety of public forums, I have heard from literally thousands of highly educated
men and women that morality is a myth, that statements about human values are without
truth conditions (and are, therefore, nonsensical), and that concepts like well-being and
misery are so poorly defined, or so susceptible to personal whim and cultural influence,
that it is impossible to know anything about them.1
Many of these people also claim that a scientific foundation for morality would
serve no purpose in any case. They think we can combat human evil all the while
knowing that our notions of “good” and “evil” are completely unwarranted. It is always
amusing when these same people then hesitate to condemn specific instances of patently
abominable behavior. I don’t think one has fully enjoyed the life of the mind until one
has seen a celebrated scholar defend the “contextual” legitimacy of the burqa, or of
female genital mutilation, a mere thirty seconds after announcing that moral relativism
does nothing to diminish a person’s commitment to making the world a better place.2
And so it is obvious that before we can make any progress toward a science of
morality, we will have to clear some philosophical brush. In this chapter, I attempt to do
this within the limits of what I imagine to be most readers’ tolerance for such projects.
Those who leave this section with their doubts intact are encouraged to consult the
endnotes.
First, I want to be very clear about my general thesis: I am not suggesting that
science can give us an evolutionary or neurobiological account of what people do in the
name of “morality.” Nor am I merely saying that science can help us get what we want
out of life. These would be quite banal claims to make—unless one happens to doubt the
truth of evolution, the mind’s dependency on the brain, or the general utility of science.
Rather I am arguing that science can, in principle, help us understand what we should do
and should want—and, therefore, what other people should do and should want in order
to live the best lives possible. My claim is that there are right and wrong answers to moral
questions, just as there are right and wrong answers to questions of physics, and such
answers may one day fall within reach of the maturing sciences of mind.
Once we see that a concern for well-being (defined as deeply and as inclusively as
possible) is the only intelligible basis for morality and values, we will see that there must
be a science of morality, whether or not we ever succeed in developing it: because the
well-being of conscious creatures depends upon how the universe is, altogether. Given
that changes in the physical universe and in our experience of it can be understood,
science should increasingly enable us to answer specific moral questions. For instance,
would it be better to spend our next billion dollars eradicating racism or malaria? Which

is generally more harmful to our personal relationships, “white” lies or gossip? Such
questions may seem impossible to get a hold of at this moment, but they may not stay that
way forever. As we come to understand how human beings can best collaborate and
thrive in this world, science can help us find a path leading away from the lowest depths
of misery and toward the heights of happiness for the greatest number of people. Of
course, there will be practical impediments to evaluating the consequences of certain
actions, and different paths through life may be morally equivalent (i.e., there may be
many peaks on the moral landscape), but I am arguing that there are no obstacles, in
principle, to our speaking about moral truth.

It seems to me, however, that most educated, secular people (and this includes
most scientists, academics, and journalists) believe that there is no such thing as moral
truth—only moral preference, moral opinion, and emotional reactions that we mistake for
genuine knowledge of right and wrong. While we can understand how human beings
think and behave in the name of “morality,” it is widely imagined that there are no right
answers to moral questions for science to discover.
Some people maintain this view by defining “science” in exceedingly narrow
terms, as though it were synonymous with mathematical modeling or immediate access to
experimental data. However, this is to mistake science for a few of its tools. Science
simply represents our best effort to understand what is going on in this universe, and the
boundary between it and the rest of rational thought cannot always be drawn. There are
many tools one must get in hand to think scientifically—ideas about cause and effect,
respect for evidence and logical coherence, a dash of curiosity and intellectual honesty,
the inclination to make falsifiable predictions, etc.—and these must be put to use long
before one starts worrying about mathematical models or specific data.
Many people are also confused about what it means to speak with scientific
“objectivity” about the human condition. As the philosopher John Searle once pointed
out, there are two very different senses of the terms “objective” and “subjective.”3 The
first sense relates to how we know (i.e., epistemology), the second to what there is to
know (i.e., ontology). When we say that we are reasoning or speaking “objectively,” we
generally mean that we are free of obvious bias, open to counterarguments, cognizant of
the relevant facts, and so on. This is to make a claim about how we are thinking. In this
sense, there is no impediment to our studying subjective (i.e., first-person) facts
“objectively.”
For instance, it is true to say that I am experiencing tinnitus (ringing in my ear) at
this moment. This is a subjective fact about me, but in stating this fact, I am being
entirely objective: I am not lying; I am not exaggerating for effect; I am not expressing a
mere preference or personal bias. I am simply stating a fact about what I am hearing at
this moment. I have also been to an otologist and had the associated hearing loss in my
right ear confirmed. No doubt, my experience of tinnitus must have an objective (thirdperson) cause that could be discovered (likely, damage to my cochlea). There is simply
no question that I can speak about my tinnitus in the spirit of scientific objectivity—and,
indeed, the sciences of mind are largely predicated on our being able to correlate firstperson reports of subjective experience with third-person states of the brain. This is the

only way to study a phenomenon like depression: the underlying brain states must be
distinguished with reference to a person’s subjective experience.
However, many people seem to think that because moral facts relate to our
experience (and are, therefore, ontologically “subjective”), all talk of morality must be
“subjective” in the epistemological sense (i.e., biased, merely personal, etc.). This is
simply untrue. I hope it is clear that when I speak about “objective” moral truths, or about
the “objective” causes of human well-being, I am not denying the necessarily subjective
(i.e., experiential) component of the facts under discussion. I am certainly not claiming
that moral truths exist independent of the experience of conscious beings—like the
Platonic Form of the Good 4—or that certain actions are intrinsically wrong. 5 I am
simply saying that, given that there are facts— real facts—to be known about how
conscious creatures can experience the worst possible misery and the greatest possible
well-being, it is objectively true to say that there are right and wrong answers to moral
questions, whether or not we can always answer these questions in practice.
And, as I have said, people consistently fail to distinguish between there being
answers in practice and answers in principle to specific questions about the nature of
reality. When thinking about the application of science to questions of human well-being,
it is crucial that we not lose sight of this distinction. After all, there are countless
phenomena that are subjectively real, which we can discuss objectively (i.e., honestly and
rationally), but which remain impossible to describe with precision. Consider the
complete set of “birthday wishes” corresponding to every conscious hope that people
have entertained silently while blowing out candles on birthday cakes. Will we ever be
able to retrieve these unspoken thoughts? Of course not. Many of us would be hardpressed to recall even one of our own birthday wishes. Does this mean that these wishes
never existed or that we can’t make true or false statements about them? What if I were to
say that every one of these wishes was phrased in Latin, focused on improvements in
solar panel technology, and produced by the activity of exactly 10,000 neurons in each
person’s brain? Is this a vacuous assertion? No, it is quite precise and surely wrong. But
only a lunatic could believe such a thing about his fellow human beings. Clearly, we can
make true or false claims about human (and animal) subjectivity, and we can often
evaluate these claims without having access to the facts in question. This is a perfectly
reasonable, scientific, and often necessary thing to do. And yet many scientists will say
that moral truths do not exist, simply because certain facts about human experience
cannot be readily known, or may never be known. As I hope to show, this
misunderstanding has created tremendous confusion about the relationship between
human knowledge and human values.
Another thing that makes the idea of moral truth difficult to discuss is that people
often employ a double standard when thinking about consensus: most people take
scientific consensus to mean that scientific truths exist, and they consider scientific
controversy to be merely a sign that further work remains to be done; and yet many of
these same people believe that moral controversy proves that there can be no such thing
as moral truth, while moral consensus shows only that human beings often harbor the
same biases. Clearly, this double standard rigs the game against a universal conception of
morality. 6
The deeper issue, however, is that truth has nothing, in principle, to do with
consensus: one person can be right, and everyone else can be wrong. Consensus is a

guide to discovering what is going on in the world, but that is all that it is. Its presence or
absence in no way constrains what may or may not be true.7 There are surely physical,
chemical, and biological facts about which we are ignorant or mistaken. In speaking of
“moral truth,” I am saying that there must be facts regarding human and animal wellbeing about which we can also be ignorant or mistaken. In both cases, science—and
rational thought generally—is the tool we can use to uncover these facts.
And here is where the real controversy begins, for many people strongly object to
my claim that morality and values relate to facts about the well-being of conscious
creatures. My critics seem to think that consciousness holds no special place where
values are concerned, or that any state of consciousness stands the same chance of being
valued as any other. The most common objection to my argument is some version of the
following:
But you haven’t said why the well-being of conscious beings ought to matter to
us. If someone wants to torture all conscious beings to the point of madness, what is to
say that he isn’t just as “moral” as you are?

While I do not think anyone sincerely believes that this kind of moral skepticism
makes sense, there is no shortage of people who will press this point with a ferocity that
often passes for sincerity.
Let us begin with the fact of consciousness: I think we can know, through reason
alone, that consciousness is the only intelligible domain of value. What is the alternative?
I invite you to try to think of a source of value that has absolutely nothing to do with the
(actual or potential) experience of conscious beings. Take a moment to think about what
this would entail: whatever this alternative is, it cannot affect the experience of any
creature (in this life or in any other). Put this thing in a box, and what you have in that
box is—it would seem, by definition—the least interesting thing in the universe.
So how much time should we spend worrying about such a transcendent source of
value? I think the time I will spend typing this sentence is already too much. All other
notions of value will bear some relationship to the actual or potential experience of
conscious beings. So my claim that consciousness is the basis of human values and
morality is not an arbitrary starting point. 8
Now that we have consciousness on the table, my further claim is that the concept
of “well-being” captures all that we can intelligibly value. And “morality”—whatever
people’s associations with this term happen to be— really relates to the intentions and
behaviors that affect the well-being of conscious creatures.
On this point, religious conceptions of moral law are often put forward as
counterexamples: for when asked why it is important to follow God’s law, many people
will cannily say, “for its own sake.” Of course, it is possible to say this, but this seems
neither an honest nor a coherent claim. What if a more powerful God would punish us for
eternity for following Yahweh’s law? Would it then make sense to follow Yahweh’s law
“for its own sake”? The inescapable fact is that religious people are as eager to find
happiness and to avoid misery as anyone else: many of them just happen to believe that
the most important changes in conscious experience occur after death (i.e., in heaven or
in hell). And while Judaism is sometimes held up as an exception—because it tends not
to focus on the afterlife—the Hebrew Bible makes it absolutely clear that Jews should

follow Yahweh’s law out of concern for the negative consequences of not following it.
People who do not believe in God or an afterlife, and yet still think it important to
subscribe to a religious tradition, only believe this because living this way seems to make
some positive contribution to their well-being or to the well-being of others. 9
Religious notions of morality, therefore, are not exceptions to our common
concern for well-being. And all other philosophical efforts to describe morality in terms
of duty, fairness, justice, or some other principle that is not explicitly tied to the wellbeing of conscious creatures, draw upon some conception of well-being in the end.10
The doubts that immediately erupt on this point invariably depend upon bizarre
and restrictive notions of what the term “well-being” might mean.11 I think there is little
doubt that most of what matters to the average person—like fairness, justice, compassion,
and a general awareness of terrestrial reality—will be integral to our creating a thriving
global civilization and, therefore, to the greater well-being of humanity. 12 And, as I have
said, there may be many different ways for individuals and communities to thrive—many
peaks on the moral landscape—so if there is real diversity in how people can be deeply
fulfilled in this life, such diversity can be accounted for and honored in the context of
science. The concept of “well-being,” like the concept of “health,” is truly open for
revision and discovery. Just how fulfilled is it possible for us to be, personally and
collectively? What are the conditions—ranging from changes in the genome to changes
in economic systems—that will produce such happiness? We simply do not know.
But what if certain people insist that their “values” or “morality” have nothing to
do with well-being? Or, more realistically, what if their conception of well-being is so
idiosyncratic and circumscribed as to be hostile, in principle, to the well-being of all
others? For instance, what if a man like Jeffrey Dahmer says, “The only peaks on the
moral landscape that interest me are ones where I get to murder young men and have sex
with their corpses.” This possibility—the prospect of radically different moral
commitments—is at the heart of many people’s doubts about moral truth.
Again, we should observe the double standard in place regarding the significance
of consensus: those who do not share our scientific goals have no influence on scientific
discourse whatsoever; but, for some reason, people who do not share our moral goals
render us incapable of even speaking about moral truth. It is, perhaps, worth
remembering that there are trained “scientists” who are Biblical Creationists, and their
“scientific” thinking is purposed toward interpreting the data of science to fit the Book of
Genesis. Such people claim to be doing “science,” of course, but real scientists are free,
and indeed obligated, to point out that they are misusing the term. Similarly, there are
people who claim to be highly concerned about “morality” and “human values,” but
when we see that their beliefs cause tremendous misery, nothing need prevent us from
saying that they are misusing the term “morality” or that their values are distorted. How
have we convinced ourselves that, on the most important questions in human life, all
views must count equally?
Consider the Catholic Church: an organization which advertises itself as the
greatest force for good and as the only true bulwark against evil in the universe. Even
among non-Catholics, its doctrines are widely associated with the concepts of “morality”
and “human values.” However, the Vatican is an organization that excommunicates
women for attempting to become priests 13 but does not excommunicate male priests for
raping children. 14 It excommunicates doctors who perform abortions to save a mother’s

life—even if the mother is a nine-year-old girl raped by her stepfather and pregnant with
twins15—but it did not excommunicate a single member of the Third Reich for
committing genocide. Are we really obliged to consider such a diabolical inversion of
priorities to be evidence of an alternative “moral” framework? No. It seems clear that the
Catholic Church is as misguided in speaking about the “moral” peril of contraception, for
instance, as it would be in speaking about the “physics” of Transubstantiation. In both
domains, it is true to say that the Church is grotesquely confused about which things in
this world are worth paying attention to.
However, many people will continue to insist that we cannot speak about moral
truth, or anchor morality to a deeper concern for well-being, because concepts like
“morality” and “well-being” must be defined with reference to specific goals and other
criteria—and nothing prevents people from disagreeing about these definitions. I might
claim that morality is really about maximizing well-being and that well-being entails a
wide range of psychological virtues and wholesome pleasures, but someone else will be
free to say that morality depends upon worshipping the gods of the Aztecs and that wellbeing, if it matters at all, entails always having a terrified person locked in one’s
basement, waiting to be sacrificed.
Of course, goals and conceptual definitions matter. But this holds for all
phenomena and for every method we might use to study them. My father, for instance,
has been dead for twenty-five years. What do I mean by “dead”? Do I mean “dead” with
reference to specific goals? Well, if you must, yes—goals like respiration, energy
metabolism, responsiveness to stimuli, etc. The definition of “life” remains, to this day,
difficult to pin down. Does this mean we can’t study life scientifically? No. The science
of biology thrives despite such ambiguities. Again, the concept of “health” is looser still:
it, too, must be defined with reference to specific goals—not suffering chronic pain, not
always vomiting, etc.—and these goals are continually changing. Our notion of “health”
may one day be defined by goals that we cannot currently entertain with a straight face
(like the goal of spontaneously regenerating a lost limb). Does this mean we can’t study
health scientifically?
I wonder if there is anyone on earth who would be tempted to attack the
philosophical underpinnings of medicine with questions like: “What about all the people
who don’t share your goal of avoiding disease and early death? Who is to say that living
a long life free of pain and debilitating illness is ‘healthy’? What makes you think that
you could convince a person suffering from fatal gangrene that he is not as healthy as you
are?” And yet these are precisely the kinds of objections I face when I speak about
morality in terms of human and animal well-being. Is it possible to voice such doubts in
human speech? Yes. But that doesn’t mean we should take them seriously.
One of my critics put the concern this way: “Morals are relative to the time and
place in which they appear. If you do not already accept well-being as a value, then there
seems to be no argument for why one should promote well-being.” As proof of this
assertion, he observed that I would be unable to convince the Taliban that they value the
wrong things. By this standard, however, the truths of science are also “relative to the
time and place in which they appear,” and there is no way to convince someone who does
not value empirical evidence that he should value it. 16 Despite 150 years of working at it,
we still can’t convince a majority of Americans that evolution is a fact. Does this mean
biology isn’t a proper science?

Everyone has an intuitive “physics,” but much of our intuitive physics is wrong
(with respect to the goal of describing the behavior of matter). Only physicists have a
deep understanding of the laws that govern the behavior of matter in our universe. I am
arguing that everyone also has an intuitive “morality,” but much of our intuitive morality
is clearly wrong (with respect to the goal of maximizing personal and collective wellbeing). And only genuine moral experts would have a deep understanding of the causes
and conditions of human and animal well-being.17 Yes, we must have a goal to define
what counts as “right” or “wrong” when speaking about physics or morality, but this
criterion visits us equally in both domains. And yes, I think it is quite clear that members
of the Taliban are seeking well-being in this world (as well as hoping for it in the next).
But their religious beliefs have led them to create a culture that is almost perfectly hostile
to human flourishing. Whatever they think they want out of life—like keeping all women
and girls subjugated and illiterate—they simply do not understand how much better life
would be for them if they had different priorities.
Science cannot tell us why, scientifically, we should value health. But once we
admit that health is the proper concern of medicine, we can then study and promote it
through science. Medicine can resolve specific questions about human health—and it can
do this even while the very definition of “health” continues to change. Indeed, the science
of medicine can make marvelous progress without knowing how much its own progress
will alter our conception of health in the future.
I think our concern for well-being is even less in need of justification than our
concern for health is—as health is merely one of its many facets. And once we begin
thinking seriously about human well-being, we will find that science can resolve specific
questions about morality and human values, even while our conception of “well-being”
evolves.
It is essential to see that the demand for radical justification leveled by the moral
skeptic could not be met by any branch of science. Science is defined with reference to
the goal of understanding the processes at work in the universe. Can we justify this goal
scientifically? Of course not. Does this make science itself unscientific? If so, we appear
to have pulled ourselves down by our bootstraps.
It would be impossible to prove that our definition of science is correct, because
our standards of proof will be built into any proof we would offer. What evidence could
prove that we should value evidence? What logic could demonstrate the importance of
logic?18 We might observe that standard science is better at predicting the behavior of
matter than Creationist “science” is. But what could we say to a “scientist” whose only
goal is to authenticate the Word of God? Here, we seem to reach an impasse. And yet, no
one thinks that the failure of standard science to silence all possible dissent has any
significance whatsoever; why should we demand more of a science of morality? 19
Many moral skeptics piously cite Hume’s is/ought distinction as though it were
well known to be the last word on the subject of morality until the end of the world. 20
They insist that notions of what we ought to do or value can be justified only in terms of
other “oughts,” never in terms of facts about the way the world is. After all, in a world of
physics and chemistry, how could things like moral obligations or values really exist?
How could it be objectively true, for instance, that we ought to be kind to children?
But this notion of “ought” is an artificial and needlessly confusing way to think
about moral choice. In fact, it seems to be another dismal product of Abrahamic

religion—which, strangely enough, now constrains the thinking of even atheists. If this
notion of “ought” means anything we can possibly care about, it must translate into a
concern about the actual or potential experience of conscious beings (either in this life or
in some other). For instance, to say that we ought to treat children with kindness seems
identical to saying that everyone will tend to be better off if we do. The person who
claims that he does not want to be better off is either wrong about what he does, in fact,
want (i.e., he doesn’t know what he’s missing), or he is lying, or he is not making sense.
The person who insists that he is committed to treating children with kindness for reasons
that have nothing to do with anyone’s well-being is also not making sense. It is worth
noting in this context that the God of Abraham never told us to treat children with
kindness, but He did tell us to kill them for talking back to us (Exodus 21:15, Leviticus
20:9, Deuteronomy 21:18–21, Mark 7:9–13, and Matthew 15:4–7). And yet everyone
finds this “moral” imperative perfectly insane. Which is to say that no one—not even
fundamentalist Christians and orthodox Jews—can so fully ignore the link between
morality and human well-being as to be truly bound by God’s law. 21

The Worst Possible Misery for Everyone

I have argued that values only exist relative to actual and potential changes in the
well-being of conscious creatures. However, as I have said, many people seem to have
strange associations with the concept of “well-being”—imagining that it must be at odds
with principles like justice, autonomy, fairness, scientific curiosity, etc., when it simply
isn’t. They also worry that the concept of “well-being” is poorly defined. Again, I have
indicated why I do not think this is a problem (just as it’s not a problem with concepts
like “life” and “health”). However, it is also useful to notice that a universal morality can
be defined with reference to the negative end of the spectrum of conscious experience: I
refer to this extreme as “the worst possible misery for everyone.”
Even if each conscious being has a unique nadir on the moral landscape, we can
still conceive of a state of the universe in which everyone suffers as much as he or she (or
it) possibly can. If you think we cannot say this would be “bad,” then I don’t know what
you could mean by the word “bad” (and I don’t think you know what you mean by it
either). Once we conceive of “the worst possible misery for everyone,” then we can talk
about taking incremental steps toward this abyss: What could it mean for life on earth to
get worse for all human beings simultaneously? Notice that this need have nothing to do
with people enforcing their culturally conditioned moral precepts. Perhaps a neurotoxic
dust could fall to earth from space and make everyone extremely uncomfortable. All we
need imagine is a scenario in which everyone loses a little, or a lot, without there being
compensatory gains (i.e., no one learns any important lessons, no one profits from others’
losses, etc.). It seems uncontroversial to say that a change that leaves everyone worse off,
by any rational standard, can be reasonably called “bad,” if this word is to have any
meaning at all.
We simply must stand somewhere. I am arguing that, in the moral sphere, it is
safe to begin with the premise that it is good to avoid behaving in such a way as to

produce the worst possible misery for everyone. I am not claiming that most of us
personally care about the experience of all conscious beings; I am saying that a universe
in which all conscious beings suffer the worst possible misery is worse than a universe in
which they experience well-being. This is all we need to speak about “moral truth” in the
context of science. Once we admit that the extremes of absolute misery and absolute
flourishing—whatever these states amount to for each particular being in the end—are
different and dependent on facts about the universe, then we have admitted that there are
right and wrong answers to questions of morality. 22
Granted, genuine ethical difficulties arise when we ask questions like, “How
much should I care about other people’s children? How much should I be willing to
sacrifice, or demand that my own children sacrifice, in order to help other people in
need?” We are not, by nature, impartial—and much of our moral reasoning must be
applied to situations in which there is tension between our concern for ourselves, or for
those closest to us, and our sense that it would be better to be more committed to helping
others. And yet “better” must still refer, in this context, to positive changes in the
experience of sentient creatures.
Imagine if there were only two people living on earth: we can call them Adam
and Eve. Clearly, we can ask how these two people might maximize their well-being. Are
there wrong answers to this question? Of course. (Wrong answer number 1: smash each
other in the face with a large rock.) And while there are ways for their personal interests
to be in conflict, most solutions to the problem of how two people can thrive on earth will
not be zero-sum. Surely the best solutions will not be zero-sum. Yes, both of these people
could be blind to the deeper possibilities of collaboration: each might attempt to kill and
eat the other, for instance. Would they be wrong to behave this way? Yes, if by “wrong”
we mean that they would be forsaking far deeper and more durable sources of
satisfaction. It seems uncontroversial to say that a man and woman alone on earth would
be better off if they recognized their common interests—like getting food, building
shelter, and defending themselves against larger predators. If Adam and Eve were
industrious enough, they might realize the benefits of exploring the world, begetting
future generations of humanity, and creating technology, art, and medicine. Are there
good and bad paths to take across this landscape of possibilities? Of course. In fact, there
are, by definition, paths that lead to the worst misery and paths that lead to the greatest
fulfillment possible for these two people—given the structure of their respective brains,
the immediate facts of their environment, and the laws of Nature. The underlying facts
here are the facts of physics, chemistry, and biology as they bear on the experience of the
only two people in existence. Unless the human mind is fully separable from the
principles of physics, chemistry, and biology, any fact about Adam and Eve’s subjective
experience (morally salient or not) is a fact about (part of) the universe. 23
In talking about the causes of Adam and Eve’s first-person experience, we are
talking about an extraordinarily complex interplay between brain states and
environmental stimuli. However complex these processes are, it is clearly possible to
understand them to a greater or lesser degree (i.e., there are right and wrong answers to
questions about Adam’s and Eve’s well-being). Even if there are a thousand different
ways for these two people to thrive, there will be many ways for them not to thrive—and
the differences between luxuriating on a peak of well-being and languishing in a valley of
internecine horror will translate into facts that can be scientifically understood. Why

would the difference between right and wrong answers suddenly disappear once we add
6.7 billion more people to this experiment?
Grounding our values in a continuum of conscious states—one that has the worst
possible misery for everyone at its depths and differing degrees of well-being at all other
points—seems like the only legitimate context in which to conceive of values and moral
norms. Of course, anyone who has an alternative set of moral axioms is free to put them
forward, just as they are free to define “science” any way they want. But some definitions
will be useless, or worse—and many current definitions of “morality” are so bad that we
can know, far in advance of any breakthrough in the sciences of mind, that they have no
place in a serious conversation about how we should live in this world. The Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan have nothing meaningful to say about particle physics, cell physiology,
epidemiology, linguistics, economic policy, etc. How is their ignorance any less obvious
on the subject of human well-being? 24
The moment we admit that consciousness is the context in which any discussion
of values makes sense, we must admit that there are facts to be known about how the
experience of conscious creatures can change. Human and animal well-being are natural
phenomena. As such, they can be studied, in principle, with the tools of science and
spoken about with greater or lesser precision. Do pigs suffer more than cows do when
being led to slaughter? Would humanity suffer more or less, on balance, if the United
States unilaterally gave up all its nuclear weapons? Questions like these are very difficult
to answer. But this does not mean that they don’t have answers.
The fact that it could be difficult or impossible to know exactly how to maximize
human well-being does not mean that there are no right or wrong ways to do this—nor
does it mean that we cannot exclude certain answers as obviously bad. For instance, there
is often a tension between the autonomy of the individual and the common good, and
many moral problems turn on just how to prioritize these competing values. However,
autonomy brings obvious benefit to people and is, therefore, an important component of
the common good. The fact that it might be difficult to decide exactly how to balance
individual rights against collective interests, or that there might be a thousand equivalent
ways of doing this, does not mean that there aren’t objectively terrible ways of doing
this. The difficulty of getting precise answers to certain moral questions does not mean
that we must hesitate to condemn the morality of the Taliban—not just personally, but
from the point of view of science. The moment we admit that we know anything about
human well-being scientifically, we must admit that certain individuals or cultures can be
absolutely wrong about it.

Moral Blindness in the Name of “Tolerance”

There are very practical concerns that follow from the glib idea that anyone is free
to value anything—the most consequential being that it is precisely what allows highly
educated, secular, and otherwise well-intentioned people to pause thoughtfully, and often
interminably, before condemning practices like compulsory veiling, genital excision,
bride burning, forced marriage, and the other cheerful products of alternative “morality”
found elsewhere in the world. Fanciers of Hume’s is/ought distinction never seem to

realize what the stakes are, and they do not see how abject failures of compassion are
enabled by this intellectual “tolerance” of moral difference. While much of the debate on
these issues must be had in academic terms, this is not merely an academic debate. There
are girls getting their faces burned off with acid at this moment for daring to learn to read,
or for not consenting to marry men they have never met, or even for the “crime” of
getting raped. The amazing thing is that some Western intellectuals won’t even blink
when asked to defend these practices on philosophical grounds. I once spoke at an
academic conference on themes similar to those discussed here. Near the end of my
lecture, I made what I thought would be a quite incontestable assertion: We already have
good reason to believe that certain cultures are less suited to maximizing well-being than
others. I cited the ruthless misogyny and religious bamboozlement of the Taliban as an
example of a worldview that seems less than perfectly conducive to human flourishing.
As it turns out, to denigrate the Taliban at a scientific meeting is to court
controversy. At the conclusion of my talk, I fell into debate with another invited speaker,
who seemed, at first glance, to be very well positioned to reason effectively about the
implications of science for our understanding of morality. In fact, this person has since
been appointed to the President’s Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues and is
now one of only thirteen people who will advise President Obama on “issues that may
emerge from advances in biomedicine and related areas of science and technology” in
order to ensure that “scientific research, health care delivery, and technological
innovation are conducted in an ethically responsible manner.”25 Here is a snippet of our
conversation, more or less verbatim:
She: What makes you think that science will ever be able to say that forcing
women to wear burqas is wrong?
Me: Because I think that right and wrong are a matter of increasing or decreasing
well-being—and it is obvious that forcing half the population to live in cloth bags, and
beating or killing them if they refuse, is not a good strategy for maximizing human wellbeing.
She: But that’s only your opinion.
Me: Okay … Let’s make it even simpler. What if we found a culture that ritually
blinded every third child by literally plucking out his or her eyes at birth, would you then
agree that we had found a culture that was needlessly diminishing human well-being?
She: It would depend on why they were doing it.
Me [slowly returning my eyebrows from the back of my head]: Let’s say they
were doing it on the basis of religious superstition. In their scripture, God says, “Every
third must walk in darkness.”
She: Then you could never say that they were wrong.
Such opinions are not uncommon in the Ivory Tower. I was talking to a woman
(it’s hard not to feel that her gender makes her views all the more disconcerting) who had
just delivered an entirely lucid lecture on some of the moral implications of recent
advances in neuroscience. She was concerned that our intelligence services might one
day use neuroimaging technology for the purposes of lie detection, which she considered
a likely violation of cognitive liberty. She was especially exercised over rumors that our
government might have exposed captured terrorists to aerosols containing the hormone
oxytocin in an effort to make them more cooperative.26 Though she did not say it, I
suspect that she would even have opposed subjecting these prisoners to the smell of

freshly baked bread, which has been shown to have a similar effect. 27 While listening to
her talk, as yet unaware of her liberal views on compulsory veiling and ritual enucleation,
I thought her slightly overcautious, but a basically sane and eloquent authority on
scientific ethics. I confess that once we did speak, and I peered into the terrible gulf that
separated us on these issues, I found that I could not utter another word to her. In fact, our
conversation ended with my blindly enacting two neurological clichés: my jaw quite
literally dropped open, and I spun on my heels before walking away.

While human beings have different moral codes, each competing view presumes
its own universality. This seems to be true even of moral relativism. While few
philosophers have ever answered to the name of “moral relativist,” it is by no means
uncommon to find local eruptions of this view whenever scientists and other academics
encounter moral diversity. Forcing women and girls to wear burqas may be wrong in
Boston or Palo Alto, so the argument will run, but we cannot say that it is wrong for
Muslims in Kabul. To demand that the proud denizens of an ancient culture conform to
our view of gender equality would be culturally imperialistic and philosophically naïve.
This is a surprisingly common view, especially among anthropologists. 28
Moral relativism, however, tends to be self-contradictory. Relativists may say that
moral truths exist only relative to a specific cultural framework—but this claim about the
status of moral truth purports to be true across all possible frameworks. In practice,
relativism almost always amounts to the claim that we should be tolerant of moral
difference because no moral truth can supersede any other. And yet this commitment to
tolerance is not put forward as simply one relative preference among others deemed
equally valid. Rather, tolerance is held to be more in line with the (universal) truth about
morality than intolerance is. The contradiction here is unsurprising. Given how deeply
disposed we are to make universal moral claims, I think one can reasonably doubt
whether any consistent moral relativist has ever existed.
Moral relativism is clearly an attempt to pay intellectual reparations for the crimes
of Western colonialism, ethnocentrism, and racism. This is, I think, the only charitable
thing to be said about it. I hope it is clear that I am not defending the idiosyncrasies of the
West as any more enlightened, in principle, than those of any other culture. Rather, I am
arguing that the most basic facts about human flourishing must transcend culture, just as
most other facts do. And if there are facts that are truly a matter of cultural
construction—if, for instance, learning a specific language or tattooing your face
fundamentally alters the possibilities of human experience—well, then these facts also
arise from (neurophysiological) processes that transcend culture.
In his wonderful book The Blank Slate, Steven Pinker includes a quotation from
the anthropologist Donald Symons that captures the problem of multiculturalism
especially well:
If only one person in the world held down a terrified, struggling, screaming little
girl, cut off her genitals with a septic blade, and sewed her back up, leaving only a tiny
hole for urine and menstrual flow, the only question would be how severely that person
should be punished, and whether the death penalty would be a sufficiently severe
sanction. But when millions of people do this, instead of the enormity being magnified

millions-fold, suddenly it becomes “culture,” and thereby magically becomes less, rather
than more, horrible, and is even defended by some Western “moral thinkers,” including
feminists.29

It is precisely such instances of learned confusion (one is tempted to say “learned
psychopathy”) that lend credence to the claim that a universal morality requires the
support of faith-based religion. The categorical distinction between facts and values has
opened a sinkhole beneath secular liberalism—leading to moral relativism and
masochistic depths of political correctness. Think of the champions of “tolerance” who
reflexively blamed Salman Rushdie for his fatwa, or Ayaan Hirsi Ali for her ongoing
security concerns, or the Danish cartoonists for their “controversy,” and you will
understand what happens when educated liberals think there is no universal foundation
for human values. Among conservatives in the West, the same skepticism about the
power of reason leads, more often than not, directly to the feet of Jesus Christ, Savior of
the Universe. The purpose of this book is to help cut a third path through this wilderness.

Moral Science

Charges of “scientism” cannot be long in coming. No doubt, there are still some
people who will reject any description of human nature that was not first communicated
in iambic pentameter. Many readers may also fear that the case I am making is vaguely,
or even explicitly, utopian. It isn’t, as should become clear in due course.
However, other doubts about the authority of science are even more fundamental.
There are academics who have built entire careers on the allegation that the foundations
of science are rotten with bias—sexist, racist, imperialist, Northern, etc. Sandra Harding,
a feminist philosopher of science, is probably the most famous proponent of this view.
On her account, these prejudices have driven science into an epistemological cul-de-sac
called “weak objectivity.” To remedy this dire situation, Harding recommends that
scientists immediately give “feminist” and “multicultural” epistemologies their due.30
First, let’s be careful not to confuse this quite crazy claim for its sane cousin:
There is no question that scientists have occasionally demonstrated sexist and racist
biases. The composition of some branches of science is still disproportionately white and
male (though some are now disproportionately female), and one can reasonably wonder
whether bias is the cause. There are also legitimate questions to be asked about the
direction and application of science: in medicine, for instance, it seems clear that
women’s health issues have been sometimes neglected because the prototypical human
being has been considered male. One can also argue that the contributions of women and
minority groups to science have occasionally been ignored or undervalued: the case of
Rosalind Franklin standing in the shadows of Crick and Watson might be an example of
this. But none of these facts, alone or in combination, or however multiplied, remotely
suggests that our notions of scientific objectivity are vitiated by racism or sexism.
Is there really such a thing as a feminist or multicultural epistemology? Harding’s
case is not helped when she finally divulges that there is not just one feminist

epistemology, but many. On this view, why was Hitler’s notion of “Jewish physics” (or
Stalin’s idea of “capitalist biology”) anything less than a thrilling insight into the richness
of epistemology? Should we now consider the possibility of not only Jewish physics, but
of Jewish women’s physics? How could such a balkanization of science be a step toward
“strong objectivity”? And if political inclusiveness is our primary concern, where could
such efforts to broaden our conception of scientific truth possibly end? Physicists tend to
have an unusual aptitude for complex mathematics, and anyone who doesn’t cannot
expect to make much of a contribution to the field. Why not remedy this situation as
well? Why not create an epistemology for physicists who failed calculus? Why not be
bolder still and establish a branch of physics for people suffering from debilitating brain
injuries? Who could reasonably expect that such efforts at inclusiveness would increase
our understanding of a phenomenon like gravity? 31 As Steven Weinberg once said
regarding similar doubts about the objectivity of science, “You have to be very learned to
be that wrong.” 32 Indeed, one does—and many are.
There is no denying, however, that the effort to reduce all human values to
biology can produce howlers. For instance, when the entomologist E. O. Wilson (in
collaboration with the philosopher Michael Ruse) wrote that “morality, or more strictly
our belief in morality, is merely an adaptation put in place to further our reproductive
ends,” the philosopher Daniel Dennett rightly dismissed it as “nonsense.”33 The fact that
our moral intuitions probably conferred some adaptive advantage upon our ancestors
does not mean that the present purpose of morality is successful reproduction, or that
“our belief in morality” is just a useful delusion. (Is the purpose of astronomy successful
reproduction? What about the practice of contraception? Is that all about reproduction,
too?) Nor does it mean that our notion of “morality” cannot grow deeper and more
refined as our understanding of ourselves develops.
Many universal features of human life need not have been selected for at all; they
may simply be, as Dennett says, “good tricks” communicated by culture or “forced
moves” that naturally emerge out of the regularities in our world. As Dennett says, it is
doubtful that there is a gene for knowing that you should throw a spear “pointy end first.”
And it is, likewise, doubtful that our ancestors had to spend much time imparting this
knowledge to each successive generation.34
We have good reason to believe that much of what we do in the name of
“morality”—decrying sexual infidelity, punishing cheaters, valuing cooperation, etc.—is
borne of unconscious processes that were shaped by natural selection. 35 But this does not
mean that evolution designed us to lead deeply fulfilling lives. Again, in talking about a
science of morality, I am not referring to an evolutionary account of all the cognitive and
emotional processes that govern what people do when they say they are being “moral”; I
am referring to the totality of scientific facts that govern the range of conscious
experiences that are possible for us. To say that there are truths about morality and human
values is simply to say that there are facts about well-being that await our discovery—
regardless of our evolutionary history. While such facts necessarily relate to the
experience of conscious beings, they cannot be the mere invention of any person or
culture.
It seems to me, therefore, that there are at least three projects that we should not
confuse:
1. We can explain why people tend to follow certain patterns of thought and

behavior (many of them demonstrably silly and harmful) in the name of “morality.”
2. We can think more clearly about the nature of moral truth and determine which
patterns of thought and behavior we should follow in the name of “morality.”
3. We can convince people who are committed to silly and harmful patterns of
thought and behavior in the name of “morality” to break these commitments and to live
better lives.
These are distinct and independently worthy endeavors. Most scientists who study
morality in evolutionary, psychological, or neurobiological terms are exclusively devoted
to the first project: their goal is to describe and understand how people think and behave
in light of morally salient emotions like anger, disgust, empathy, love, guilt, humiliation,
etc. This research is fascinating, of course, but it is not my focus. And while our common
evolutionary origins and resultant physiological similarity to one another suggest that
human well-being will admit of general principles that can be scientifically understood, I
consider this first project all but irrelevant to projects 2 and 3. In the past, I have found
myself in conflict with some of the leaders in this field because many of them, like the
psychologist Jonathan Haidt, believe that this first project represents the only legitimate
point of contact between science and morality.
I happen to believe that the third project—changing people’s ethical
commitments—is the most important task facing humanity in the twenty-first century.
Nearly every other important goal—from combating climate change, to fighting
terrorism, to curing cancer, to saving the whales—falls within its purview. Of course,
moral persuasion is a difficult business, but it strikes me as especially difficult if we
haven’t figured out in what sense moral truths exist. Hence, my main focus is on project
2.
To see the difference between these three projects, it is best to consider specific
examples: we can, for instance, give a plausible evolutionary account of why human
societies have tended to treat women as the property of men (1); it is, however, quite
another thing to give a scientific account of whether, why, and to what degree human
societies change for the better when they outgrow this tendency (2); it is yet another thing
altogether to decide how best to change people’s attitudes at this moment in history and
to empower women on a global scale (3).
It is easy to see why the study of the evolutionary origins of “morality” might lead
to the conclusion that morality has nothing at all to do with Truth. If morality is simply an
adaptive means of organizing human social behavior and mitigating conflict, there would
be no reason to think that our current sense of right and wrong would reflect any deeper
understanding about the nature of reality. Hence, a narrow focus explaining why people
think and behave as they do can lead a person to find the idea of “moral truth” literally
unintelligible.
But notice that the first two projects give quite different accounts of how
“morality” fits into the natural world. In 1, “morality” is the collection of impulses and
behaviors (along with their cultural expressions and neurobiological underpinnings) that
have been hammered into us by evolution. In 2, “morality” refers to the impulses and
behaviors we can follow so as to maximize our well-being in the future.
To give a concrete example: Imagine that a handsome stranger tries to seduce
another man’s wife at the gym. When the woman politely informs her admirer that she is
married, the cad persists, as though a happy marriage could be no impediment to his

charms. The woman breaks off the conversation soon thereafter, but far less abruptly than
might have been compatible with the laws of physics.
I write now, in the rude glare of recent experience. I can say that when my wife
reported these events to me yesterday, they immediately struck me as morally salient. In
fact, she had not completed her third sentence before the dark fluids of moral indignation
began coursing through my brain—jealousy, embarrassment, anger, etc.—albeit only at a
trickle. First, I was annoyed by the man’s behavior—and had I been present to witness it,
I suspect that my annoyance would have been far greater. If this Don Juan had been as
dismissive of me in my presence as he was in my absence, I could imagine how such an
encounter could result in physical violence.
No evolutionary psychologist would find it difficult to account for my response to
this situation—and almost all scientists who study “morality” would confine their
attention to this set of facts: my inner ape had swung into view, and any thoughts I might
entertain about “moral truth” would be linguistic effluvium masking far more zoological
concerns. I am the product of an evolutionary history in which every male of the species
has had to guard against squandering his resources on another man’s offspring. Had we
scanned my brain and correlated my subjective feelings with changes in my
neurophysiology, the scientific description of these events would be nearly complete. So
ends project 1.
But there are many different ways for an ape to respond to the fact that other apes
find his wife desirable. Had this happened in a traditional honor culture, the jealous
husband might beat his wife, drag her to the gym, and force her to identify her suitor so
that he could put a bullet in his brain. In fact, in an honor society, the employees of the
gym might sympathize with this project and help to organize a proper duel. Or perhaps
the husband would be satisfied to act more obliquely, killing one of his rival’s relatives
and initiating a classic blood feud. In either case, assuming he didn’t get himself killed in
the process, he might then murder his wife for emphasis, leaving his children motherless.
There are many communities on earth where men commonly behave this way, and
hundreds of millions of boys are beginning to run this ancient software on their brains
even now.
However, my own mind shows some precarious traces of civilization: one being
that I view the emotion of jealously with suspicion. What is more, I happen to love my
wife and genuinely want her to be happy, and this entails a certain empathetic
understanding of her point of view. Given a moment to think about it, I can feel glad that
her self-esteem received a boost from this man’s attention; I can also feel compassion for
the fact that, after recently having our first child, her self-esteem needed any boost at all.
I also know that she would not want to be rude, and that this probably made her
somewhat slow to extricate herself from a conversation that had taken a wrong turn. And
I am under no illusions that I am the only man on earth whom she will find attractive, or
momentarily distracting, nor do I imagine that her devotion to me should consist in this
impossible narrowing of her focus. And how do I feel about the man? Well, I still find his
behavior objectionable—because I cannot sympathize with his effort to break up a
marriage, and I know that I would not behave as he did—but I sympathize with
everything else he must have felt, because I also happen to think that my wife is
beautiful, and I know what it’s like to be a single ape in the jungle.
Most important, however, I value my own well-being, as well as that of my wife

and daughter, and I want to live in a society that maximizes the possibility of human
well-being generally. Here begins project 2: Are there right and wrong answers to the
question of how to maximize well-being? How would my life have been affected if I had
killed my wife in response to this episode? We do not need a completed neuroscience to
know that my happiness, as well as that of many other people, would have been
profoundly diminished. And what about the collective well-being of people in an honor
society that might support such behavior? It seems to me that members of these societies
are obviously worse off. If I am wrong about this, however, and there are ways to
organize an honor culture that allow for precisely the same level of human flourishing
enjoyed elsewhere—then so be it. This would represent another peak on the moral
landscape. Again, the existence of multiple peaks would not render the truths of morality
merely subjective.
The framework of a moral landscape guarantees that many people will have
flawed conceptions of morality, just as many people have flawed conceptions of physics.
Some people think “physics” includes (or validates) practices like astrology, voodoo, and
homeopathy. These people are, by all appearances, simply wrong about physics. In the
United States, a majority of people (57 percent) believe that preventing homosexuals
from marrying is a “moral” imperative.36 However, if this belief rests on a flawed sense
of how we can maximize our well-being, such people may simply be wrong about
morality. And the fact that millions of people use the term “morality” as a synonym for
religious dogmatism, racism, sexism, or other failures of insight and compassion should
not oblige us to merely accept their terminology until the end of time.
What will it mean for us to acquire a deep, consistent, and fully scientific
understanding of the human mind? While many of the details remain unclear, the
challenge is for us to begin speaking sensibly about right and wrong, and good and evil,
given what we already know about our world. Such a conversation seems bound to shape
our morality and public policy in the years to come.37

Chapter 2
GOOD AND EVIL

There may be nothing more important than human cooperation. Whenever more
pressing concerns seem to arise—like the threat of a deadly pandemic, an asteroid
impact, or some other global catastrophe—human cooperation is the only remedy (if a
remedy exists). Cooperation is the stuff of which meaningful human lives and viable
societies are made. Consequently, few topics will be more relevant to a maturing science
of human well-being.
Open a newspaper, today or any day for the rest of your life, and you will witness
failures of human cooperation, great and small, announced from every corner of the
world. The results of these failures are no less tragic for being utterly commonplace:
deception, theft, violence, and their associated miseries arise in a continuous flux of
misspent human energy. When one considers the proportion of our limited time and
resources that must be squandered merely to guard against theft and violence (to say
nothing of addressing their effects), the problem of human cooperation seems almost the
only problem worth thinking about.1 “Ethics” and “morality” (I use these terms
interchangeably) are the names we give to our deliberate thinking on these matters. 2
Clearly, few subjects have greater bearing upon the question of human well-being.
As we better understand the brain, we will increasingly understand all of the
forces—kindness, reciprocity, trust, openness to argument, respect for evidence,
intuitions of fairness, impulse control, the mitigation of aggression, etc.—that allow
friends and strangers to collaborate successfully on the common projects of civilization.
Understanding ourselves in this way, and using this knowledge to improve human life,
will be among the most important challenges to science in the decades to come.
Many people imagine that the theory of evolution entails selfishness as a
biological imperative. This popular misconception has been very harmful to the
reputation of science. In truth, human cooperation and its attendant moral emotions are
fully compatible with biological evolution. Selection pressure at the level of “selfish”
genes would surely incline creatures like ourselves to make sacrifices for our relatives,
for the simple reason that one’s relatives can be counted on to share one’s genes: while
this truth might not be obvious through introspection, your brother’s or sister’s
reproductive success is, in part, your own. This phenomenon, known as kin selection, was
not given a formal analysis until the 1960s in the work of William Hamilton, 3 but it was
at least implicit in the understanding of earlier biologists. Legend has it that J. B. S.
Haldane was once asked if he would risk his life to save a drowning brother, to which he
quipped, “No, but I would save two brothers or eight cousins.” 4
The work of evolutionary biologist Robert Trivers on reciprocal altruism has
gone a long way toward explaining cooperation among unrelated friends and strangers. 5
Trivers’s model incorporates many of the psychological and social factors related to
altruism and reciprocity, including: friendship, moralistic aggression (i.e., the punishment

of cheaters), guilt, sympathy, and gratitude, along with a tendency to deceive others by
mimicking these states. As first suggested by Darwin, and recently elaborated by the
psychologist Geoffrey Miller, sexual selection may have further encouraged the
development of moral behavior. Because moral virtue is attractive to both sexes, it might
function as a kind of peacock’s tail: costly to produce and maintain, but beneficial to
one’s genes in the end. 6
Clearly, our selfish and selfless interests do not always conflict. In fact, the wellbeing of others, especially those closest to us, is one of our primary (and, indeed, most
selfish) interests. While much remains to be understood about the biology of our moral
impulses, kin selection, reciprocal altruism, and sexual selection explain how we have
evolved to be, not merely atomized selves in thrall to our self-interest, but social selves
disposed to serve a common interest with others. 7
Certain biological traits appear to have been shaped by, and to have further
enhanced, the human capacity for cooperation. For instance, unlike the rest of the earth’s
creatures, including our fellow primates, the sclera of our eyes (the region surrounding
the colored iris) is white and exposed. This makes the direction of the human gaze very
easy to detect, allowing us to notice even the subtlest shifts in one another’s visual
attention. The psychologist Michael Tomasello suggests the following adaptive logic:
If I am, in effect, advertising the direction of my eyes, I must be in a social
environment full of others who are not often inclined to take advantage of this to my
detriment—by, say, beating me to the food or escaping aggression before me. Indeed, I
must be in a cooperative social environment in which others following the direction of
my eyes somehow benefits me.8

Tomasello has found that even twelve-month old children will follow a person’s
gaze, while chimpanzees tend to be interested only in head movements. He suggests that
our unique sensitivity to gaze direction facilitated human cooperation and language
development.
While each of us is selfish, we are not merely so. Our own happiness requires that
we extend the circle of our self-interest to others—to family, friends, and even to perfect
strangers whose pleasures and pains matter to us. While few thinkers have placed greater
focus on the role that competing self-interests play in society, even Adam Smith
recognized that each of us cares deeply about the happiness of others.9 He also
recognized, however, that our ability to care about others has its limits and that these
limits are themselves the object of our personal and collective concern:
Let us suppose that the great empire of China, with all its myriads of inhabitants,
was suddenly swallowed up by an earthquake, and let us consider how a man of humanity
in Europe, who had no sort of connection with that part of the world, would be affected
upon receiving intelligence of this dreadful calamity. He would, I imagine, first of all,
express very strongly his sorrow for the misfortune of that unhappy people, he would
make many melancholy reflections upon the precariousness of human life, and the vanity
of all the labours of man, which could thus be annihilated in a moment. He would too,
perhaps, if he was a man of speculation, enter into many reasonings concerning the
effects which this disaster might produce upon the commerce of Europe, and the trade
and business of the world in general. And when all this fine philosophy was over, when

all these humane sentiments had been once fairly expressed, he would pursue his business
or his pleasure, take his repose or his diversion, with the same ease and tranquility, as if
no such accident had happened. The most frivolous disaster which could befall himself
would occasion a more real disturbance. If he was to lose his little finger to-morrow, he
would not sleep to-night; but, provided he never saw them, he will snore with the most
profound security over the ruin of a hundred millions of his brethren, and the destruction
of that immense multitude seems plainly an object less interesting to him, than this paltry
misfortune of his own. To prevent, therefore, this paltry misfortune to himself, would a
man of humanity be willing to sacrifice the lives of a hundred millions of his brethren,
provided he had never seen them? Human nature startles with horror at the thought, and
the world, in its greatest depravity and corruption, never produced such a villain as could
be capable of entertaining it. But what makes this difference? 10

Smith captures the tension between our reflexive selfishness and our broader
moral intuitions about as well as anyone can here. The truth about us is plain to see: most
of us are powerfully absorbed by selfish desires almost every moment of our lives; our
attention to our own pains and pleasures could scarcely be more acute; only the most
piercing cries of anonymous suffering capture our interest, and then fleetingly. And yet,
when we consciously reflect on what we should do, an angel of beneficence and
impartiality seems to spread its wings within us: we genuinely want fair and just
societies; we want others to have their hopes realized; we want to leave the world better
than we found it.
Questions of human well-being run deeper than any explicit code of morality.
Morality—in terms of consciously held precepts, social contracts, notions of justice,
etc.—is a relatively recent development. Such conventions require, at a minimum,
complex language and a willingness to cooperate with strangers, and this takes us a stride
or two beyond the Hobbesian “state of nature.” However, any biological changes that
served to mitigate the internecine misery of our ancestors would fall within the scope of
an analysis of morality as a guide to personal and collective well-being. To simplify
matters enormously:
1. Genetic changes in the brain gave rise to social emotions, moral intuitions, and
language …
2. These allowed for increasingly complex cooperative behavior, the keeping of
promises, concern about one’s reputation, etc.…
3. Which became the basis for cultural norms, laws, and social institutions whose
purpose has been to render this growing system of cooperation durable in the face of
countervailing forces.
Some version of this progression has occurred in our case, and each step
represents an undeniable enhancement of our personal and collective well-being. To be
sure, catastrophic regressions are always possible. We could, either by design or
negligence, employ the hard-won fruits of civilization, and the emotional and social
leverage wrought of millennia of biological and cultural evolution, to immiserate
ourselves more fully than unaided Nature ever could. Imagine a global North Korea,
where the better part of a starving humanity serve as slaves to a lunatic with bouffant
hair: this might be worse than a world filled merely with warring australopithecines.

What would “worse” mean in this context? Just what our intuitions suggest: more painful,
less satisfying, more conducive to terror and despair, and so on. While it may never be
feasible to compare such counterfactual states of the world, this does not mean that there
are no experiential truths to be compared. Once again, there is a difference between
answers in practice and answers in principle.
The moment one begins thinking about morality in terms of well-being, it
becomes remarkably easy to discern a moral hierarchy across human societies. Consider
the following account of the Dobu islanders from Ruth Benedict:
Life in Dobu fosters extreme forms of animosity and malignancy which most
societies have minimized by their institutions. Dobuan institutions, on the other hand,
exalt them to the highest degree. The Dobuan lives out without repression man’s worst
nightmares of the ill-will of the universe, and according to his view of life virtue consists
in selecting a victim upon whom he can vent the malignancy he attributes alike to human
society and to the powers of nature. All existence appears to him as a cutthroat struggle in
which deadly antagonists are pitted against one another in contest for each one of the
goods of life. Suspicion and cruelty are his trusted weapons in the strife and he gives no
mercy, as he asks none.11

The Dobu appear to have been as blind to the possibility of true cooperation as
they were to the truths of modern science. While innumerable things would have been
worthy of their attention—the Dobu were, after all, extremely poor and mightily
ignorant—their main preoccupation seems to have been malicious sorcery. Every
Dobuan’s primary interest was to cast spells on other members of the tribe in an effort to
sicken or kill them and in the hopes of magically appropriating their crops. The relevant
spells were generally passed down from a maternal uncle and became every Dobuan’s
most important possessions. Needless to say, those who received no such inheritance
were believed to be at a terrible disadvantage. Spells could be purchased, however, and
the economic life of the Dobu was almost entirely devoted to trade in these fantastical
commodities.
Certain members of the tribe were understood to have a monopoly over both the
causes and cures for specific illnesses. Such people were greatly feared and ceaselessly
propitiated. In fact, the conscious application of magic was believed necessary for the
most mundane tasks. Even the work of gravity had to be supplemented by relentless
wizardry: absent the right spell, a man’s vegetables were expected to rise out of the soil
and vanish under their own power.
To make matters worse, the Dobu imagined that good fortune conformed to a
rigid law of thermodynamics: if one man succeeded in growing more yams than his
neighbor, his surplus crop must have been pilfered through sorcery. As all Dobu
continuously endeavored to steal one another’s crops by such methods, the lucky
gardener is likely to have viewed his surplus in precisely these terms. A good harvest,
therefore, was tantamount to “a confession of theft.”
This strange marriage of covetousness and magical thinking created a perfect
obsession with secrecy in Dobu society. Whatever possibility of love and real friendship
remained seems to have been fully extinguished by a final doctrine: the power of sorcery
was believed to grow in proportion to one’s intimacy with the intended victim. This

belief gave every Dobuan an incandescent mistrust of all others, which burned brightest
on those closest. Therefore, if a man fell seriously ill or died, his misfortune was
immediately blamed on his wife, and vice versa. The picture is of a society completely in
thrall to antisocial delusions.
Did the Dobu love their friends and family as much as we love ours? Many
people seem to think that the answer to such a question must, in principle, be “yes,” or
that the question itself is vacuous. I think it is clear, however, that the question is well
posed and easily answered. The answer is “no.” Being fellow Homo sapiens, we must
presume that the Dobu islanders had brains sufficiently similar to our own to invite
comparison. Is there any doubt that the selfishness and general malevolence of the Dobu
would have been expressed at the level of their brains? Only if you think the brain does
nothing more than filter oxygen and glucose out of the blood. Once we more fully
understand the neurophysiology of states like love, compassion, and trust, it will be
possible to spell out the differences between ourselves and people like the Dobu in
greater detail. But we need not await any breakthroughs in neuroscience to bring the
general principle in view: just as it is possible for individuals and groups to be wrong
about how best to maintain their physical health, it is possible for them to be wrong about
how to maximize their personal and social well-being.
I believe that we will increasingly understand good and evil, right and wrong, in
scientific terms, because moral concerns translate into facts about how our thoughts and
behaviors affect the well-being of conscious creatures like ourselves. If there are facts to
be known about the well-being of such creatures—and there are—then there must be
right and wrong answers to moral questions. Students of philosophy will notice that this
commits me to some form of moral realism (viz. moral claims can really be true or false)
and some form of consequentialism (viz. the rightness of an act depends on how it
impacts the well-being of conscious creatures). While moral realism and
consequentialism have both come under pressure in philosophical circles, they have the
virtue of corresponding to many of our intuitions about how the world works.12
Here is my (consequentialist) starting point: all questions of value (right and
wrong, good and evil, etc.) depend upon the possibility of experiencing such value.
Without potential consequences at the level of experience—happiness, suffering, joy,
despair, etc.—all talk of value is empty. Therefore, to say that an act is morally
necessary, or evil, or blameless, is to make (tacit) claims about its consequences in the
lives of conscious creatures (whether actual or potential). I am unaware of any interesting
exception to this rule. Needless to say, if one is worried about pleasing God or His
angels, this assumes that such invisible entities are conscious (in some sense) and
cognizant of human behavior. It also generally assumes that it is possible to suffer their
wrath or enjoy their approval, either in this world or the world to come. Even within
religion, therefore, consequences and conscious states remain the foundation of all
values.
Consider the thinking of a Muslim suicide bomber who decides to obliterate
himself along with a crowd of infidels: this would appear to be a perfect repudiation of
the consequentialist attitude. And yet, when we look at the rationale for seeking
martyrdom within Islam, we see that the consequences of such actions, both real and
imagined, are entirely the point. Aspiring martyrs expect to please God and experience an
eternity of happiness after death. If one fully accepts the metaphysical presuppositions of

traditional Islam, martyrdom must be viewed as the ultimate attempt at career
advancement. The martyr is also the greatest of altruists: for not only does he secure a
place for himself in Paradise, he wins admittance for seventy of his closest relatives as
well. Aspiring martyrs also believe that they are furthering God’s work here on earth,
with desirable consequences for the living. We know quite a lot about how such people
think—indeed, they advertise their views and intentions ceaselessly—and it has
everything to do with their belief that God has told them, in the Qur’an and the hadith,
precisely what the consequences of certain thoughts and actions will be. Of course, it
seems profoundly unlikely that our universe has been designed to reward individual
primates for killing one another while believing in the divine origin of a specific book.
The fact that would-be martyrs are almost surely wrong about the consequences of their
behavior is precisely what renders it such an astounding and immoral misuse of human
life.
Because most religions conceive of morality as a matter of being obedient to the
word of God (generally for the sake of receiving a supernatural reward), their precepts
often have nothing to do with maximizing well-being in this world. Religious believers
can, therefore, assert the immorality of contraception, masturbation, homosexuality, etc.,
without ever feeling obliged to argue that these practices actually cause suffering. They
can also pursue aims that are flagrantly immoral, in that they needlessly perpetuate
human misery, while believing that these actions are morally obligatory. This pious
uncoupling of moral concern from the reality of human and animal suffering has caused
tremendous harm.

Clearly, there are mental states and capacities that contribute to our general wellbeing (happiness, compassion, kindness, etc.) as well as mental states and incapacities
that diminish it (cruelty, hatred, terror, etc.). It is, therefore, meaningful to ask whether a
specific action or way of thinking will affect a person’s well-being and/or the well-being
of others, and there is much that we might eventually learn about the biology of such
effects. Where a person finds himself on this continuum of possible states will be
determined by many factors—genetic, environmental, social, cognitive, political,
economic, etc.—and while our understanding of such influences may never be complete,
their effects are realized at the level of the human brain. Our growing understanding of
the brain, therefore, will have increasing relevance for any claims we make about how
thoughts and actions affect the welfare of human beings.
Notice that I do not mention morality in the preceding paragraph, and perhaps I
need not. I began this book by arguing that, despite a century of timidity on the part of
scientists and philosophers, morality can be linked directly to facts about the happiness
and suffering of conscious creatures. However, it is interesting to consider what would
happen if we simply ignored this step and merely spoke about “well-being.” What would
our world be like if we ceased to worry about “right” and “wrong,” or “good” and “evil,”
and simply acted so as to maximize well-being, our own and that of others? Would we
lose anything important? And if important, wouldn’t it be, by definition, a matter of
someone’s well-being?

Can We Ever Be “Right” About Right and Wrong?

The philosopher and neuroscientist Joshua Greene has done some of the most
influential neuroimaging research on morality.13 While Greene wants to understand the
brain processes that govern our moral lives, he believes that we should be skeptical of
moral realism on metaphysical grounds. For Greene, the question is not, “How can you
know for sure that your moral beliefs are true?” but rather, “How could it be that
anyone’s moral beliefs are true?” In other words, what is it about the world that could
make a moral claim true or false? 14 He appears to believe that the answer to this question
is “nothing.”
However, it seems to me that this question is easily answered. Moral view A is
truer than moral view B, if A entails a more accurate understanding of the connections
between human thoughts/intentions/behavior and human well-being. Does forcing
women and girls to wear burqas make a net positive contribution to human well-being?
Does it produce happier boys and girls? Does it produce more compassionate men or
more contented women? Does it make for better relationships between men and women,
between boys and their mothers, or between girls and their fathers? I would bet my life
that the answer to each of these questions is “no.” So, I think, would many scientists. And
yet, as we have seen, most scientists have been trained to think that such judgments are
mere expressions of cultural bias—and, thus, unscientific in principle. Very few of us
seem willing to admit that such simple, moral truths increasingly fall within the scope of
our scientific worldview. Greene articulates the prevailing skepticism quite well:
Moral judgment is, for the most part, driven not by moral reasoning, but by moral
intuitions of an emotional nature. Our capacity for moral judgment is a complex
evolutionary adaptation to an intensely social life. We are, in fact, so well adapted to
making moral judgments that our making them is, from our point of view, rather easy, a
part of “common sense.” And like many of our common sense abilities, our ability to
make moral judgments feels to us like a perceptual ability, an ability, in this case, to
discern immediately and reliably mind-independent moral facts. As a result, we are
naturally inclined toward a mistaken belief in moral realism. The psychological
tendencies that encourage this false belief serve an important biological purpose, and that
explains why we should find moral realism so attractive even though it is false. Moral
realism is, once again, a mistake we were born to make.15

Greene alleges that moral realism assumes that “there is sufficient uniformity in
people’s underlying moral outlooks to warrant speaking as if there is a fact of the matter
about what’s ‘right’ or ‘wrong,’ ‘just’ or ‘unjust.’” 16 But do we really need to assume
such uniformity for there to be right answers to moral questions? Is physical or biological
realism predicated on “sufficient uniformity in people’s underlying [physical or
biological] outlooks”? Taking humanity as a whole, I am quite certain that there is a
greater consensus that cruelty is wrong (a common moral precept) than the passage of
time varies with velocity (special relativity) or that humans and lobsters share a common
ancestor (evolution). Should we doubt whether there is a “fact of the matter” with respect

to these physical and biological truth claims? Does the general ignorance about the
special theory of relativity or the pervasive disinclination of Americans to accept the
scientific consensus on evolution put our scientific worldview, even slightly, in question?
17

Greene notes that it is often difficult to get people to agree about moral truth, or to
even get an individual to agree with himself in different contexts. These tensions lead
him to the following conclusion:
[M]oral theorizing fails because our intuitions do not reflect a coherent set of
moral truths and were not designed by natural selection or anything else to behave as if
they were … If you want to make sense of your moral sense, turn to biology, psychology,
and sociology—not normative ethics.18

This objection to moral realism may seem reasonable, until one notices that it can
be applied, with the same leveling effect, to any domain of human knowledge. For
instance, it is just as true to say that our logical, mathematical, and physical intuitions
have not been designed by natural selection to track the Truth.19 Does this mean that we
must cease to be realists with respect to physical reality? We need not look far in science
to find ideas and opinions that defy easy synthesis. There are many scientific frameworks
(and levels of description) that resist integration and which divide our discourse into
areas of specialization, even pitting Nobel laureates in the same discipline against one
another. Does this mean that we can never hope to understand what is really going on in
the world? No. It means the conversation must continue. 20
Total uniformity in the moral sphere—either interpersonally or intrapersonally—
may be hopeless. So what? This is precisely the lack of closure we face in all areas of
human knowledge. Full consensus as a scientific goal only exists in the limit, at a
hypothetical end of inquiry. Why not tolerate the same open-endedness in our thinking
about human well-being?
Again, this does not mean that all opinions about morality are justified. To the
contrary—the moment we accept that there are right and wrong answers to questions of
human well-being, we must admit that many people are simply wrong about morality.
The eunuchs who tended the royal family in China’s Forbidden City, dynasty after
dynasty, seem to have felt generally well compensated for their lives of arrested
development and isolation by the influence they achieved at court—as well as by the
knowledge that their genitalia, which had been preserved in jars all the while, would be
buried with them after their deaths, ensuring them rebirth as human beings. When
confronted with such an exotic point of view, a moral realist would like to say we are
witnessing more than a mere difference of opinion: we are in the presence of moral error.
It seems to me that we can be reasonably confident that it is bad for parents to sell their
sons into the service of a government that intends to cut off their genitalia “using only hot
chili sauce as a local anesthetic.”21 This would mean that Sun Yaoting, the emperor’s last
eunuch, who died in 1996 at the age of ninety-four, was wrong to harbor, as his greatest
regret, “the fall of the imperial system he had aspired to serve.” Most scientists seem to
believe that no matter how maladaptive or masochistic a person’s moral commitments, it
is impossible to say that he is ever mistaken about what constitutes a good life.

Moral Paradox
One of the problems with consequentialism in practice is that we cannot always
determine whether the effects of an action will be bad or good. In fact, it can be
surprisingly difficult to decide this even in retrospect. Dennett has dubbed this problem
“the Three Mile Island Effect.” 22 Was the meltdown at Three Mile Island a bad outcome
or a good one? At first glance, it surely seems bad, but it might have also put us on a path
toward greater nuclear safety, thereby saving many lives. Or it might have caused us to
grow dependent on more polluting technologies, contributing to higher rates of cancer
and to global climate change. Or it might have produced a multitude of effects, some
mutually reinforcing, and some mutually canceling. If we cannot determine the net result
of even such a well-analyzed event, how can we judge the likely consequences of the
countless decisions we must make throughout our lives?
One difficulty we face in determining the moral valence of an event is that it often
seems impossible to determine whose well-being should most concern us. People have
competing interests, mutually incompatible notions of happiness, and there are many
well-known paradoxes that leap into our path the moment we begin thinking about the
welfare of whole populations. As we are about to see, population ethics is a notorious
engine of paradox, and no one, to my knowledge, has come up with a way of assessing
collective well-being that conserves all of our intuitions. As the philosopher Patricia
Churchland puts it, “no one has the slightest idea how to compare the mild headache of
five million against the broken legs of two, or the needs of one’s own two children
against the needs of a hundred unrelated brain-damaged children in Serbia.”23
Such puzzles may seem of mere academic interest, until we realize that
population ethics governs the most important decisions societies ever make. What are our
moral responsibilities in times of war, when diseases spread, when millions suffer
famine, or when global resources are scarce? These are moments in which we have to
assess changes in collective welfare in ways that purport to be rational and ethical. Just
how motivated should we be to act when 250,000 people die in an earthquake on the
island of Haiti? Whether we know it or not, intuitions about the welfare of whole
populations determine our thinking on these matters.
Except, that is, when we simply ignore population ethics—as, it seems, we are
psychologically disposed to do. The work of the psychologist Paul Slovic and colleagues
has uncovered some rather startling limitations on our capacity for moral reasoning when
thinking about large groups of people—or, indeed, about groups larger than one. 24 As
Slovic observes, when human life is threatened, it seems both rational and moral for our
concern to increase with the number of lives at stake. And if we think that losing many
lives might have some additional negative consequences (like the collapse of
civilization), the curve of our concern should grow steeper still. But this is not how we
characteristically respond to the suffering of other human beings.
Slovic’s experimental work suggests that we intuitively care most about a single,
identifiable human life, less about two, and we grow more callous as the body count rises.
Slovic believes that this “psychic numbing” explains the widely lamented fact that we are
generally more distressed by the suffering of single child (or even a single animal) than
by a proper genocide. What Slovic has termed “genocide neglect”—our reliable failure to
respond, both practically and emotionally, to the most horrific instances of unnecessary

human suffering—represents one of the more perplexing and consequential failures of
our moral intuition.
Slovic found that when given a chance to donate money in support of needy
children, subjects give most generously and feel the greatest empathy when told only
about a single child’s suffering. When presented with two needy cases, their compassion
wanes. And this diabolical trend continues: the greater the need, the less people are
emotionally affected and the less they are inclined to give.
Of course, charities have long understood that putting a face on the data will
connect their constituents to the reality of human suffering and increase donations.
Slovic’s work has confirmed this suspicion, which is now known as the “identifiable
victim effect.”25 Amazingly, however, adding information about the scope of a problem
to these personal appeals proves to be counterproductive. Slovic has shown that setting
the story of a single needy person in the context of wider human need reliably diminishes
altruism.
The fact that people seem to be reliably less concerned when faced with an
increase in human suffering represents an obvious violation of moral norms. The
important point, however, is that we immediately recognize how indefensible this
allocation of emotional and material resources is once it is brought to our attention. What
makes these experimental findings so striking is that they are patently inconsistent: if you
care about what happens to one little girl, and you care about what happens to her
brother, you must, at the very least, care as much about their combined fate. Your
concern should be (in some sense) cumulative. 26 When your violation of this principle is
revealed, you will feel that you have committed a moral error. This explains why results
of this kind can only be obtained between subjects (where one group is asked to donate to
help one child and another group is asked to support two); we can be sure that if we
presented both questions to each participant in the study, the effect would disappear
(unless subjects could be prevented from noticing when they were violating the norms of
moral reasoning).
Clearly, one of the great tasks of civilization is to create cultural mechanisms that
protect us from the moment-to-moment failures of our ethical intuitions. We must build
our better selves into our laws, tax codes, and institutions. Knowing that we are generally
incapable of valuing two children more than either child alone, we must build a structure
that reflects and enforces our deeper understanding of human well-being. This is where a
science of morality could be indispensable to us: the more we understand the causes and
constituents of human fulfillment, and the more we know about the experiences of our
fellow human beings, the more we will be able to make intelligent decisions about which
social policies to adopt.
For instance, there are an estimated 90,000 people living on the streets of Los
Angeles. Why are they homeless? How many of these people are mentally ill? How many
are addicted to drugs or alcohol? How many have simply fallen through the cracks in our
economy? Such questions have answers. And each of these problems admits of a range of
responses, as well as false solutions and neglect. Are there policies we could adopt that
would make it easy for every person in the United States to help alleviate the problem of
homelessness in their own communities? Is there some brilliant idea that no one has
thought of that would make people want to alleviate the problem of homelessness more
than they want to watch television or play video games? Would it be possible to design a

video game that could help solve the problem of homelessness in the real world? 27
Again, such questions open onto a world of facts, whether or not we can bring the
relevant facts into view.
Clearly, morality is shaped by cultural norms to a great degree, and it can be
difficult to do what one believes to be right on one’s own. A friend’s four-year-old
daughter recently observed the role that social support plays in making moral decisions:
“It’s so sad to eat baby lambies,” she said as she gnawed greedily on a lamb chop.
“So, why don’t you stop eating them?” her father asked.
“Why would they kill such a soft animal? Why wouldn’t they kill some other kind
of animal?”
“Because,” her father said, “people like to eat the meat. Like you are, right now.”
His daughter reflected for a moment—still chewing her lamb—and then replied:
“It’s not good. But I can’t stop eating them if they keeping killing them.”
And the practical difficulties for consequentialism do not end here. When thinking
about maximizing the well-being of a population, are we thinking in terms of total or
average well-being? The philosopher Derek Parfit has shown that both bases of
calculation lead to troubling paradoxes.28 If we are concerned only about total welfare,
we should prefer a world with hundreds of billions of people whose lives are just barely
worth living to a world in which 7 billion of us live in perfect ecstasy. This is the result of
Parfit’s famous argument known as “The Repugnant Conclusion.” 29 If, on the other
hand, we are concerned about the average welfare of a population, we should prefer a
world containing a single, happy inhabitant to a world of billions who are only slightly
less happy; it would even suggest that we might want to painlessly kill many of the least
happy people currently alive, thereby increasing the average of human well-being.
Privileging average welfare would also lead us to prefer a world in which billions live
under the misery of constant torture to a world in which only one person is tortured everso-slightly more. It could also render the morality of an action dependent upon the
experience of unaffected people. As Parfit points out, if we care about the average over
time, we might deem it morally wrong to have a child today whose life, while eminently
worth living, would not compare favorably to the lives of the ancient Egyptians. Parfit
has even devised scenarios in which everyone alive could have a lower quality of life
than they otherwise would and yet the average quality of life will have increased. 30
Clearly, this proves that we cannot rely on a simple summation or averaging of welfare as
our only metric. And yet, at the extremes, we can see that human welfare must aggregate
in some way: it really is better for all of us to be deeply fulfilled than it is for everyone to
live in absolute agony.
Placing only consequences in our moral balance also leads to indelicate questions.
For instance, do we have a moral obligation to come to the aid of wealthy, healthy, and
intelligent hostages before poor, sickly, and slow-witted ones? After all, the former are
more likely to make a positive contribution to society upon their release. And what about
remaining partial to one’s friends and family? Is it wrong for me to save the life of my
only child if, in the process, I neglect to save a stranger’s brood of eight? Wrestling with
such questions has convinced many people that morality does not obey the simple laws of
arithmetic.
However, such puzzles merely suggest that certain moral questions could be
difficult or impossible to answer in practice; they do not suggest that morality depends

upon something other than the consequences of our actions and intentions. This is a
frequent source of confusion: consequentialism is less a method of answering moral
questions than it is a claim about the status of moral truth. Our assessment of
consequences in the moral domain must proceed as it does in all others: under the shadow
of uncertainty, guided by theory, data, and honest conversation. The fact that it may often
be difficult, or even impossible, to know what the consequences of our thoughts and
actions will be does not mean that there is some other basis for human values that is
worth worrying about.
Such difficulties notwithstanding, it seems to me quite possible that we will one
day resolve moral questions that are often thought to be unanswerable. For instance, we
might agree that having a preference for one’s intimates is better (in that it increases
general welfare) than being fully disinterested as to how consequences accrue. Which is
to say that there may be some forms of love and happiness that are best served by each of
us being specially connected to a subset of humanity. This certainly appears to be
descriptively true of us at present. Communal experiments that ignore parents’ special
attachment to their own children, for instance, do not seem to work very well. The Israeli
kibbutzim learned this the hard way: after discovering that raising children communally
made both parents and children less happy, they reinstated the nuclear family. 31 Most
people may be happier in a world in which a natural bias toward one’s own children is
conserved—presumably in the context of laws and social norms that disregard this bias.
When I take my daughter to the hospital, I am naturally more concerned about her than I
am about the other children in the lobby. I do not, however, expect the hospital staff to
share my bias. In fact, given time to reflect about it, I realize that I would not want them
to. How could such a denial of my self-interest actually be in the service of my selfinterest? Well, first, there are many more ways for a system to be biased against me than
in my favor, and I know that I will benefit from a fair system far more than I will from
one that can be easily corrupted. I also happen to care about other people, and this
experience of empathy deeply matters to me. I feel better as a person valuing fairness,
and I want my daughter to become a person who shares this value. And how would I feel
if the physician attending my daughter actually shared my bias for her and viewed her as
far more important than the other patients under his care? Frankly, it would give me the
creeps.
But perhaps there are two possible worlds that maximize the well-being of their
inhabitants to precisely the same degree: in world X everyone is focused on the welfare
of all others without bias, while in world Y everyone shows some degree of moral
preference for their friends and family. Perhaps these worlds are equally good, in that
their inhabitants enjoy precisely the same level of well-being. These could be thought of
as two peaks on the moral landscape. Perhaps there are others. Does this pose a threat to
moral realism or to consequentialism? No, because there would still be right and wrong
ways to move from our current position on the moral landscape toward one peak or the
other, and movement would still be a matter of increasing well-being in the end.
To bring the discussion back to the especially low-hanging fruit of conservative
Islam: there is absolutely no reason to think that demonizing homosexuals, stoning
adulterers, veiling women, soliciting the murder of artists and intellectuals, and
celebrating the exploits of suicide bombers will move humanity toward a peak on the
moral landscape. This is, I think, as objective a claim as we ever make in science.

Consider the Danish cartoon controversy: an eruption of religious insanity that
still flows to this day. Kurt Westergaard, the cartoonist who drew what was arguably the
most inflammatory of these utterly benign cartoons has lived in hiding since pious
Muslims first began calling for his murder in 2006. A few weeks ago—more than three
years after the controversy first began—a Somali man broke into Westergaard’s home
with an axe. Only the construction of a specially designed “safe room” allowed
Westergaard to escape being slaughtered for the glory of God (his five-year-old
granddaughter also witnessed the attack). Westergaard now lives with continuous police
protection—as do the other eighty-seven men in Denmark who have the misfortune of
being named “Kurt Westergaard.”32
The peculiar concerns of Islam have created communities in almost every society
on earth that grow so unhinged in the face of criticism that they will reliably riot, burn
embassies, and seek to kill peaceful people, over cartoons. This is something they will
not do, incidentally, in protest over the continuous atrocities committed against them by
their fellow Muslims. The reasons why such a terrifying inversion of priorities does not
tend to maximize human happiness are susceptible to many levels of analysis—ranging
from biochemistry to economics. But do we need further information in this case? It
seems to me that we already know enough about the human condition to know that
killing cartoonists for blasphemy does not lead anywhere worth going on the moral
landscape.
There are other results in psychology and behavioral economics that make it
difficult to assess changes in human well-being. For instance, people tend to consider
losses to be far more significant than forsaken gains, even when the net result is the same.
For instance, when presented with a wager where they stand a 50 percent chance of
losing $100, most people will consider anything less than a potential gain of $200 to be
unattractive. This bias relates to what has come to be known as “the endowment effect”:
people demand more money in exchange for an object that has been given to them than
they would spend to acquire the object in the first place. In psychologist Daniel
Kahneman’s words, “a good is worth more when it is considered as something that could
be lost or given up than when it is evaluated as a potential gain.”33 This aversion to loss
causes human beings to generally err on the side of maintaining the status quo. It is also
an important impediment to conflict resolution through negotiation: for if each party
values his opponent’s concessions as gains and his own as losses, each is bound to
perceive his sacrifice as being greater. 34
Loss aversion has been studied with functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). If this bias were the result of negative feelings associated with potential loss, we
would expect brain regions known to govern negative emotion to be involved. However,
researchers have not found increased activity in any areas of the brain as losses increase.
Instead, those regions that represent gains show decreasing activity as the size of the
potential losses increases. In fact, these brain structures themselves exhibit a pattern of
“neural loss aversion”: their activity decreases at a steeper rate in the face of potential
losses than they increase for potential gains.35
There are clearly cases in which such biases seem to produce moral illusions—
where a person’s view of right and wrong will depend on whether an outcome is
described in terms of gains or losses. Some of these illusions might not be susceptible to
full correction. As with many perceptual illusions, it may be impossible to “see” two

circumstances as morally equivalent, even while “knowing” that they are. In such cases,
it may be ethical to ignore how things seem. Or it may be that the path we take to arrive
at identical outcomes really does matter to us—and, therefore, that losses and gains will
remain incommensurable.
Imagine, for instance, that you are empaneled as the member of a jury in a civil
trial and asked to determine how much a hospital should pay in damages to the parents of
children who received substandard care in their facility. There are two scenarios to
consider:
Couple A learned that their three-year-old daughter was inadvertently given a
neurotoxin by the hospital staff. Before being admitted, their daughter was a musical
prodigy with an IQ of 195. She has since lost all her intellectual gifts. She can no longer
play music with any facility and her IQ is now a perfectly average 100.
Couple B learned that the hospital neglected to give their three-year-old daughter,
who has an IQ of 100, a perfectly safe and inexpensive genetic enhancement that would
have given her remarkable musical talent and nearly doubled her IQ. Their daughter’s
intelligence remains average, and she lacks any noticeable musical gifts. The critical
period for giving this enhancement has passed.
Obviously the end result under either scenario is the same. But what if the mental
suffering associated with loss is simply bound to be greater than that associated with
forsaken gains? If so, it may be appropriate to take this difference into account, even
when we cannot give a rational explanation of why it is worse to lose something than not
to gain it. This is another source of difficulty in the moral domain: unlike dilemmas in
behavioral economics, it is often difficult to establish the criteria by which two outcomes
can be judged equivalent.36 There is probably another principle at work in this example,
however: people tend to view sins of commission more harshly than sins of omission. It
is not clear how we should account for this bias either. But, once again, to say that there
are right answers to questions of how to maximize human well-being is not to say that we
will always be in a position to answer such questions. There will be peaks and valleys on
the moral landscape, and movement between them is clearly possible, whether or not we
always know which way is up.
There are many other features of our subjectivity that have implications for
morality. For instance, people tend to evaluate an experience based on its peak intensity
(whether positive or negative) and the quality of its final moments. In psychology, this is
known as the “peak/end rule.” Testing this rule in a clinical environment, one group
found that patients undergoing colonoscopies (in the days when this procedure was done
without anesthetic) could have their perception of suffering markedly reduced, and their
likelihood of returning for a follow-up exam increased, if their physician needlessly
prolonged the procedure at its lowest level of discomfort by leaving the colonoscope
inserted for a few extra minutes.37 The same principle seems to hold for aversive sounds
38
and for exposure to cold. 39 Such findings suggest that, under certain conditions, it is
compassionate to prolong a person’s pain unnecessarily so as to reduce his memory of
suffering later on. Indeed, it might be unethical to do otherwise. Needless to say, this is a
profoundly counterintuitive result. But this is precisely what is so important about
science: it allows us to investigate the world, and our place within it, in ways that get
behind first appearances. Why shouldn’t we do this with morality and human values
generally?

Fairness and Hierarchy

It is widely believed that focusing on the consequences of a person’s actions is
merely one of several approaches to ethics—one that is beset by paradox and often
impossible to implement. Imagined alternatives are either highly rational, as in the work
of a modern philosopher like John Rawls,40 or decidedly otherwise, as we see in the
disparate and often contradictory precepts that issue from the world’s major religions.
My reasons for dismissing revealed religion as a source of moral guidance have
been spelled out elsewhere,41 so I will not ride this hobbyhorse here, apart from pointing
out the obvious: (1) there are many revealed religions available to us, and they offer
mutually incompatible doctrines; (2) the scriptures of many religions, including the most
well subscribed (i.e., Christianity and Islam), countenance patently unethical practices
like slavery; (3) the faculty we use to validate religious precepts, judging the Golden Rule
to be wise and the murder of apostates to be foolish, is something we bring to scripture; it
does not, therefore, come from scripture; (4) the reasons for believing that any of the
world’s religions were “revealed” to our ancestors (rather than merely invented by men
and women who did not have the benefit of a twenty-first-century education) are either
risible or nonexistent—and the idea that each of these mutually contradictory doctrines is
inerrant remains a logical impossibility. Here we can take refuge in Bertrand Russell’s
famous remark that even if we could be certain that one of the world’s religions was
perfectly true, given the sheer number of conflicting faiths on offer, every believer should
expect damnation purely as a matter of probability.
Among the rational challenges to consequentialism, the “contractualism” of John
Rawls has been the most influential in recent decades. In his book A Theory of Justice
Rawls offered an approach to building a fair society that he considered an alternative to
the aim of maximizing human welfare. 42 His primary method, for which this work is
duly famous, was to ask how reasonable people would structure a society, guided by their
self-interest, if they couldn’t know what sort of person they would be in it. Rawls called
this novel starting point “the original position,” from which each person must judge the
fairness of every law and social arrangement from behind a “veil of ignorance.” In other
words, we can design any society we like as long as we do not presume to know, in
advance, whether we will be black or white, male or female, young or old, healthy or
sick, of high or low intelligence, beautiful or ugly, etc.
As a method for judging questions of fairness, this thought experiment is
undeniably brilliant. But is it really an alternative to thinking about the actual
consequences of our behavior? How would we feel if, after structuring our ideal society
from behind a veil of ignorance, we were told by an omniscient being that we had made a
few choices that, though eminently fair, would lead to the unnecessary misery of
millions, while parameters that were ever-so-slightly less fair would entail no such
suffering? Could we be indifferent to this information? The moment we conceive of
justice as being fully separable from human well-being, we are faced with the prospect of
there being morally “right” actions and social systems that are, on balance, detrimental to
the welfare of everyone affected by them. To simply bite the bullet on this point, as
Rawls seemed to do, saying “there is no reason to think that just institutions will
maximize the good” 43 seems a mere embrace of moral and philosophical defeat.

Some people worry that a commitment to maximizing a society’s welfare could
lead us to sacrifice the rights and liberties of the few wherever these losses would be
offset by the greater gains of the many. Why not have a society in which a few slaves are
continually worked to death for the pleasure of the rest? The worry is that a focus on
collective welfare does not seem to respect people as ends in themselves. And whose
welfare should we care about? The pleasure that a racist takes in abusing some minority
group, for instance, seems on all fours with the pleasure a saint takes in risking his life to
help a stranger. If there are more racists than saints, it seems the racists will win, and we
will be obliged to build a society that maximizes the pleasure of unjust men.
But such concerns clearly rest on an incomplete picture of human well-being. To
the degree that treating people as ends in themselves is a good way to safeguard human
well-being, it is precisely what we should do. Fairness is not merely an abstract
principle—it is a felt experience. We all know this from the inside, of course, but
neuroimaging has also shown that fairness drives reward-related activity in the brain,
while accepting unfair proposals requires the regulation of negative emotion.44 Taking
others’ interests into account, making impartial decisions (and knowing that others will
make them), rendering help to the needy—these are experiences that contribute to our
psychological and social well-being. It seems perfectly reasonable, within a
consequentialist framework, for each of us to submit to a system of justice in which our
immediate, selfish interests will often be superseded by considerations of fairness. It is
only reasonable, however, on the assumption that everyone will tend to be better off
under such a system. As, it seems, they will. 45
While each individual’s search for happiness may not be compatible in every
instance with our efforts to build a just society, we should not lose sight of the fact that
societies do not suffer; people do. The only thing wrong with injustice is that it is, on
some level, actually or potentially bad for people.46 Injustice makes its victims
demonstrably less happy, and it could be easily argued that it tends to make its
perpetrators less happy than they would be if they cared about the well-being of others.
Injustice also destroys trust, making it difficult for strangers to cooperate. Of course, here
we are talking about the nature of conscious experience, and so we are, of necessity,
talking about processes at work in the brains of human beings. The neuroscience of
morality and social emotions is only just beginning, but there seems no question that it
will one day deliver morally relevant insights regarding the material causes of our
happiness and suffering. While there may be some surprises in store for us down this
path, there is every reason to expect that kindness, compassion, fairness, and other
classically “good” traits will be vindicated neuroscientifically—which is to say that we
will only discover further reasons to believe that they are good for us, in that they
generally enhance our lives.
We have already begun to see that morality, like rationality, implies the existence
of certain norms—that is, it does not merely describe how we tend to think and behave; it
tells us how we should think and behave. One norm that morality and rationality share is
the interchangeability of perspective. 47 The solution to a problem should not depend on
whether you are the husband or the wife, the employer or employee, the creditor or
debtor, etc. This is why one cannot argue for the rightness of one’s views on the basis of
mere preference. In the moral sphere, this requirement lies at the core of what we mean
by “fairness.” It also reveals why it is generally not a good thing to have a different

ethical code for friends and strangers.
We have all met people who behave quite differently in business than in their
personal lives. While they would never lie to their friends, they might lie without a qualm
to their clients or customers. Why is this a moral failing? At the very least, it is
vulnerable to what could be called the principle of the unpleasant surprise. Consider
what happens to such a person when he discovers that one of his customers is actually a
friend: “Oh, why didn’t you say you were Jennifer’s sister! Uh … Okay, don’t buy that
model; this one is a much better deal.” Such moments expose a rift in a person’s ethics
that is always unflattering. People with two ethical codes are perpetually susceptible to
embarrassments of this kind. They are also less trustworthy—and trust is a measure of
how much a person can be relied upon to safeguard other people’s well-being. Even if
you happen to be a close friend of such a person—that is, on the right side of his ethics—
you can’t trust him to interact with others you may care about (“I didn’t know she was
your daughter. Sorry about that”).
Or consider the position of a Nazi living under the Third Reich, having fully
committed himself to exterminating the world’s Jews, only to learn, as many did, that he
was Jewish himself. Unless some compelling argument for the moral necessity of his
suicide were forthcoming, we can imagine that it would be difficult for our protagonist to
square his Nazi ethics with his actual identity. Clearly, his sense of right and wrong was
predicated on a false belief about his own genealogy. A genuine ethics should not be
vulnerable to such unpleasant surprises. This seems another way of arriving at Rawls’s
“original position.” That which is right cannot be dependent upon one’s being a member
of a certain tribe—if for no other reason than one can be mistaken about the fact of one’s
membership.
Kant’s “categorical imperative,” perhaps the most famous prescription in all of
moral philosophy, captures some of these same concerns:
Hence there is only one categorical imperative and it is this: “Act only according
to that maxim whereby you can at the same time will that it should become a universal
law.” 48

While Kant believed that this criterion of universal applicability was the product
of pure reason, it appeals to us because it relies on basic intuitions about fairness and
justification.49 One cannot claim to be “right” about anything—whether as a matter of
reason or a matter of ethics—unless one’s views can be generalized to others. 50

Is Being Good Just Too Difficult?

Most of us spend some time over the course of our lives deciding how (or
whether) to respond to the fact that other people on earth needlessly starve to death. Most
of us also spend some time deciding which delightful foods we want to consume at home
and in our favorite restaurants. Which of these projects absorbs more of your time and
material resources on a yearly basis? If you are like most people living in the developed
world, such a comparison will not recommend you for sainthood. Can the disparity

between our commitment to fulfilling our selfish desires and our commitment to
alleviating the unnecessary misery and death of millions be morally justified? Of course
not. These failures of ethical consistency are often considered a strike against
consequentialism. They shouldn’t be. Who ever said that being truly good, or even
ethically consistent, must be easy?
I have no doubt that I am less good than I could be. Which is to say, I am not
living in a way that truly maximizes the well-being of others. I am nearly as sure,
however, that I am also failing to live in a way that maximizes my own well-being. This
is one of the paradoxes of human psychology: we often fail to do what we ostensibly
want to do and what is most in our self-interest to do. We often fail to do what we most
want to do—or, at the very least, we fail to do what, at the end of the day (or year, or
lifetime) we will most wish we had done.
Just think of the heroic struggles many people must endure simply to quit
smoking or lose weight. The right course of action is generally obvious: if you are
smoking two packs of cigarettes a day or are fifty pounds overweight, you are surely not
maximizing your well-being. Perhaps this isn’t so clear to you now, but imagine: if you
could successfully stop smoking or lose weight, what are the chances that you would
regret this decision a year hence? Probably zero. And yet, if you are like most people,
you will find it extraordinarily difficult to make the simple behavioral changes required
to get what you want. 51
Most of us are in this predicament in moral terms. I know that helping people who
are starving is far more important than most of what I do. I also have no doubt that doing
what is most important would give me more pleasure and emotional satisfaction than I
get from most of what I do by way of seeking pleasure and emotional satisfaction. But
this knowledge does not change me. I still want to do what I do for pleasure more than I
want to help the starving. I strongly believe that I would be happier if I wanted to help the
starving more—and I have no doubt that they would be happier if I spent more time and
money helping them—but these beliefs are not sufficient to change me. I know that I
would be happier and the world would be a (marginally) better place if I were different in
these respects. I am, therefore, virtually certain that I am neither as moral, nor as happy,
as I could be.52 I know all of these things, and I want to maximize my happiness, but I am
generally not moved to do what I believe will make me happier than I now am.
At bottom, these are claims both about the architecture of my mind and about the
social architecture of our world. It is quite clear to me that given the current state of my
mind—that is, given how my actions and uses of attention affect my life—I would be
happier if I were less selfish. This means I would be more wisely and effectively selfish if
I were less selfish. This is not a paradox.
What if I could change the architecture of my mind? On some level, this has
always been possible, as everything we devote attention to, every discipline we adopt, or
piece of knowledge we acquire changes our minds. Each of us also now has access to a
swelling armamentarium of drugs that regulate mood, attention, and wakefulness. And
the possibility of far more sweeping (as well as more precise) changes to our mental
capacities may be within reach. Would it be good to make changes to our minds that
affect our sense of right and wrong? And would our ability to alter our moral sense
undercut the case I am making for moral realism? What if, for instance, I could rewire my
brain so that eating ice cream was not only extremely pleasurable, but also felt like the

most important thing I could do?
Despite the ready availability of ice cream, it seems that my new disposition
would present certain challenges to self-actualization. I would gain weight. I would
ignore social obligations and intellectual pursuits. No doubt, I would soon scandalize
others with my skewed priorities. But what if advances in neuroscience eventually allow
us to change the way every brain responds to morally relevant experiences? What if we
could program the entire species to hate fairness, to admire cheating, to love cruelty, to
despise compassion, etc. Would this be morally good? Again, the devil is in the details. Is
this really a world of equivalent and genuine well-being, where the concept of “wellbeing” is susceptible to ongoing examination and refinement as it is in our world? If so,
so be it. What could be more important than genuine well-being? But, given all that the
concept of “well-being” entails in our world, it is very difficult to imagine that its
properties could be entirely fungible as we move across the moral landscape.
A miniature version of this dilemma is surely on the horizon: increasingly, we
will need to consider the ethics of using medications to mitigate mental suffering. For
instance, would it be good for a person to take a drug that made her indifferent to the
death of her child? Surely not while she still had responsibilities as a parent. But what if a
mother lost her only child and was thereafter inconsolable? How much better than
inconsolable should her doctor make her feel? How much better should she want to feel?
Would any of us want to feel perfectly happy in this circumstance? Given a choice—and
this choice, in some form, is surely coming—I think that most of us will want our mental
states to be coupled, however loosely, to the reality of our lives. How else could our
bonds with one another be maintained? How, for instance, can we love our children and
yet be totally indifferent to their suffering and death? I suspect we cannot. But what will
we do once our pharmacies begin stocking a genuine antidote to grief?
If we cannot always resolve such conundrums, how should we proceed? We
cannot perfectly measure or reconcile the competing needs of billions of creatures. We
often cannot effectively prioritize our own competing needs. What we can do is try,
within practical limits, to follow a path that seems likely to maximize both our own wellbeing and the well-being of others. This is what it means to live wisely and ethically. As
we will see, we have already begun to discover which regions of the brain allow us to do
this. A fuller understanding of what moral life entails, however, would require a science
of morality.

Bewildered by Diversity

The psychologist Jonathan Haidt has put forward a very influential thesis about
moral judgment known as the “social-intuitionist model.” In a widely referenced article
entitled “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail,” Haidt summarizes our predicament
this way:
[O]ur moral life is plagued by two illusions. The first illusion can be called the
“wag-the-dog” illusion: We believe that our own moral judgment (the dog) is driven by
our own moral reasoning (the tail). The second illusion can be called the “wag-the-otherdog’s-tail” illusion: In a moral argument, we expect the successful rebuttal of our

opponents’ arguments to change our opponents’ minds. Such a belief is analogous to
believing that forcing a dog’s tail to wag by moving it with your hand should make the
dog happy.53

Haidt does not go so far as to say that reasoning never produces moral judgments;
he simply argues that this happens far less often than people think. Haidt is pessimistic
about our ever making realistic claims about right and wrong, or good and evil, because
he has observed that human beings tend to make moral decisions on the basis of emotion,
justify these decisions with post hoc reasoning, and stick to their guns even when their
reasoning demonstrably fails. He notes that when asked to justify their responses to
specific moral (and pseudo-moral) dilemmas, people are often “morally dumbfounded.”
His experimental subjects would “stutter, laugh, and express surprise at their inability to
find supporting reasons, yet they would not change their initial judgments …”
The same can be said, however, about our failures to reason effectively. Consider
the Monty Hall Problem (based on the television game show Let’s Make a Deal).
Imagine that you are a contestant on a game show and presented with three closed doors:
behind one sits a new car; the other two conceal goats. Pick the correct door, and the car
is yours.
The game proceeds this way: Assume that you have chosen Door #1. Your host
then opens Door #2, revealing a goat. He now gives you a chance to switch your bet from
Door #1 to the remaining Door #3. Should you switch? The correct answer is “yes.” But
most people find this answer very perplexing, as it violates the common intuition that,
with two unopened doors remaining, the odds must be 1 in 2 that the car will be behind
either one of them. If you stick with your initial choice, however, your odds of winning
are actually 1 in 3. If you switch, your odds increase to 2 in 3.54
It would be fair to say that the Monty Hall problem leaves many of its victims
“logically dumbfounded.” Even when people understand conceptually why they should
switch doors, they can’t shake their initial intuition that each door represents a 1/2 chance
of success. This reliable failure of human reasoning is just that—a failure of reasoning. It
does not suggest that there is no correct answer to the Monty Hall problem.
And yet scientists like Joshua Greene and Jonathan Haidt seem to think that the
very existence of moral controversy nullifies the possibility of moral truth. In their
opinion, all we can do is study what human beings do in the name of “morality.” Thus, if
religious conservatives find the prospect of gay marriage abhorrent, and secular liberals
find it perfectly acceptable, we are confronted by a mere difference of moral
preference—not a difference that relates to any deeper truths about human life.
In opposition to the liberal notion of morality as being a system of “prescriptive
judgments of justice, rights, and welfare pertaining to how people ought to relate to each
other,” Haidt asks us to ponder mysteries of the following sort:
[I]f morality is about how we treat each other, then why did so many ancient texts
devote so much space to rules about menstruation, who can eat what, and who can have
sex with whom?55

Interesting question. Are these the same ancient texts that view slavery as morally

unproblematic? Perhaps slavery has no moral implications after all—otherwise, surely
these ancient texts would have something of substance to say against it. Could abolition
have been the ultimate instance of liberal bias? Or, following Haidt’s logic, why not ask,
“if physics is just a system of laws that explains the structure of the universe in terms of
mass and energy, why do so many ancient texts devote so much space to immaterial
influences and miraculous acts of God?” Why indeed.
Haidt appears to consider it an intellectual virtue to accept, uncritically, the moral
categories of his subjects. But where is it written that everything that people do or decide
in the name of “morality” deserves to be considered part of its subject matter? A majority
of Americans believe that the Bible provides an accurate account of the ancient world.
Many millions of Americans also believe that a principal cause of cancer is “repressed
anger.” Happily, we do not allow these opinions to anchor us when it comes time to have
serious discussions about history and oncology. It seems abundantly clear that many
people are simply wrong about morality—just as many people are wrong about physics,
biology, history, and everything else worth understanding. What scientific purpose is
served by averting our eyes from this fact? If morality is a system of thinking about (and
maximizing) the well-being of conscious creatures like ourselves, many people’s moral
concerns must be immoral.
Moral skeptics like Haidt generally emphasize the intractability of moral
disagreements:
The bitterness, futility, and self-righteousness of most moral arguments can now
be explicated. In a debate about abortion, politics, consensual incest, or what my friend
did to your friend, both sides believe that their positions are based on reasoning about the
facts and issues involved (the wag-the-dog illusion). Both sides present what they take to
be excellent arguments in support of their positions. Both sides expect the other side to be
responsive to such reasons (the wag-the-other-dog’s-tail illusion). When the other side
fails to be affected by such good reasons, each side concludes that the other side must be
closed minded or insincere. In this way the culture wars over issues such as
homosexuality and abortion can generate morally motivated players on both sides who
believe that their opponents are not morally motivated. 56

But the dynamic Haidt describes will be familiar to anyone who has ever entered
into a debate on any subject. Such failures of persuasion do not suggest that both sides of
every controversy are equally credible. For instance, the above passage perfectly captures
my occasional collisions with 9/11 conspiracy theorists. A nationwide poll conducted by
the Scripps Survey Research Center at Ohio University found that more than a third of
Americans suspect that the federal government “assisted in the 9/11 terrorist attacks or
took no action to stop them so the United States could go to war in the Middle East” and
16 percent believe that this proposition is “very likely” to be true.57 Many of these people
believe that the Twin Towers collapsed not because fully fueled passenger jets smashed
into them but because agents of the Bush administration had secretly rigged these
buildings to explode (6 percent of all respondents judged this “very likely,” 10 percent
judged it “somewhat likely”). Whenever I encounter people harboring these convictions,
the impasse that Haidt describes is well in place: both sides “present what they take to be
excellent arguments in support of their positions. Both sides expect the other side to be

responsive to such reasons (the wag-the-other-dog’s-tail illusion). When the other side
fails to be affected by such good reasons, each side concludes that the other side must be
closed minded or insincere.” It is undeniable, however, that if one side in this debate is
right about what actually happened on September 11, 2001, the other side must be
absolutely wrong.
Of course, it is now well known that our feeling of reasoning objectively is often
illusory.58 This does not mean, however, that we cannot learn to reason more effectively,
pay greater attention to evidence, and grow more mindful of the ever-present possibility
of error. Haidt is right to notice that the brain’s emotional circuitry often governs our
moral intuitions, and the way in which feeling drives judgment is surely worthy of study.
But it does not follow that there are no right and wrong answers to questions of morality.
Just as people are often less than rational when claiming to be rational, they can be less
than moral when claiming to be moral.
In describing the different forms of morality available to us, Haidt offers a choice
between “contractual” and “beehive” approaches: the first is said to be the province of
liberals, who care mainly about harm and fairness; the second represents the conservative
(generally religious) social order, which incorporates further concerns about group
loyalty, respect for authority, and religious purity. The opposition between these two
conceptions of the good life may be worth discussing, and Haidt’s data on the differences
between liberals and conservatives is interesting, but is his interpretation correct? It
seems possible, for instance, that his five foundations of morality are simply facets of a
more general concern about harm.
What, after all, is the problem with desecrating a copy of the Qur’an? There
would be no problem but for the fact that people believe that the Qur’an is a divinely
authored text. Such people almost surely believe that some harm could come to them or
to their tribe as a result of such sacrileges—if not in this world, then in the next. A more
esoteric view might be that any person who desecrates scripture will have harmed himself
directly: a lack of reverence might be its own punishment, dimming the eyes of faith.
Whatever interpretation one favors, sacredness and respect for religious authority seem to
reduce to a concern about harm just the same.
The same point can be made in the opposite direction: even a liberal like myself,
enamored as I am of thinking in terms of harm and fairness, can readily see that my
vision of the good life must be safeguarded from the aggressive tribalism of others. When
I search my heart, I discover that I want to keep the barbarians beyond the city walls just
as much as my conservative neighbors do, and I recognize that sacrifices of my own
freedom may be warranted for this purpose. I expect that epiphanies of this sort could
well multiply in the coming years. Just imagine, for instance, how liberals might be
disposed to think about the threat of Islam after an incident of nuclear terrorism. Liberal
hankering for happiness and freedom might one day produce some very strident calls for
stricter laws and tribal loyalty. Will this mean that liberals have become religious
conservatives pining for the beehive? Or is the liberal notion of avoiding harm flexible
enough to encompass the need for order and differences between in-group and out-group?
There is also the question of whether conservatism contains an extra measure of
cognitive bias—or outright hypocrisy—as the moral convictions of social conservatives
are so regularly belied by their louche behavior. The most conservative regions of the
United States tend to have the highest rates of divorce and teenage pregnancy, as well as

the greatest appetite for pornography.59 Of course, it could be argued that social
conservatism is the consequence of so much ambient sinning. But this seems an unlikely
explanation—especially in those cases where a high level of conservative moralism and a
predilection for sin can be found in a single person. If one wants examples of such
hypocrisy, Evangelical ministers and conservative politicians seem to rarely disappoint.
When is a belief system not only false but so encouraging of falsity and needless
suffering as to be worthy of our condemnation? According to a recent poll, 36 percent of
British Muslims (ages sixteen to twenty-four) think apostates should be put to death for
their unbelief.60 Are these people “morally motivated,” in Haidt’s sense, or just morally
confused?
And what if certain cultures are found to harbor moral codes that look terrible no
matter how we jigger Haidt’s five variables of harm, fairness, group loyalty, respect for
authority, and spiritual purity? What if we find a group of people who aren’t especially
sensitive to harm and fairness, or cognizant of the sacred, or morally astute in any other
way? Would Haidt’s conception of morality then allow us to stop these benighted people
from abusing their children? Or would that be unscientific?

The Moral Brain

Imagine that you are having dinner in a restaurant and spot your best friend’s wife
seated some distance away. As you stand to say hello, you notice that the man seated
across from her is not your best friend, but a handsome stranger. You hesitate. Is he a
colleague of hers from work? Her brother from out of town? Something about the scene
strikes you as illicit. While you cannot hear what they are saying, there is an
unmistakable sexual chemistry between them. You now recall that your best friend is
away at a conference. Is his wife having an affair? What should you do?
Several regions of the brain will contribute to this impression of moral salience
and to the subsequent stirrings of moral emotion. There are many separate strands of
cognition and feeling that intersect here: sensitivity to context, reasoning about other
people’s beliefs, the interpretation of facial expressions and body language, suspicion,
indignation, impulse control, etc. At what point do these disparate processes constitute an
instance of moral cognition? It is difficult to say. At a minimum, we know that we have
entered moral territory once thoughts about morally relevant events (e.g., the possibility
of a friend’s betrayal) have been consciously entertained. For the purposes of this
discussion, we need draw the line no more precisely than this.
The brain regions involved in moral cognition span many areas of the prefrontal
cortex and the temporal lobes. The neuroscientists Jorge Moll, Ricardo de OliveiraSouza, and colleagues have written the most comprehensive reviews of this research.61
They divide human actions into four categories:
1. Self-serving actions that do not affect others
2. Self-serving actions that negatively affect others
3. Actions that are beneficial to others, with a high probability of reciprocation
(“reciprocal altruism”)
4. Actions that are beneficial to others, with no direct personal benefits (material

or reputation gains) and no expected reciprocation (“genuine altruism”). This includes
altruistic helping as well as costly punishment of norm violators (“altruistic
punishment”)62
As Moll and colleagues point out, we share behaviors 1 through 3 with other
social mammals, while 4 seems to be the special province of human beings. (We should
probably add that this altruism must be intentional/conscious, so as to exclude the truly
heroic self-sacrifice seen among eusocial insects like bees, ants, and termites.) While
Moll et al. admit to ignoring the reward component of genuine altruism (often called the
“warm glow” associated with cooperation), we know from neuroimaging studies that
cooperation is associated with heightened activity in the brain’s reward regions.63 Here,
once again, the traditional opposition between selfish and selfless motivation seems to
break down. If helping others can be rewarding, rather than merely painful, it should be
thought of as serving the self in another mode.
It is easy to see the role that negative and positive motivations play in the moral
domain: we feel contempt/anger for the moral transgressions of others, guilt/shame over
our own moral failings, and the warm glow of reward when we find ourselves playing
nicely with other people. Without the engagement of such motivational mechanisms,
moral prescriptions (purely rational notions of “ought”) would be very unlikely to
translate into actual behaviors. The fact that motivation is a separate variable explains the
conundrum briefly touched on above: we often know what would make us happy, or what
would make the world a better place, and yet we find that we are not motivated to seek
these ends; conversely, we are often motivated to behave in ways that we know we will
later regret. Clearly, moral motivation can be uncoupled from the fruits of moral
reasoning. A science of morality would, of necessity, require a deeper understanding of
human motivation.
The regions of the brain that govern judgments of right and wrong include a broad
network of cortical and subcortical structures. The contribution of these areas to moral
thought and behavior differs with respect to emotional tone: lateral regions of the frontal
lobes seem to govern the indignation associated with punishing transgressors, while
medial frontal regions produce the feelings of reward associated with trust and
reciprocation. 64 As we will see, there is also a distinction between personal and
impersonal moral decisions. The resulting picture is complicated: factors like moral
sensitivity, moral motivation, moral judgment, and moral reasoning rely on separable,
mutually overlapping processes.
The medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) is central to most discussions of morality
and the brain. As discussed further in chapters 3 and 4, this region is involved in emotion,
reward, and judgments of self-relevance. It also seems to register the difference between
belief and disbelief. Injuries here have been associated with a variety of deficits including
poor impulse control, emotional blunting, and the attenuation of social emotions like
empathy, shame, embarrassment, and guilt. When frontal damage is limited to the MPFC,
reasoning ability as well as the conceptual knowledge of moral norms are generally
spared, but the ability to behave appropriately toward others tends to be disrupted.
Interestingly, patients suffering from MPFC damage are more inclined to
consequentialist reasoning than normal subjects are when evaluating certain moral
dilemmas—when, for instance, the means of sacrificing one person’s life to save many
others is personal rather than impersonal.65 Consider the following two scenarios:

1. You are at the wheel of a runaway trolley quickly approaching a fork in the
tracks. On the tracks extending to the left is a group of five railway workmen. On the
tracks extending to the right is a single railway workman.
If you do nothing the trolley will proceed to the left, causing the deaths of the five
workmen. The only way to avoid the deaths of these workmen is to hit a switch on your
dashboard that will cause the trolley to proceed to the right, causing the death of the
single workman.
Is it appropriate for you to hit the switch in order to avoid the deaths of the five
workmen?
2. A runaway trolley is heading down the tracks toward five workmen who will
be killed if the trolley proceeds on its present course. You are on a footbridge over the
tracks, in between the approaching trolley and the five workmen. Next to you on this
footbridge is a stranger who happens to be very large.
The only way to save the lives of the five workmen is to push this stranger off the
bridge and onto the tracks below where his large body will stop the trolley. The stranger
will die if you do this, but the five workmen will be saved.
Is it appropriate for you to push the stranger onto the tracks in order to save the
five workmen?66
Most people strongly support sacrificing one person to save five in the first
scenario, while considering such a sacrifice morally abhorrent in the second. This
paradox has been well known in philosophical circles for years.67 Joshua Greene and
colleagues were the first to look at the brain’s response to these dilemmas using fMRI. 68
They found that the personal forms of these dilemmas, like the one described in scenario
two, more strongly activate brain regions associated with emotion. Another group has
since found that the disparity between people’s responses to the two scenarios can be
modulated, however slightly, by emotional context. Subjects who spent a few minutes
watching a pleasant video prior to confronting the footbridge dilemma were more apt to
push the man to his death. 69
The fact that patients suffering from MPFC injuries find it easier to sacrifice the
one for the many is open to differing interpretations. Greene views this as evidence that
emotional and cognitive processes often work in opposition.70 There are reasons to worry,
however, that mere opposition between consequentialist thinking and negative emotion
does not adequately account for the data. 71
I suspect that a more detailed understanding of the brain processes involved in
making moral judgments of this type could affect our sense of right and wrong. And yet
superficial differences between moral dilemmas may continue to play a role in our
reasoning. If losses will always cause more suffering than forsaken gains, or if pushing a
person to his death is guaranteed to traumatize us in a way that throwing a switch will
not, these distinctions become variables that constrain how we can move across the moral
landscape toward higher states of well-being. It seems to me, however, that a science of
morality can absorb these details: scenarios that appear, on paper, to lead to the same
outcome (e.g., one life lost, five lives saved), may actually have different consequences in
the real world.

Psychopaths

In order to understand the relationship between the mind and the brain, it is often
useful to study subjects who, whether through illness or injury, lack specific mental
capacities. As luck would have it, Mother Nature has provided us with a nearly perfect
dissection of conventional morality. The resulting persons are generally referred to as
“psychopaths” or “sociopaths,”72 and there seem to be many more of them living among
us than most of us realize. Studying their brains has yielded considerable insight into the
neural basis of conventional morality.
As a personality disorder, psychopathy has been so sensationalized in the media
that it is difficult to research it without feeling that one is pandering, either to oneself or
to one’s audience. However, there is no question that psychopaths exist, and many of
them speak openly about the pleasure they take in terrorizing and torturing innocent
people. The extreme examples, which include serial killers and sexual sadists, seem to
defy any sympathetic understanding on our parts. Indeed, if you immerse yourself in this
literature, each case begins to seem more horrible and incomprehensible than the last.
While I am reluctant to traffic in the details of these crimes, I fear that speaking in
abstractions may obscure the underlying reality. Despite a steady diet of news, which
provides a daily reminder of human evil, it can be difficult to remember that certain
people truly lack the capacity to care about their fellow human beings. Consider the
statement of a man who was convicted of repeatedly raping and torturing his nine-yearold stepson:
After about two years of molesting my son, and all the pornography that I had
been buying, renting, swapping, I had got my hands on some “bondage discipline”
pornography with children involved. Some of the reading that I had done and the pictures
that I had seen showed total submission. Forcing the children to do what I wanted.
And I eventually started using some of this bondage discipline with my own son,
and it had escalated to the point where I was putting a large Zip-loc bag over his head and
taping it around his neck with black duct tape or black electrical tape and raping and
molesting him … to the point where he would turn blue, pass out. At that point I would
rip the bag off his head, not for fear of hurting him, but because of the excitement.
I was extremely aroused by inflicting pain. And when I see him pass out and
change colors, that was very arousing and heightening to me, and I would rip the bag off
his head and then I’d jump on his chest and masturbate in his face and make him suck my
penis while he … started to come back awake. While he was coughing and choking, I
would rape him in the mouth.
I used this same sadistic style of plastic bag and the tape two or three times a
week, and it went on for I’d say a little over a year.73
I suspect that this brief glimpse of one man’s private passions will suffice to make
the point. Be assured that this is not the worst abuse a man or woman has ever inflicted
upon a child just for the fun of it. And one remarkable feature of the literature on
psychopaths is the extent to which even the worst people are able to find collaborators.
For instance, the role played by violent pornography in these cases is difficult to
overlook. Child pornography alone—which, as many have noted, is the visual record of

an actual crime—is now a global, multibillion-dollar industry, involving kidnapping, “sex
tourism,” organized crime, and great technical sophistication in the use of the internet.
Apparently, there are enough people who are eager to see children—and, increasingly,
toddlers and infants—raped and tortured so as to create an entire subculture.74

While psychopaths are especially well represented in our prisons, 75 many live
below the threshold of overt criminality. For every psychopath who murders a child,
there are tens of thousands who are guilty of far more conventional mischief. Robert
Hare, the creator of the standard diagnostic instrument to assess psychopathy, the
Psychopathy Checklist–Revised (PCL–R), estimates that while there are probably no
more than a hundred serial killers in the United States at any moment, there are probably
3 million psychopaths (about 1 percent of the population). 76 If Hare is correct, each of us
crosses paths with such people all the time.
For instance, I recently met a man who took considerable pride in having arranged
his life so as to cheat on his wife with impunity. In fact, he was also cheating on the many
women with whom he was cheating—for each believed him to be faithful. All this
gallantry involved aliases, fake businesses, and, needless to say, a blizzard of lies. While
I can’t say for certain this man was a psychopath, it was quite apparent that he lacked
what most of us would consider a normal conscience. A life of continuous deception and
selfish machination seemed to cause him no discomfort whatsoever.77
Psychopaths are distinguished by their extraordinary egocentricity and their total
lack of concern for the suffering of others. A list of their most frequent characteristics
reads like a personal ad from hell: they are said to be callous, manipulative, deceptive,
impulsive, secretive, grandiose, thrill-seeking, sexually promiscuous, unfaithful,
irresponsible, prone to both reactive and calculated aggression,78 and lacking in
emotional depth. They also show reduced emotional sensitivity to punishment (whether
actual or anticipated). Most important, psychopaths do not experience a normal range of
anxiety and fear, and this may account for their lack of conscience.
The first neuroimaging experiment done on psychopaths found that, when
compared to nonpsychopathic criminals and noncriminal controls, they exhibit
significantly less activity in regions of the brain that generally respond to emotional
stimuli.79 While anxiety and fear are emotions that most of us would prefer to live
without, they serve as anchors to social and moral norms. 80 Without an ability to feel
anxious about one’s own transgressions, real or imagined, norms become nothing more
than “rules that others make up.” 81 The developmental literature also supports this
interpretation: fearful children have been shown to display greater moral understanding.
82
It remains an open question, therefore, just how free of anxiety we can reasonably want
to be. Again, this is something that only an empirical science of morality could decide.
And as more effective remedies for anxiety appear on the horizon, this is an issue that we
will have to confront in some form.
Further neuroimaging work suggests that psychopathy is also a product of
pathological arousal and reward.83 People scoring high on the psychopathic personality
inventory show abnormally high activity in the reward regions of their brain (in
particular, the nucleus accumbens) in response to amphetamine and while anticipating

monetary gains. Hypersensitivity of this circuitry is especially linked to the impulsiveantisocial dimension of psychopathy, which leads to risky and predatory behavior.
Researchers speculate that an excessive response to anticipated reward can prevent a
person from learning from the negative emotions of others.
Unlike others who suffer from mental illness or mood disorders, psychopaths
generally do not feel that anything is wrong with them. They also meet the legal
definition of sanity, in that they possess an intellectual understanding of the difference
between right and wrong. However, psychopaths generally fail to distinguish between
conventional and moral transgressions. When asked “Would it be okay to eat at your desk
if the teacher gave you permission?” vs. “Would it be okay to hit another student in the
face if the teacher gave you permission?” normal children age thirty-nine months and
above tend to see these questions as fundamentally distinct and consider the latter
transgression intrinsically wrong. In this, they appear to be guided by an awareness of
potential human suffering. Children at risk for psychopathy tend to view these questions
as morally indistinguishable.
When asked to identify the mental states of other people on the basis of
photographs of their eyes alone, psychopaths show no general impairment.84 Their
“theory of mind” processing (as the ability to understand the mental states of others is
generally known) seems to be basically intact, with subtle deficits resulting from their
simply not caring about how other people feel. 85 The one crucial exception, however, is
that psychopaths are often unable to recognize expressions of fear and sadness in others.
86
And this may be the difference that makes all the difference.
Neuroscientist James Blair and colleagues suggest that psychopathy results from a
failure of emotional learning due to genetic impairments of the amygdala and
orbitofrontal cortex, regions vital to the processing of emotion.87 The negative emotions
of others, rather than parental punishment, may be what goad us to normal socialization.
Psychopathy, therefore, could result from a failure to learn from the fear and sadness of
other people. 88
A child at risk for psychopathy, being emotionally blind to the suffering he
causes, may increasingly resort to antisocial behavior in pursuit of his goals throughout
adolescence and adulthood.89 As Blair points out, parenting strategies that increase
empathy tend to successfully mitigate antisocial behavior in healthy children; such
strategies inevitably fail with children who present with the callousness/unemotional
(CU) trait that is characteristic of psychopathy. While it may be difficult to accept, the
research strongly suggests that some people cannot learn to care about others. 90 Perhaps
we will one day develop interventions to change this. For the purposes of this discussion,
however, it seems sufficient to point out that we are beginning to understand the kinds of
brain pathologies that lead to the most extreme forms of human evil. And just as some
people have obvious moral deficits, others must possess moral talent, moral expertise,
and even moral genius. As with any human ability, these gradations must be expressed at
the level of the brain.
Game theory suggests that evolution probably selected for two stable orientations
toward human cooperation: tit for tat (often called “strong reciprocity”) and permanent
defection. 91 Tit for tat is generally what we see throughout society: you show me some
kindness, and I am eager to return the favor; you do something rude or injurious, and the
temptation to respond in kind becomes difficult to resist. But consider how permanent

defection would appear at the level of human relationships: the defector would probably
engage in continuous cheating and manipulation, sham moralistic aggression (to provoke
guilt and altruism in others), and strategic mimicry of positive social emotions like
sympathy (as well as of negative emotions like guilt). This begins to sound like gardenvariety psychopathy. The existence of psychopaths, while otherwise quite mysterious,
would seem to be predicted by game theory. And yet, the psychopath who lives his entire
life in a tiny village must be at a terrible disadvantage. The stability of permanent
defection as a strategy would require that a defector be able to find people to fleece who
are not yet aware of his terrible reputation. Needless to say, the growth of cities has made
this way of life far more practicable than it has ever been.

Evil

When confronted with psychopathy at its most extreme, it is very difficult not to
think in terms of good and evil. But what if we adopt a more naturalistic view? Consider
the prospect of being locked in a cage with a wild grizzly: why would this be a problem?
Well, clearly, wild grizzlies suffer some rather glaring cognitive and emotional deficits.
Your new roommate will not be easy to reason with or placate; he is unlikely to recognize
that you have interests analogous to his own, or that the two of you might have shared
interests; and if he could understand such things, he would probably lack the emotional
resources to care. From his point of view, you will be a distraction at best, a cowering
annoyance, and something tender to probe with his teeth. We might say that a wild bear
is, like a psychopath, morally insane. However, we are very unlikely to refer to his
condition as a form of “evil.”
Human evil is a natural phenomenon, and some level of predatory violence is
innate in us. Humans and chimpanzees tend to display the same level of hostility toward
outsiders, but chimps are far more aggressive than humans are within a group (by a factor
of about 200).92 Therefore, we seem to have prosocial abilities that chimps lack. And,
despite appearances, human beings have grown steadily less violent. As Jared Diamond
explains:
It’s true, of course, that twentieth-century state societies, having developed potent
technologies of mass killing, have broken all historical records for violent deaths. But this
is because they enjoy the advantage of having by far the largest populations of potential
victims in human history; the actual percentage of the population that died violently was
on the average higher in traditional pre-state societies than it was even in Poland during
the Second World War or Cambodia under Pol Pot. 93

We must continually remind ourselves that there is a difference between what is
natural and what is actually good for us. Cancer is perfectly natural, and yet its
eradication is a primary goal of modern medicine. Evolution may have selected for
territorial violence, rape, and other patently unethical behaviors as strategies to propagate
one’s genes—but our collective well-being clearly depends on our opposing such natural
tendencies.

Territorial violence might have even been necessary for the development of
altruism. The economist Samuel Bowles has argued that lethal, “out-group” hostility and
“in-group” altruism are two sides of the same coin.94 His computer models suggest that
altruism cannot emerge without some level of conflict between groups. If true, this is one
of the many places where we must transcend evolutionary pressures through reason—
because, barring an attack from outer space, we now lack a proper “out-group” to inspire
us to further altruism.
In fact, Bowles’s work has interesting implications for my account of the moral
landscape. Consider the following from Patricia Churchland:
Assuming our woodland ape ancestors as well as our own human ancestors
engaged in out-group raids, as chimps and several South American tribes still do, can we
be confident in moral condemnation of their behavior? I see no basis in reality for such a
judgment. If, as Samuel Bowles argues, the altruism typical of modern humans plausibly
co-evolved with lethal out-group competition, such a judgment will be problematic. 95

Of course, the purpose of my argument is to suggest a “basis in reality” for
universal judgments of value. However, as Churchland points out, if there was simply no
other way for our ancestors to progress toward altruism without developing a penchant
for out-group hostility, then so be it. Assuming that the development of altruism
represents an extraordinarily important advance in moral terms (I believe it does), this
would be analogous to our ancestors descending into an unpleasant valley on the moral
landscape only to make progress toward a higher peak. But it is important to reiterate that
such evolutionary constraints no longer hold. In fact, given recent developments in
biology, we are now poised to consciously engineer our further evolution. Should we do
this, and if so, in which ways? Only a scientific understanding of the possibilities of
human well-being could guide us.
The Illusion of Free Will

Brains allow organisms to alter their behavior and internal states in response to
changes in the environment. The evolution of these structures, tending toward increased
size and complexity, has led to vast differences in how the earth’s species live.
The human brain responds to information coming from several domains: from the
external world, from internal states of the body, and, increasingly, from a sphere of
meaning—which includes spoken and written language, social cues, cultural norms,
rituals of interaction, assumptions about the rationality of others, judgments of taste and
style, etc. Generally, these domains seem unified in our experience: You spot your best
friend standing on the street corner looking strangely disheveled. You recognize that she
is crying and frantically dialing her cell phone. Did someone assault her? You rush to her
side, feeling an acute desire to help. Your “self” seems to stand at the intersection of
these lines of input and output. From this point of view, you tend to feel that you are the
source of your own thoughts and actions. You decide what to do and not to do. You seem
to be an agent acting of your own free will. As we will see, however, this point of view
cannot be reconciled with what we know about the human brain.
We are conscious of only a tiny fraction of the information that our brains process

in each moment. While we continually notice changes in our experience—in thought,
mood, perception, behavior, etc.—we are utterly unaware of the neural events that
produce these changes. In fact, by merely glancing at your face or listening to your tone
of voice, others are often more aware of your internal states and motivations than you are.
And yet most of us still feel that we are the authors of our own thoughts and actions.
All of our behavior can be traced to biological events about which we have no
conscious knowledge: this has always suggested that free will is an illusion. For instance,
the physiologist Benjamin Libet famously demonstrated that activity in the brain’s motor
regions can be detected some 350 milliseconds before a person feels that he has decided
to move.96 Another lab recently used fMRI data to show that some “conscious” decisions
can be predicted up to 10 seconds before they enter awareness (long before the
preparatory motor activity detected by Libet). 97 Clearly, findings of this kind are difficult
to reconcile with the sense that one is the conscious source of one’s actions. Notice that
distinction between “higher” and “lower” systems in the brain gets us nowhere: for I no
more initiate events in executive regions of my prefrontal cortex than I cause the
creaturely outbursts of my limbic system. The truth seems inescapable: I, as the subject of
my experience, cannot know what I will next think or do until a thought or intention
arises; and thoughts and intentions are caused by physical events and mental stirrings of
which I am not aware.
Many scientists and philosophers realized long ago that free will could not be
squared with our growing understanding of the physical world.98 Nevertheless, many still
deny this fact. 99 The biologist Martin Heisenberg recently observed that some
fundamental processes in the brain, like the opening and closing of ion channels and the
release of synaptic vesicles, occur at random, and cannot, therefore, be determined by
environmental stimuli. Thus, much of our behavior can be considered “self-generated,”
and therein, he imagines, lies a basis for free will. 100 But “self-generated” in this sense
means only that these events originate in the brain. The same can be said for the brain
states of a chicken.
If I were to learn that my decision to have a third cup of coffee this morning was
due to a random release of neurotransmitters, how could the indeterminacy of the
initiating event count as the free exercise of my will? Such indeterminacy, if it were
generally effective throughout the brain, would obliterate any semblance of human
agency. Imagine what your life would be like if all your actions, intentions, beliefs, and
desires were “self-generated” in this way: you would scarcely seem to have a mind at all.
You would live as one blown about by an internal wind. Actions, intentions, beliefs, and
desires are the sorts of things that can exist only in a system that is significantly
constrained by patterns of behavior and the laws of stimulus-response. In fact, the
possibility of reasoning with other human beings—or, indeed, of finding their behaviors
and utterances comprehensible at all—depends on the assumption that their thoughts and
actions will obediently ride the rails of a shared reality. In the limit, Heisenberg’s “selfgenerated” mental events would amount to utter madness. 101
The problem is that no account of causality leaves room for free will. Thoughts,
moods, and desires of every sort simply spring into view—and move us, or fail to move
us, for reasons that are, from a subjective point of view, perfectly inscrutable. Why did I
use the term “inscrutable” in the previous sentence? I must confess that I do not know.
Was I free to do otherwise? What could such a claim possibly mean? Why, after all,

didn’t the word “opaque” come to mind? Well, it just didn’t—and now that it vies for a
place on the page, I find that I am still partial to my original choice. Am I free with
respect to this preference? Am I free to feel that “opaque” is the better word, when I just
do not feel that it is the better word? Am I free to change my mind? Of course not. It can
only change me.
It means nothing to say that a person would have done otherwise had he chosen to
do otherwise, because a person’s “choices” merely appear in his mental stream as though
sprung from the void. In this sense, each of us is like a phenomenological glockenspiel
played by an unseen hand. From the perspective of your conscious mind, you are no more
responsible for the next thing you think (and therefore do) than you are for the fact that
you were born into this world. 102
Our belief in free will arises from our moment-to-moment ignorance of specific
prior causes. The phrase “free will” describes what it feels like to be identified with the
content of each thought as it arises in consciousness. Trains of thought like, “What should
I get my daughter for her birthday? I know, I’ll take her to a pet store and have her pick
out some tropical fish,” convey the apparent reality of choices, freely made. But from a
deeper perspective (speaking both subjectively and objectively), thoughts simply arise
(what else could they do?) unauthored and yet author to our actions.
As Daniel Dennett has pointed out, many people confuse determinism with
fatalism.103 This gives rise to questions like, “If everything is determined, why should I
do anything? Why not just sit back and see what happens?” But the fact that our choices
depend on prior causes does not mean that they do not matter. If I had not decided to
write this book, it wouldn’t have written itself. My choice to write it was unquestionably
the primary cause of its coming into being. Decisions, intentions, efforts, goals,
willpower, etc., are causal states of the brain, leading to specific behaviors, and behaviors
lead to outcomes in the world. Human choice, therefore, is as important as fanciers of
free will believe. And to “just sit back and see what happens” is itself a choice that will
produce its own consequences. It is also extremely difficult to do: just try staying in bed
all day waiting for something to happen; you will find yourself assailed by the impulse to
get up and do something, which will require increasingly heroic efforts to resist.
Of course, there is a distinction between voluntary and involuntary actions, but it
does nothing to support the common idea of free will (nor does it depend upon it). The
former are associated with felt intentions (desires, goals, expectations, etc.) while the
latter are not. All of the conventional distinctions we like to make between degrees of
intent—from the bizarre neurological complaint of alien hand syndrome104 to the
premeditated actions of a sniper—can be maintained: for they simply describe what else
was arising in the mind at the time an action occurred. A voluntary action is accompanied
by the felt intention to carry it out, while an involuntary action isn’t. Where our intentions
themselves come from, however, and what determines their character in every instant,
remains perfectly mysterious in subjective terms. Our sense of free will arises from a
failure to appreciate this fact: we do not know what we will intend to do until the
intention itself arises. To see this is to realize that you are not the author of your thoughts
and actions in the way that people generally suppose. This insight does not make social
and political freedom any less important, however. The freedom to do what one intends,
and not to do otherwise, is no less valuable than it ever was.

Moral Responsibility

The question of free will is no mere curio of philosophy seminars. The belief in
free will underwrites both the religious notion of “sin” and our enduring commitment to
retributive justice.105 The Supreme Court has called free will a “universal and persistent”
foundation for our system of law, distinct from “a deterministic view of human conduct
that is inconsistent with the underlying precepts of our criminal justice system” ( United
States v. Grayson, 1978). 106 Any scientific developments that threatened our notion of
free will would seem to put the ethics of punishing people for their bad behavior in
question. 107
But, of course, human goodness and human evil are the product of natural events.
The great worry is that any honest discussion of the underlying causes of human behavior
seems to erode the notion of moral responsibility. If we view people as neuronal weather
patterns, how can we coherently speak about morality? And if we remain committed to
seeing people as people, some who can be reasoned with and some who cannot, it seems
that we must find some notion of personal responsibility that fits the facts.
What does it really mean to take responsibility for an action? For instance,
yesterday I went to the market; as it turns out, I was fully clothed, did not steal anything,
and did not buy anchovies. To say that I was responsible for my behavior is simply to say
that what I did was sufficiently in keeping with my thoughts, intentions, beliefs, and
desires to be considered an extension of them. If, on the other hand, I had found myself
standing in the market naked, intent upon stealing as many tins of anchovies as I could
carry, this behavior would be totally out of character; I would feel that I was not in my
right mind, or that I was otherwise not responsible for my actions. Judgments of
responsibility, therefore, depend upon the overall complexion of one’s mind, not on the
metaphysics of mental cause and effect.
Consider the following examples of human violence:
1. A four-year-old boy was playing with his father’s gun and killed a young
woman. The gun had been kept loaded and unsecured in a dresser drawer.
2. A twelve-year-old boy, who had been the victim of continuous physical and
emotional abuse, took his father’s gun and intentionally shot and killed a young woman
because she was teasing him.
3. A twenty-five-year-old man, who had been the victim of continuous abuse as a
child, intentionally shot and killed his girlfriend because she left him for another man.
4. A twenty-five-year-old man, who had been raised by wonderful parents and
never abused, intentionally shot and killed a young woman he had never met “just for the
fun of it.”
5. A twenty-five-year-old man, who had been raised by wonderful parents and
never abused, intentionally shot and killed a young woman he had never met “just for the
fun of it.” An MRI of the man’s brain revealed a tumor the size of a golf ball in his
medial prefrontal cortex (a region responsible for the control of emotion and behavioral
impulses).
In each case a young woman has died, and in each case her death was the result of
events arising in the brain of another human being. The degree of moral outrage we feel

clearly depends on the background conditions described in each case. We suspect that a
four-year-old child cannot truly intend to kill someone and that the intentions of a twelveyear-old do not run as deep as those of an adult. In both cases 1 and 2, we know that the
brain of the killer has not fully matured and that all the responsibilities of personhood
have not yet been conferred. The history of abuse and precipitating circumstance in
example 3 seem to mitigate the man’s guilt: this was a crime of passion committed by a
person who had himself suffered at the hands of others. In 4, we have no abuse, and the
motive brands the perpetrator a psychopath. In 5, we appear to have the same
psychopathic behavior and motive, but a brain tumor somehow changes the moral
calculus entirely: given its location in the MPFC, it seems to divest the killer of all
responsibility. How can we make sense of these gradations of moral blame when brains
and their background influences are, in every case, and to exactly the same degree, the
real cause of a woman’s death?
It seems to me that we need not have any illusions about a casual agent living
within the human mind to condemn such a mind as unethical, negligent, or even evil, and
therefore liable to occasion further harm. What we condemn in another person is the
intention to do harm—and thus any condition or circumstance (e.g., accident, mental
illness, youth) that makes it unlikely that a person could harbor such an intention would
mitigate guilt, without any recourse to notions of free will. Likewise, degrees of guilt
could be judged, as they are now, by reference to the facts of the case: the personality of
the accused, his prior offenses, his patterns of association with others, his use of
intoxicants, his confessed intentions with regard to the victim, etc. If a person’s actions
seem to have been entirely out of character, this will influence our sense of the risk he
now poses to others. If the accused appears unrepentant and anxious to kill again, we
need entertain no notions of free will to consider him a danger to society.
Of course, we hold one another accountable for more than those actions that we
consciously plan, because most voluntary behavior comes about without explicit
planning.108 But why is the conscious decision to do another person harm particularly
blameworthy? Because consciousness is, among other things, the context in which our
intentions become completely available to us. What we do subsequent to conscious
planning tends to most fully reflect the global properties of our minds—our beliefs,
desires, goals, prejudices, etc. If, after weeks of deliberation, library research, and debate
with your friends, you still decide to kill the king—well, then killing the king really
reflects the sort of person you are. Consequently, it makes sense for the rest of society to
worry about you.
While viewing human beings as forces of nature does not prevent us from
thinking in terms of moral responsibility, it does call the logic of retribution into question.
Clearly, we need to build prisons for people who are intent upon harming others. But if
we could incarcerate earthquakes and hurricanes for their crimes, we would build prisons
for them as well.109 The men and women on death row have some combination of bad
genes, bad parents, bad ideas, and bad luck—which of these quantities, exactly, were they
responsible for? No human being stands as author to his own genes or his upbringing, and
yet we have every reason to believe that these factors determine his character throughout
life. Our system of justice should reflect our understanding that each of us could have
been dealt a very different hand in life. In fact, it seems immoral not to recognize just
how much luck is involved in morality itself.

Consider what would happen if we discovered a cure for human evil. Imagine, for
the sake of argument, that every relevant change in the human brain can be made
cheaply, painlessly, and safely. The cure for psychopathy can be put directly into the food
supply like vitamin D. Evil is now nothing more than a nutritional deficiency.
If we imagine that a cure for evil exists, we can see that our retributive impulse is
profoundly flawed. Consider, for instance, the prospect of withholding the cure for evil
from a murderer as part of his punishment. Would this make any moral sense at all? What
could it possibly mean to say that a person deserves to have this treatment withheld?
What if the treatment had been available prior to the person’s crime? Would he still be
responsible for his actions? It seems far more likely that those who had been aware of his
case would be indicted for negligence. Would it make any sense at all to deny surgery to
the man in example 5 as a punishment if we knew the brain tumor was the proximate
cause of his violence? Of course not. The urge for retribution, therefore, seems to depend
upon our not seeing the underlying causes of human behavior.
Despite our attachment to notions of free will, most us know that disorders of the
brain can trump the best intentions of the mind. This shift in understanding represents
progress toward a deeper, more consistent, and more compassionate view of our common
humanity—and we should note that this is progress away from religious metaphysics. It
seems to me that few concepts have offered greater scope for human cruelty than the idea
of an immortal soul that stands independent of all material influences, ranging from genes
to economic systems.
And yet one of the fears surrounding our progress in neuroscience is that this
knowledge will dehumanize us. Could thinking about the mind as the product of the
physical brain diminish our compassion for one another? While it is reasonable to ask this
question, it seems to me that, on balance, soul/body dualism has been the enemy of
compassion. For instance, the moral stigma that still surrounds disorders of mood and
cognition seems largely the result of viewing the mind as distinct from the brain. When
the pancreas fails to produce insulin, there is no shame in taking synthetic insulin to
compensate for its lost function. Many people do not feel the same way about regulating
mood with antidepressants (for reasons that appear quite distinct from any concern about
potential side effects). If this bias has diminished in recent years, it has been because of
an increased appreciation of the brain as a physical organ.
However, the issue of retribution is a genuinely tricky one. In a fascinating article
in The New Yorker, Jared Diamond recently wrote of the high price we often pay for
leaving vengeance to the state. 110 He compares the experience of his friend Daniel, a
New Guinea highlander, who avenged the death of a paternal uncle and felt exquisite
relief, to the tragic experience of his late father-in-law, who had the opportunity to kill
the man who murdered his family during the Holocaust but opted instead to turn him over
to the police. After spending only a year in jail, the killer was released, and Diamond’s
father-in-law spent the last sixty years of his life “tormented by regret and guilt.” While
there is much to be said against the vendetta culture of the New Guinea Highlands, it is
clear that the practice of taking vengeance answers to a common psychological need.
We are deeply disposed to perceive people as the authors of their actions, to hold
them responsible for the wrongs they do us, and to feel that these debts must be repaid.
Often, the only compensation that seems appropriate requires that the perpetrator of a
crime suffer or forfeit his life. It remains to be seen how the best system of justice would

steward these impulses. Clearly, a full account of the causes of human behavior should
undermine our natural response to injustice, at least to some degree. It seems doubtful,
for instance, that Diamond’s father-in-law would have suffered the same pangs of
unrequited vengeance if his family had been trampled by an elephant or laid low by
cholera. Similarly, we can expect that his regret would have been significantly eased if he
had learned that his family’s killer had lived a flawlessly moral life until a virus began
ravaging his medial prefrontal cortex.
It may be that a sham form of retribution could still be moral, if it led people to
behave far better than they otherwise would. Whether it is useful to emphasize the
punishment of certain criminals—rather than their containment or rehabilitation—is a
question for social and psychological science. But it seems quite clear that a retributive
impulse, based upon the idea that each person is the free author of his thoughts and
actions, rests on a cognitive and emotional illusion—and perpetuates a moral one.
It is generally argued that our sense of free will presents a compelling mystery: on
the one hand, it is impossible to make sense of it in causal terms; on the other, there is a
powerful subjective sense that we are the authors of our own actions.111 However, I think
that this mystery is itself a symptom of our confusion. It is not that free will is simply an
illusion: our experience is not merely delivering a distorted view of reality; rather, we are
mistaken about the nature of our experience. We do not feel as free as we think we feel.
Our sense of our own freedom results from our not paying attention to what it is actually
like to be what we are. The moment we do pay attention, we begin to see that free will is
nowhere to be found, and our subjectivity is perfectly compatible with this truth.
Thoughts and intentions simply arise in the mind. What else could they do? The truth
about us is stranger than many suppose: The illusion of free will is itself an illusion.

Chapter 3
BELIEF

A candidate for the presidency of the United States once met a group of potential
supporters at the home of a wealthy benefactor. After brief introductions, he spotted a
bowl of potpourri on the table beside him. Mistaking it for a bowl of trail mix, he
scooped up a fistful of this decorative debris—which consisted of tree bark, incense,
flowers, pinecones, and other inedible bits of woodland—and delivered it greedily into
his mouth.
What our hero did next went unreported (suffice it to say that he did not become
the next president of the United States). We can imagine the psychology of the scene,
however: the candidate wide-eyed in ambush, caught between the look of horror on his
host’s face and the panic of his own tongue, having to quickly decide whether to swallow
the vile material or disgorge it in full view of his audience. We can see the celebrities and
movie producers feigning not to notice the great man’s gaffe and taking a sudden interest
in the walls, ceiling, and floorboards of the room. Some were surely less discreet. We can
imagine their faces from the candidate’s point of view: a pageant of ill-concealed
emotion, ranging from amazement to schadenfreude.
All such responses, their personal and social significance, and their moment-tomoment physiological effects, arise from mental capacities that are distinctly human: the
recognition of another’s intentions and state of mind, the representation of the self in both
physical and social space, the impulse to save face (or to help others to save it), etc.
While such mental states undoubtedly have analogs in the lives of other animals, we
human beings experience them with a special poignancy. There may be many reasons for
this, but one is clearly paramount: we alone, among all earth’s creatures, possess the
ability to think and communicate with complex language.
The work of archeologists, paleoanthropologists, geneticists, and
neuroscientists—not to mention the relative taciturnity of our primate cousins—suggests
that human language is a very recent adaptation.1 Our species diverged from its common
ancestor with the chimpanzees only 6.3 million years ago. And it now seems that the split
with chimps may have been less than decisive, as comparisons between the two genomes,
focusing on the greater-than-expected similarity of our X chromosomes, reveal that our
species diverged, interbred for a time, and then diverged for good. 2 Such rustic
encounters notwithstanding, all human beings currently alive appear to have descended
from a single population of hunter-gatherers that lived in Africa around 50,000 BCE.
These were the first members of our species to exhibit the technical and social
innovations made possible by language. 3
Genetic evidence indicates that a band of perhaps 150 of these people left Africa
and gradually populated the rest of the earth. Their migration would not have been
without its hardships, however, as they were not alone: Homo neanderthalensis laid claim
to Europe and the Middle East, and Homo erectus occupied Asia. Both were species of

archaic humans that had developed along separate evolutionary paths after one or more
prior migrations out of Africa. Both possessed large brains, fashioned stone tools similar
to those of Homo sapiens, and were well armed. And yet over the next twenty thousand
years, our ancestors gradually displaced, and may have physically eradicated, all rivals. 4
Given the larger brains and sturdier build of the Neanderthals, it seems reasonable to
suppose that only our species had the advantage of fully symbolic, complex speech. 5
While there is still controversy over the biological origins of human language, as
well as over its likely precursors in the communicative behavior of other animals,6 there
is no question that syntactic language lies at the root of our ability to understand the
universe, to communicate ideas, to cooperate with one another in complex societies, and
to build (one hopes) a sustainable, global civilization. 7 But why has language made such
a difference? How has the ability to speak (and to read and write of late) given modern
humans a greater purchase on the world? What, after all, has been worth communicating
these last 50,000 years? I hope it will not seem philistine of me to suggest that our ability
to create fiction has not been the driving force here. The power of language surely results
from the fact that it allows mere words to substitute for direct experience and mere
thoughts to simulate possible states of the world. Utterances like, “I saw some very scary
guys in front of that cave yesterday,” would have come in quite handy 50,000 years ago.
The brain’s capacity to accept such propositions as true—as valid guides to behavior and
emotion, as predictive of future outcomes, etc.—explains the transformative power of
words. There is a common term we use for this type of acceptance; we call it “belief.” 8

What Is “Belief”?

It is surprising that so little research has been done on belief, as few mental states
exert so sweeping an influence over human life. While we often make a conventional
distinction between “belief” and “knowledge,” these categories are actually quite
misleading. Knowing that George Washington was the first president of the United States
and believing the statement “George Washington was the first president of the United
States” amount to the same thing. When we distinguish between belief and knowledge in
ordinary conversation, it is generally for the purpose of drawing attention to degrees of
certainty: I’m apt to say “I know it” when I am quite certain that one of my beliefs about
the world is true; when I’m less sure, I may say something like “I believe it is probably
true.” Most of our knowledge about the world falls between these extremes. The entire
spectrum of such convictions—ranging from better-than-a-coin-toss to I-would-bet-mylife-on-it—expresses gradations of “belief.”
It is reasonable to wonder, however, whether “belief” is really a single
phenomenon at the level of the brain. Our growing understanding of human memory
should make us cautious: over the last fifty years, the concept of “memory” has
decomposed into several forms of cognition that are now known to be neurologically and
evolutionarily distinct. 9 This should make us wonder whether a notion like “belief”
might not also shatter into separate processes when mapped onto the brain. In fact, belief
overlaps with certain types of memory, as memory can be equivalent to a belief about the
past (e.g., “I had breakfast most days last week”), 10 and certain beliefs are

indistinguishable from what is often called “semantic memory” (e.g., “The earth is the
third planet from the sun”).
There is no reason to think that any of our beliefs about the world are stored as
propositions, or within discrete structures, inside the brain.11 Merely understanding a
simple proposition often requires the unconscious activation of considerable background
knowledge 12 and an active process of hypothesis testing. 13 For instance, a sentence like
“The team was terribly disappointed because the second stage failed to fire,” while easy
enough to read, cannot be understood without some general concept of a rocket launch
and a team of engineers. So there is more to even basic communication than the mere
decoding of words. We must expect that a similar penumbra of associations will surround
specific beliefs as well.
And yet our beliefs can be represented and expressed as discrete statements.
Imagine hearing any one of the following assertions from a trusted friend:
1. The CDC just announced that cell phones really do cause brain cancer.
2. My brother won $100,000 in Las Vegas over the weekend.
3. Your car is being towed.
We trade in such representations of the world all the time. The acceptance of such
statements as true (or likely to be true) is the mechanism by which we acquire most of
our knowledge about the world. While it would not make any sense to search for
structures in the brain that correspond to specific sentences, we may be able to
understand the brain states that allow us to accept such sentences as true. 14 When
someone says “Your car is being towed,” it is your acceptance of this statement as true
that sends you racing out the door. “Belief,” therefore, can be thought of as a process
taking place in the present; it is the act of grasping, not the thing grasped.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines multiple senses of the term “belief”:
1. The mental action, condition, or habit, of trusting to or confiding in a person or
thing; trust, dependence, reliance, confidence, faith.
2. Mental acceptance of a proposition, statement, or fact as true, on the ground of
authority or evidence; assent of the mind to a statement, or to the truth of a fact beyond
observation, on the testimony of another, or to a fact or truth on the evidence of
consciousness; the mental condition involved in this assent.
3. The thing believed; the proposition or set of propositions held true.
Definition 2 is exactly what we are after, and 1 may apply as well. These first two
senses of the term are quite different from the data-centered meaning given in 3.
Consider the following claim: Starbucks does not sell plutonium. I suspect that
most of us would be willing to wager a fair amount of money that this statement is
generally true—which is to say that we believe it. However, before reading this
statement, you are very unlikely to have considered the prospect that the world’s most
popular coffee chain might also trade in one of the world’s most dangerous substances.
Therefore, it does not seem possible for there to have been a structure in your brain that
already corresponded to this belief. And yet you clearly harbored some representation of
the world that amounts to this belief.
Many modes of information processing must lay the groundwork for us to judge
the above statement as “true.” Most of us know, in a variety of implicit and explicit ways,
that Starbucks is not a likely proliferator of nuclear material. Several distinct capacities—
episodic memory, semantic knowledge, assumptions about human behavior and

economic incentives, inductive reasoning, etc.—conspire to make us accept the above
proposition. To say that we already believed that one cannot buy plutonium at Starbucks
is to merely put a name to the summation of these processes in the present moment: that
is, “belief,” in this case, is the disposition to accept a proposition as true (or likely to be).
This process of acceptance often does more than express our prior commitments,
however. It can revise our view of the world in an instant. Imagine reading the following
headline in tomorrow’s New York Times: “Most of the World’s Coffee Is Now
Contaminated by Plutonium.” Believing this statement would immediately influence your
thinking on many fronts, as well as your judgment about the truth of the former
proposition. Most of our beliefs have come to us in just this form: as statements that we
accept on the assumption that their source is reliable, or because the sheer number of
sources rules out any significant likelihood of error.
In fact, everything we know outside of our personal experience is the result of our
having encountered specific linguistic propositions—the sun is a star; Julius Caesar was
a Roman emperor; broccoli is good for you—and found no reason (or means) to doubt
them. It is “belief” in this form, as an act of acceptance, which I have sought to better
understand in my neuroscientific research. 15

Looking for Belief in the Brain

For a physical system to be capable of complex behavior, there must be some
meaningful separation between its input and output. As far as we know, this separation
has been most fully achieved in the frontal lobes of the human brain. Our frontal lobes
are what allow us to select among a vast range of responses to incoming information in
light of our prior goals and present inferences. Such “higher-level” control of emotion
and behavior is the stuff of which human personalities are made. Clearly, the brain’s
capacity to believe or disbelieve statements of fact— You left your wallet on the bar; that
white powder is anthrax; your boss is in love with you—is central to the initiation,
organization, and control of our most complex behaviors.
But we are not likely to find a region of the human brain devoted solely to belief.
The brain is an evolved organ, and there does not seem to be a process in nature that
allows for the creation of new structures dedicated to entirely novel modes of behavior or
cognition. Consequently, the brain’s higher-order functions had to emerge from lowerorder mechanisms. An ancient structure like the insula, for instance, helps monitor events
in our gut, governing the perception of hunger and primary emotions like disgust. But it
is also involved in pain perception, empathy, pride, humiliation, trust, music appreciation,
and addictive behavior.16 It may also play an important role in both belief formation and
moral reasoning. Such promiscuity of function is a common feature of many regions of
the brain, especially in the frontal lobes. 17
No region of the brain evolved in a neural vacuum or in isolation from the other
mutations simultaneously occurring within the genome. The human mind, therefore, is
like a ship that has been built and rebuilt, plank by plank, on the open sea. Changes have
been made to her sails, keel, and rudder even as the waves battered every inch of her hull.
And much of our behavior and cognition, even much that now seems essential to our

humanity, has not been selected for at all. There are no aspects of brain function that
evolved to hold democratic elections, to run financial institutions, or to teach our children
to read. We are, in every cell, the products of nature—but we have also been born again
and again through culture. Much of this cultural inheritance must be realized differently
in individual brains. The way in which two people think about the stock market, or recall
that Christmas is a national holiday, or solve a puzzle like the Tower of Hanoi, will
almost surely differ between individuals. This poses an obvious challenge when
attempting to identify mental states with specific brain states.18
Another factor that makes the strict localization of any mental state difficult is
that the human brain is characterized by massive interconnectivity: it is mostly talking to
itself. 19 And the information it stores must also be more fine-grained than the concepts,
symbols, objects, or states that we subjectively experience. Representation results from a
pattern of activity across networks of neurons and does not generally entail stable, one-toone mappings of things/events in the world, or concepts in the mind, to discrete structures
in the brain. 20 For instance, thinking a simple thought like Jake is married cannot be the
work of any single node in a network of neurons. It must emerge from a pattern of
connections among many nodes. None of this bodes well for one who would seek a belief
“center” in the human brain.
As part of my doctoral research at UCLA, I studied belief, disbelief, and
uncertainty with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).21 To do this, we had
volunteers read statements from a wide variety of categories while we scanned their
brains. After reading a proposition like, “California is part of the United States” or “You
have brown hair,” participants would judge them to be “true,” “false,” or “undecidable”
with the click of a button. This was, to my knowledge, the first time anyone had
attempted to study belief and disbelief with the tools of neuroscience. Consequently, we
had no basis to form a detailed hypothesis about which regions of the brain govern these
states of mind. 22 It was, nevertheless, reasonable to expect that the prefrontal cortex
(PFC) would be involved, given its wider role in controlling emotion and complex
behavior. 23
The seventeenth-century philosopher Spinoza thought that merely understanding a
statement entails the tacit acceptance of its being true, while disbelief requires a
subsequent process of rejection.24 Several psychological studies seem to support this
conjecture. 25 Understanding a proposition may be analogous to perceiving an object in
physical space: we may accept appearances as reality until they prove otherwise. The
behavioral data acquired in our research support this hypothesis, as subjects judged
statements to be “true” more quickly than they judged them to be “false” or
“undecidable.” 26
When we compared the mental states of belief and disbelief, we found that belief
was associated with greater activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC).27 This region
of the frontal lobes is involved in linking factual knowledge with relevant emotional
associations, 28 in changing behavior in response to reward, 29 and in goal-based actions.
30
The MPFC is also associated with ongoing reality monitoring, and injuries here can
cause people to confabulate—that is, to make patently false statements without any
apparent awareness that they are not telling the truth. 31 Whatever its cause in the brain,
confabulation seems to be a condition in which belief processing has run amok. The
MPFC has often been associated with self-representation, 32 and one sees more activity

here when subjects think about themselves than when they think about others. 33
The greater activity we found in the MPFC for belief compared to disbelief may
reflect the greater self-relevance and/or reward value of true statements. When we believe
a proposition to be true, it is as though we have taken it in hand as part of our extended
self: we are saying, in effect, “This is mine. I can use this. This fits my view of the
world.” It seems to me that such cognitive acceptance has a distinctly positive emotional
valence. We actually like the truth, and we may, in fact, dislike falsehood. 34
The involvement of the MPFC in belief processing suggests an anatomical link
between the purely cognitive aspects of belief and emotion/reward. Even judging the
truth of emotionally neutral propositions engaged regions of the brain that are strongly
connected to the limbic system, which governs our positive and negative affect. In fact,
mathematical belief (e.g., “2 + 6 + 8 = 16”) showed a similar pattern of activity to ethical
belief (e.g., “It is good to let your children know that you love them”), and these were
perhaps the most dissimilar sets of stimuli used in our experiment. This suggests that the
physiology of belief may be the same regardless of a proposition’s content. It also
suggests that the division between facts and values does not make much sense in terms of
underlying brain function.35
Of course, we can differentiate my argument concerning the moral landscape
from my fMRI work on belief. I have argued that there is no gulf between facts and
values, because values reduce to a certain type of fact. This is a philosophical claim, and
as such, I can make it before ever venturing into the lab. However, my research on belief
suggests that the split between facts and values should look suspicious: First, belief
appears to be largely mediated by the MPFC, which seems to already constitute an
anatomical bridge between reasoning and value. Second, the MPFC appears to be
similarly engaged, irrespective of a belief’s content. This finding of contentindependence challenges the fact/value distinction very directly: for if, from the point of
view of the brain, believing “the sun is a star” is importantly similar to believing “cruelty
is wrong,” how can we say that scientific and ethical judgments have nothing in
common?
And we can traverse the boundary between facts and values in other ways. As we
are about to see, the norms of reasoning seem to apply equally to beliefs about facts and
to beliefs about values. In both spheres, evidence of inconsistency and bias is always
unflattering. Similarities of this kind suggest that there is a deep analogy, if not identity,
between the two domains.

The Tides of Bias

If one wants to understand how another person thinks, it is rarely sufficient to
know whether or not he believes a specific set of propositions. Two people can hold the
same belief for very different reasons, and such differences generally matter. In the year
2003, it was one thing to believe that the United States should not invade Iraq because
the ongoing war in Afghanistan was more important; it was another to believe it because
you think it is an abomination for infidels to trespass on Muslim land. Knowing what a
person believes on a specific subject is not identical to knowing how that person thinks.

Decades of psychological research suggest that unconscious processes influence
belief formation, and not all of them assist us in our search for truth. When asked to judge
the probability that an event will occur, or the likelihood that one event caused another,
people are frequently misled by a variety of factors, including the unconscious influence
of extraneous information. For instance, if asked to recall the last four digits of their
Social Security numbers and then asked to estimate the number of doctors practicing in
San Francisco, the resulting numbers will show a statistically significant relationship.
Needless to say, when the order of questions is reversed, this effect disappears. 36 There
have been a few efforts to put a brave face on such departures from rationality, construing
them as random performance errors or as a sign that experimental subjects have
misunderstood the tasks presented to them—or even as proof that research psychologists
themselves have been beguiled by false norms of reasoning. But efforts to exonerate our
mental limitations have generally failed. There are some things that we are just naturally
bad at. And the mistakes people tend to make across a wide range of reasoning tasks are
not mere errors; they are systematic errors that are strongly associated both within and
across tasks. As one might expect, many of these errors decrease as cognitive ability
increases. 37 We also know that training, using both examples and formal rules, mitigates
many of these problems and can improve a person’s thinking. 38
Reasoning errors aside, we know that people often acquire their beliefs about the
world for reasons that are more emotional and social than strictly cognitive. Wishful
thinking, self-serving bias, in-group loyalties, and frank self-deception can lead to
monstrous departures from the norms of rationality. Most beliefs are evaluated against a
background of other beliefs and often in the context of an ideology that a person shares
with others. Consequently, people are rarely as open to revising their views as reason
would seem to dictate.
On this front, the internet has simultaneously enabled two opposing influences on
belief: On the one hand, it has reduced intellectual isolation by making it more difficult
for people to remain ignorant of the diversity of opinion on any given subject. But it has
also allowed bad ideas to flourish—as anyone with a computer and too much time on his
hands can broadcast his point of view and, often enough, find an audience. So while
knowledge is increasingly open-source, ignorance is, too.
It is also true that the less competent a person is in a given domain, the more he
will tend to overestimate his abilities. This often produces an ugly marriage of confidence
and ignorance that is very difficult to correct for.39 Conversely, those who are more
knowledgeable about a subject tend to be acutely aware of the greater expertise of others.
This creates a rather unlovely asymmetry in public discourse—one that is generally on
display whenever scientists debate religious apologists. For instance, when a scientist
speaks with appropriate circumspection about controversies in his field, or about the
limits of his own understanding, his opponent will often make wildly unjustified
assertions about just which religious doctrines can be inserted into the space provided.
Thus, one often finds people with no scientific training speaking with apparent certainty
about the theological implications of quantum mechanics, cosmology, or molecular
biology.
This point merits a brief aside: while it is a standard rhetorical move in such
debates to accuse scientists of being “arrogant,” the level of humility in scientific
discourse is, in fact, one of its most striking characteristics. In my experience, arrogance

is about as common at a scientific conference as nudity. At any scientific meeting you
will find presenter after presenter couching his or her remarks with caveats and apologies.
When asked to comment on something that lies to either side of the very knife edge of
their special expertise, even Nobel laureates will say things like, “Well, this isn’t really
my area, but I would suspect that X is …” or “I’m sure there a several people in this room
who know more about this than I do, but as far as I know, X is …” The totality of
scientific knowledge now doubles every few years. Given how much there is to know, all
scientists live with the constant awareness that whenever they open their mouths in the
presence of other scientists, they are guaranteed to be speaking to someone who knows
more about a specific topic than they do.
Cognitive biases cannot help but influence our public discourse. Consider
political conservatism: this is a fairly well-defined perspective that is characterized by a
general discomfort with societal change and a ready acceptance of social inequality. As
simple as political conservatism is to describe, we know that it is governed by many
factors. The psychologist John Jost and colleagues analyzed data from twelve countries,
acquired from 23,000 subjects, and found this attitude to be correlated with dogmatism,
inflexibility, death anxiety, need for closure, and anticorrelated with openness to
experience, cognitive complexity, self-esteem, and social stability. 40 Even the
manipulation of a single of these variables can affect political opinions and behavior. For
instance, merely reminding people of the fact of death increases their inclination to
punish transgressors and to reward those who uphold cultural norms. One experiment
showed that judges could be led to impose especially harsh penalties on prostitutes if they
were simply prompted to think about death prior to their deliberations. 41
And yet after reviewing the literature linking political conservatism to many
obvious sources of bias, Jost and his coauthors reach the following conclusion:
Conservative ideologies, like virtually all other belief systems, are adopted in part
because they satisfy various psychological needs. To say that ideological belief systems
have a strong motivational basis is not to say that they are unprincipled, unwarranted, or
unresponsive to reason and evidence.42

This has more than a whiff of euphemism about it. Surely we can say that a belief
system known to be especially beholden to dogmatism, inflexibility, death anxiety, and a
need for closure will be less principled, less warranted, and less responsive to reason and
evidence than it would otherwise be.
This is not to say that liberalism isn’t also occluded by certain biases. In a recent
study of moral reasoning,43 subjects were asked to judge whether it was morally correct
to sacrifice the life of one person to save one hundred, while being given subtle clues as
to the races of the people involved. Conservatives proved less biased by race than liberals
and, therefore, more even-handed. Liberals, as it turns out, were very eager to sacrifice a
white person to save one hundred nonwhites, but not the other way around—all the while
maintaining that considerations of race had not entered into their thinking. The point, of
course, is that science increasingly allows us to identify aspects of our minds that cause
us to deviate from norms of factual and moral reasoning—norms which, when made
explicit, are generally acknowledged to be valid by all parties.
There is a sense in which all cognition can be said to be motivated: one is

motivated to understand the world, to be in touch with reality, to remove doubt, etc.
Alternately, one might say that motivation is an aspect of cognition itself.44 Nevertheless,
motives like wanting to find the truth, not wanting to be mistaken, etc., tend to align with
epistemic goals in a way that many other commitments do not. As we have begun to see,
all reasoning may be inextricable from emotion. But if a person’s primary motivation in
holding a belief is to hew to a positive state of mind—to mitigate feelings of anxiety,
embarrassment, or guilt, for instance—this is precisely what we mean by phrases like
“wishful thinking” and “self-deception.” Such a person will, of necessity, be less
responsive to valid chains of evidence and argument that run counter to the beliefs he is
seeking to maintain. To point out nonepistemic motives in another’s view of the world,
therefore, is always a criticism, as it serves to cast doubt upon a person’s connection to
the world as it is. 45

Mistaking Our Limits

We have long known, principally through the neurological work of Antonio
Damasio and colleagues, that certain types of reasoning are inseparable from emotion.46
To reason effectively, we must have a feeling for the truth. Our first fMRI study of belief
and disbelief seemed to bear this out. 47 If believing a mathematical equation (vs.
disbelieving another) and believing an ethical proposition (vs. disbelieving another)
produce the same changes in neurophysiology, the boundary between scientific
dispassion and judgments of value becomes difficult to establish.
However, such findings do not in the least diminish the importance of reason, nor
do they blur the distinction between justified and unjustified belief. On the contrary, the
inseparability of reason and emotion confirms that the validity of a belief cannot merely
depend on the conviction felt by its adherents; it rests on the chains of evidence and
argument that link it to reality. Feeling may be necessary to judge the truth, but it cannot
be sufficient.
The neurologist Robert Burton argues that the “feeling of knowing” (i.e., the
conviction that one’s judgment is correct) is a primary positive emotion that often floats
free of rational processes and can occasionally become wholly detached from logical or
sensory evidence.48 He infers this from neurological disorders in which subjects display
pathological certainty (e.g., schizophrenia and Cotard’s delusion) and pathological
uncertainty (e.g., obsessive-compulsive disorder). Burton concludes that it is irrational to
expect too much of human rationality. On his account, rationality is mostly aspirational in
character and often little more than a façade masking pure, unprincipled feeling.
Other neuroscientists have made similar claims. Chris Frith, a pioneer in the use
of functional neuroimaging, recently wrote:
[W]here does conscious reasoning come into the picture? It is an attempt to justify
the choice after it has been made. And it is, after all, the only way we have to try to
explain to other people why we made a particular decision. But given our lack of access
to the brain processes involved, our justification is often spurious: a post-hoc
rationalization, or even a confabulation—a “story” born of the confusion between
imagination and memory.49

I doubt Frith meant to deny that reason ever plays a role in decision making
(though the title of his essay was “No One Really Uses Reason”). He has, however,
conflated two facts about the mind: while it is true that all conscious processes, including
any effort of reasoning, depend upon events of which we are not conscious, this does not
mean that reasoning amounts to little more than a post hoc justification of brute
sentiment. We are not aware of the neurological processes that allow us to follow the
rules of algebra, but this doesn’t mean that we never follow these rules or that the role
they play in our mathematical calculations is generally post hoc. The fact that we are
unaware of most of what goes on in our brains does not render the distinction between
having good reasons for what one believes and having bad ones any less clear or
consequential. Nor does it suggest that internal consistency, openness to information,
self-criticism, and other cognitive virtues are less valuable than we generally assume.
There are many ways to make too much of the unconscious underpinnings of
human thought. For instance, Burton observes that one’s thinking on many moral
issues—ranging from global warming to capital punishment—will be influenced by one’s
tolerance for risk. In evaluating the problem of global warming, one must weigh the risk
of melting the polar ice caps; in judging the ethics of capital punishment, one must
consider the risk of putting innocent people to death. However, people differ significantly
with respect to risk tolerance, and these differences appear to be governed by a variety of
genes—including genes for the D4 dopamine receptor and the protein stathmin (which is
primarily expressed in the amygdala). Believing that there can be no optimal degree of
risk aversion, Burton concludes that we can never truly reason about such ethical
questions. “Reason” will simply be the name we give to our unconscious (and genetically
determined) biases. But is it really true to say that every degree of risk tolerance will
serve our purposes equally well as we struggle to build a global civilization? Does Burton
really mean to suggest that there is no basis for distinguishing healthy from unhealthy—
or even suicidal—attitudes toward risk?
As it turns out, dopamine receptor genes may play a role in religious belief as
well. People who have inherited the most active form of the D4 receptor are more likely
to believe in miracles and to be skeptical of science; the least active forms correlate with
“rational materialism.”50 Skeptics given the drug L-dopa, which increases dopamine
levels, show an increased propensity to accept mystical explanations for novel
phenomena. 51 The fact that religious belief is both a cultural universal and appears to be
tethered to the genome has led scientists like Burton to conclude that there is simply no
getting rid of faith-based thinking.
It seems to me that Burton and Frith have misunderstood the significance of
unconscious cognitive processes. On Burton’s account, worldviews will remain
idiosyncratic and incommensurable, and the hope that we might persuade one another
through rational argument and, thereby, fuse our cognitive horizons is not only vain but
symptomatic of the very unconscious processes and frank irrationality that we would
presume to expunge. This leads him to conclude that any rational criticism of religious
irrationality is an unseemly waste of time:
The science-religion controversy cannot go away; it is rooted in biology …
Scorpions sting. We talk of religion, afterlife, soul, higher powers, muses, purpose,

reason, objectivity, pointlessness, and randomness. We cannot help ourselves … To insist
that the secular and the scientific be universally adopted flies in the face of what
neuroscience tells us about different personality traits generating idiosyncratic
worldviews … Different genetics, temperaments, and experience led to contrasting
worldviews. Reason isn’t going to bridge this gap between believers and nonbelievers.52

The problem, however, is that we could have said the same about witchcraft.
Historically, a preoccupation with witchcraft has been a cultural universal. And yet belief
in magic is now in disrepute almost everywhere in the developed world. Is there a
scientist on earth who would be tempted to argue that belief in the evil eye or in the
demonic origins of epilepsy is bound to remain impervious to reason?
Lest the analogy between religion and witchcraft seem quaint, it is worth
remembering that belief in magic and demonic possession is still epidemic in Africa. In
Kenya elderly men and women are regularly burned alive as witches.53 In Angola,
Congo, and Nigeria the hysteria has mostly targeted children: thousands of unlucky boys
and girls have been blinded, injected with battery acid, and otherwise put to torture in an
effort to purge them of demons; others have been killed outright; many more have been
disowned by their families and rendered homeless. 54 Needless to say, much of this
lunacy has spread in the name of Christianity. The problem is especially intractable
because the government officials charged with protecting these suspected witches also
believe in witchcraft. As was the case in the Middle Ages, when the belief in witchcraft
was omnipresent in Europe, only a truly panoramic ignorance about the physical causes
of disease, crop failure, and life’s other indignities allows this delusion to thrive.
What if we were to connect the fear of witches with the expression of a certain
receptor subtype in the brain? Who would be tempted to say that the belief in witchcraft
is, therefore, ineradicable?
As someone who has received many thousands of letters and emails from people
who have ceased to believe in the God of Abraham, I know that pessimism about the
power of reason is unwarranted. People can be led to notice the incongruities in their
faith, the self-deception and wishful thinking of their coreligionists, and the growing
conflict between the claims of scripture and the findings of modern science. Such
reasoning can inspire them to question their attachment to doctrines that, in the vast
majority of cases, were simply drummed into them on mother’s knee. The truth is that
people can transcend mere sentiment and clarify their thinking on almost any subject.
Allowing competing views to collide—through open debate, a willingness to receive
criticism, etc.—performs just such a function, often by exposing inconsistencies in a
belief system that make its adherents profoundly uncomfortable. There are standards to
guide us, even when opinions differ, and the violation of such standards generally seems
consequential to everyone involved. Self-contradiction, for instance, is viewed as a
problem no matter what one is talking about. And anyone who considers it a virtue is
very unlikely to be taken seriously. Again, reason is not starkly opposed to feeling on this
front; it entails a feeling for the truth.
Conversely, there are occasions when a true proposition just doesn’t seem right no
matter how one squints one’s eyes or cocks one’s head, and yet its truth can be
acknowledged by anyone willing to do the necessary intellectual work. It is very difficult

to grasp that tiny quantities of matter contain vast amounts of explosive energy, but the
equations of physics—along with the destructive yield of our nuclear bombs—confirms
that this is so. Similarly, we know that most people cannot produce or even recognize a
series of digits or coin tosses that meets a statistical test for randomness. But this has not
stopped us from understanding randomness mathematically—or from factoring our innate
blindness to randomness into our growing understanding of cognition and economic
behavior. 55
The fact that reason must be rooted in our biology does not negate the principles
of reason. Wittgenstein once observed that the logic of our language allows us to ask,
“Was that gunfire?” but not “Was that a noise?” 56 This seems to be a contingent fact of
neurology, rather than an absolute constraint upon logic. A synesthete, for instance, who
experiences crosstalk between his primary senses (seeing sounds, tasting colors, etc.),
might be able to pose the latter question without any contradiction. How the world seems
to us (and what can be logically said about its seemings) depends upon facts about our
brains. Our inability to say that an object is “red and green all over” is a fact about the
biology of vision before it is a fact of logic. But that doesn’t prevent us from seeing
beyond this very contingency. As science advances, we are increasingly coming to
understand the natural limits of our understanding.

Belief and Reasoning

There is a close relationship between belief and reasoning. Many of our beliefs
are the product of inferences drawn from particular instances (induction) or from general
principles (deduction), or both. Induction is the process by which we extrapolate from
past observations to novel instances, anticipate future states of the world, and draw
analogies from one domain to another.57 Believing that you probably have a pancreas
(because people generally have the same parts), or interpreting the look of disgust on
your son’s face to mean that he doesn’t like Marmite, are examples of induction. This
mode of thinking is especially important for ordinary cognition and for the practice of
science, and there have been a variety of efforts to model it computationally. 58
Deduction, while less central to our lives, is an essential component of any logical
argument. 59 If you believe that gold is more expensive than silver, and silver more
expensive than tin, deduction reveals that you also believe gold to be more expensive
than tin. Induction allows us to move beyond the facts already in hand; deduction allows
us to make the implications of our current beliefs more explicit, to search for
counterexamples, and to see whether our views are logically coherent. Of course, the
boundaries between these (and other) forms of reasoning are not always easy to specify,
and people succumb to a wide range of biases in both modes.
It is worth reflecting on what a reasoning bias actually is: a bias is not merely a
source of error; it is a reliable pattern of error. Every bias, therefore, reveals something
about the structure of the human mind. And diagnosing a pattern of errors as a “bias” can
only occur with reference to specific norms—and norms can sometimes be in conflict.
The norms of logic, for instance, don’t always correspond to the norms of practical
reasoning. An argument can be logically valid, but unsound in that it contains a false

premise and, therefore, leads to a false conclusion (e.g., Scientists are smart; smart people
do not make mistakes; therefore, scientists do not make mistakes). 60 Much research on
deductive reasoning suggests that people have a “bias” for sound conclusions and will
judge a valid argument to be invalid if its conclusion lacks credibility. It’s not clear that
this “belief bias” should be considered a symptom of native irrationality. Rather, it seems
an instance in which the norms of abstract logic and practical reason may simply be in
conflict.
Neuroimaging studies have been performed on various types of human
reasoning.61 As we have seen, however, accepting the fruits of such reasoning (i.e.,
belief) seems to be an independent process. While this is suggested by my own
neuroimaging research, it also follows directly from the fact that reasoning accounts only
for a subset of our beliefs about the world. Consider the following statements:
1. All known soil samples contain bacteria; so the soil in my garden probably
contains bacteria as well (induction).
2. Dan is a philosopher, all philosophers have opinions about Nietzsche; therefore,
Dan has an opinion about Nietzsche (deduction).
3. Mexico shares a border with the United States.
4. You are reading at this moment.
Each of these statements must be evaluated by different channels of neural
processing (and only the first two require reasoning). And yet each has the same
cognitive valence: being true, each inspires belief (or being believed, each is deemed
“true”). Such cognitive acceptance allows any apparent truth to take its place in the
economy of our thoughts and actions, at which time it becomes as potent as its
propositional content demands.

A World Without Lying?

Knowing what a person believes is equivalent to knowing whether or not he is
telling the truth. Consequently, any external means of determining which propositions a
subject believes would constitute a de facto “lie detector.” Neuroimaging research on
belief and disbelief may one day enable researchers to put this equivalence to use in the
study of deception.62 It is possible that this new approach could circumvent many of the
impediments that have hindered the study of deception in the past.
When evaluating the social cost of deception, we need to consider all of the
misdeeds—premeditated murders, terrorist atrocities, genocides, Ponzi schemes, etc.—
that must be nurtured and shored up, at every turn, by lies. Viewed in this wider context,
deception commends itself, perhaps even above violence, as the principal enemy of
human cooperation. Imagine how our world would change if, when the truth really
mattered, it became impossible to lie. What would international relations be like if every
time a person shaded the truth on the floor of the United Nations an alarm went off
throughout the building?
The forensic use of DNA evidence has already made the act of denying one’s
culpability for certain actions comically ineffectual. Recall how Bill Clinton’s cantatas of
indignation were abruptly silenced the moment he learned that a semen-stained dress was

en route to the lab. The mere threat of a DNA analysis produced what no grand jury ever
could—instantaneous communication with the great man’s conscience, which appeared
to be located in another galaxy. We can be sure that a dependable method of lie detection
would produce similar transformations, on far more consequential subjects.
The development of mind-reading technology is just beginning—but reliable lie
detection will be much easier to achieve than accurate mind reading. Whether or not we
ever crack the neural code, enabling us to download a person’s private thoughts,
memories, and perceptions without distortion, we will almost surely be able to determine,
to a moral certainty, whether a person is representing his thoughts, memories, and
perceptions honestly in conversation. The development of a reliable lie detector would
only require a very modest advance over what is currently possible through
neuroimaging.
Traditional methods for detecting deception through polygraphy never achieved
widespread acceptance,63 as they measure the peripheral signs of emotional arousal rather
than the neural activity associated with deception itself. In 2002, in a 245-page report, the
National Research Council (an arm of the National Academy of Sciences) dismissed the
entire body of research underlying polygraphy as “weak” and “lacking in scientific
rigor.” 64 More modern approaches to lie detection, using thermal imaging of the eyes, 65
suffer a similar lack of specificity. Techniques that employ electrical signals at the scalp
to detect “guilty knowledge” have limited application, and it is unclear how one can use
these methods to differentiate guilty knowledge from other forms of knowledge in any
case. 66
Methodological problems notwithstanding, it is difficult to exaggerate how fully
our world would change if lie detectors ever became reliable, affordable, and
unobtrusive. Rather than spirit criminal defendants and hedge fund managers off to the
lab for a disconcerting hour of brain scanning, there may come a time when every
courtroom or boardroom will have the requisite technology discreetly concealed behind
its wood paneling. Thereafter, civilized men and women might share a common
presumption: that wherever important conversations are held, the truthfulness of all
participants will be monitored. Well-intentioned people would happily pass between
zones of obligatory candor, and these transitions will cease to be remarkable. Just as
we’ve come to expect that certain public spaces will be free of nudity, sex, loud swearing,
and cigarette smoke—and now think nothing of the behavioral constraints imposed upon
us whenever we leave the privacy of our homes—we may come to expect that certain
places and occasions will require scrupulous truth telling. Many of us might no more feel
deprived of the freedom to lie during a job interview or at a press conference than we
currently feel deprived of the freedom to remove our pants in the supermarket. Whether
or not the technology works as well as we hope, the belief that it generally does work
would change our culture profoundly.
In a legal context, some scholars have already begun to worry that reliable lie
detection will constitute an infringement of a person’s Fifth Amendment privilege against
self-incrimination.67 However, the Fifth Amendment has already succumbed to advances
in technology. The Supreme Court has ruled that defendants can be forced to provide
samples of their blood, saliva, and other physical evidence that may incriminate them.
Will neuroimaging data be added to this list, or will it be considered a form of forced
testimony? Diaries, emails, and other records of a person’s thoughts are already freely

admissible as evidence. It is not at all clear that there is a distinction between these
diverse sources of information that should be ethically or legally relevant to us.
In fact, the prohibition against compelled testimony itself appears to be a relic of a
more superstitious age. It was once widely believed that lying under oath would damn a
person’s soul for eternity, and it was thought that no one, not even a murderer, should be
placed between the rock of Justice and so hard a place as hell. But I doubt whether even
many fundamentalist Christians currently imagine that an oath sworn on a courtroom
Bible has such cosmic significance.
Of course, no technology is ever perfect. Once we have a proper lie detector in
hand, well-intentioned people will begin to suffer its propensity for positive and negative
error. This will raise ethical and legal concerns. It is inevitable, however, that we will
deem some rate of error to be acceptable. If you doubt this, remember that we currently
lock people away in prison for decades—or kill them—all the while knowing that some
percentage of the condemned must be innocent, while some percentage of those returned
to our streets will be dangerous psychopaths guaranteed to reoffend. We are currently
living with a system in which the occasional unlucky person gets falsely convicted of
murder, suffers for years in prison in the company of terrifying predators, only to be
finally executed by the state. Consider the tragic case of Cameron Todd Willingham, who
was convicted of setting fire to the family home and thereby murdering his three children.
While protesting his innocence, Willingham served over a decade on death row and was
finally executed. It now seems that he was almost surely innocent—the victim of a
chance electrical fire, forensic pseudoscience, and of a justice system that has no reliable
means of determining when people are telling the truth. 68
We have no choice but to rely upon our criminal justice system, despite the fact
that judges and juries are very poorly calibrated truth detectors, prone to both type I (false
positive) and type II (false negative) errors. Anything that can improve the performance
of this antiquated system, even slightly, will raise the quotient of justice in our world.69

Do We Have Freedom of Belief?

While belief might prove difficult to pinpoint in the brain, many of its mental
properties are plain to see. For instance, people do not knowingly believe propositions for
bad reasons. If you doubt this, imagine hearing the following account of a failed New
Year’s resolution:
This year, I vowed to be more rational, but by the end of January, I found that I
had fallen back into my old ways, believing things for bad reasons. Currently, I believe
that robbing others is a harmless activity, that my dead brother will return to life, and that
I am destined to marry Angelina Jolie, just because these beliefs make me feel good.

This is not how our minds work. A belief—to be actually believed—entails the
corollary belief that we have accepted it because it seems to be true. To really believe a
proposition—whether about facts or values—we must also believe that we are in touch
with reality in such a way that if it were not true, one would not believe it. We must

believe, therefore, that we are not flagrantly in error, deluded, insane, self-deceived, etc.
While the preceding sentences do not suffice as a full account of epistemology, they go a
long way toward uniting science and common sense, as well as reconciling their frequent
disagreements. There can be no doubt that there is an important difference between a
belief that is motivated by an unconscious emotional bias (or other nonepistemic
commitments) and a belief that is comparatively free of such bias.
And yet many secularists and academics imagine that people of faith knowingly
believe things for reasons that have nothing to do with their perception of the truth. A
written debate I had with Philip Ball—who is a scientist, a science journalist, and an
editor at Nature—brought this issue into focus. Ball thought it reasonable for a person to
believe a proposition just because it makes him “feel better,” and he seemed to think that
people are perfectly free to acquire beliefs in this way. People often do this
unconsciously, of course, and such motivated reasoning has been discussed above. But
Ball seemed to think that beliefs can be consciously adopted simply because a person
feels better while under their spell. Let’s see how this might work. Imagine someone
making the following statement of religious conviction:
I believe Jesus was born of a virgin, was resurrected, and now answers prayers
because believing these things makes me feel better. By adopting this faith, I am merely
exercising my freedom to believe in propositions that make me feel good.

How would such a person respond to information that contradicted his cherished
belief? Given that his belief is based purely on how it makes him feel, and not on
evidence or argument, he shouldn’t care about any new evidence or argument that might
come his way. In fact, the only thing that should change his view of Jesus is a change in
how the above propositions make him feel. Imagine our believer undergoing the
following epiphany:
For the last few months, I’ve found that my belief in the divinity of Jesus no
longer makes me feel good. The truth is, I just met a Muslim woman who I greatly
admire, and I want to ask her out on a date. As Muslims believe Jesus was not divine, I
am worried that my belief in the divinity of Jesus could hinder my chances with her. As I
do not like feeling this way, and very much want to go out with this woman, I now
believe that Jesus was not divine.

Has a person like this ever existed? I highly doubt it. Why do these thoughts not
make any sense? Because beliefs are intrinsically epistemic: they purport to represent the
world as it is. In this case, our man is making specific claims about the historical Jesus,
about the manner of his birth and death, and about his special connection to the Creator
of the Universe. And yet while claiming to represent the world in this way, it is perfectly
clear that he is making no effort to stay in touch with the features of the world that should
inform his belief. He is only concerned about how he feels. Given this disparity, it should
be clear that his beliefs are not based on any foundation that would (or should) justify
them to others, or even to himself.
Of course, people do often believe things in part because these beliefs make them
feel better. But they do not do this in the full light of consciousness. Self-deception,

emotional bias, and muddled thinking are facts of human cognition. And it is a common
practice to act as if a proposition were true, in the spirit of: “I’m going to act on X
because I like what it does for me and, who knows, X might be true.” But these
phenomena are not at all the same as knowingly believing a proposition simply because
one wants it to be true.
Strangely, people often view such claims about the constraints of rationality as a
sign of “intolerance.” Consider the following from Ball:
I do wonder what [Sam Harris] is implying here. It is hard to see it as anything
other than an injunction that “you should not be free to choose what you believe.” I guess
that if all Sam means is that we should not leave people so ill-informed that they have no
reasonable basis on which to make those decisions, then fair enough. But it does seem to
go further—to say that “you should not be permitted to choose what you believe, simply
because it makes you feel better.” Doesn’t this sound a little like a Marxist denouncement
of “false consciousness,” with the implication that it needs to be corrected forthwith? I
think (I hope?) we can at least agree that there are different categories of belief—that to
believe one’s children are the loveliest in the world because that makes you feel better is
a permissible (even laudable) thing. But I slightly shudder at the notion, hinted here, that
a well-informed person should not be allowed to choose their belief freely … surely we
cannot let ourselves become proscriptive to this degree? 70

What cognitive freedom is Ball talking about? I happen to believe that George
Washington was the first president of the United States. Have I, on Ball’s terms, chosen
this belief “freely”? No. Am I free to believe otherwise? Of course not. I am a slave to the
evidence. I live under the lash of historical opinion. While I may want to believe
otherwise, I simply cannot overlook the incessant pairing of the name “George
Washington” with the phrase “first president of the United States” in any discussion of
American history. If I wanted to be thought an idiot, I could profess some other belief,
but I would be lying. Likewise, if the evidence were to suddenly change—if, for instance,
compelling evidence of a great hoax emerged and historians reconsidered Washington’s
biography, I would be helplessly stripped of my belief—again, through no choice of my
own. Choosing beliefs freely is not what rational minds do.
This does not mean, of course, that we have no mental freedom whatsoever. We
can choose to focus on certain facts to the exclusion of others, to emphasize the good
rather than the bad, etc. And such choices have consequences for how we view the world.
One can, for instance, view Kim Jong-il as an evil dictator; one can also view him as a
man who was once the child of a dangerous psychopath. Both statements are, to a first
approximation, true. (Obviously, when I speak about “freedom” and “choices” of this
sort, I am not endorsing a metaphysical notion of “free will.”)
As to whether there are “different categories of belief”: perhaps, but not in the
way that Ball suggests. I happen to have a young daughter who does strike me as the
“loveliest in the world.” But is this an accurate account of what I believe? Do I, in other
words, believe that my daughter is really the loveliest girl in the world? If I learned that
another father thought his daughter the loveliest in the world, would I insist that he was
mistaken? Of course not. Ball has mischaracterized what a proud (and sane and
intellectually honest) father actually believes. Here is what I believe: I believe that I have

a special attachment to my daughter that largely determines my view of her (which is as it
should be). I fully expect other fathers to have a similar bias toward their own daughters.
Therefore, I do not believe that my daughter is the loveliest girl in the world in any
objective sense. Ball is simply describing what it’s like to love one’s daughter more than
other girls; he is not describing belief as a representation of the world. What I really
believe is that my daughter is the loveliest girl in the world for me.
One thing that both factual and moral beliefs generally share is the presumption
that we have not been misled by extraneous information.71 Situational variables, like the
order in which unrelated facts are presented, or whether identical outcomes are described
in terms of gains or losses, should not influence the decision process. Of course, the fact
that such manipulations can strongly influence our judgment has given rise to some of the
most interesting work in psychology. However, a person’s vulnerability to such
manipulations is never considered a cognitive virtue; rather, it is a source of
inconsistency that cries out for remedy.
Consider one of the more famous cases from the experimental literature, The
Asian Disease Problem:72
Imagine that the United States is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual Asian
disease, which is expected to kill 600 people. Two alternative programs to combat the
disease have been proposed. Assume that the exact scientific estimates of the
consequences of the programs are as follows:
If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.
If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 600 people will be
saved and a two-thirds probability that no people will be saved.
Which one of the two programs would you favor?
In this version of the problem, a significant majority of people favor Program A.
The problem, however, can be restated this way:
If Program A is adopted, 400 people will die.
If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that nobody will die and a
two-thirds probability that 600 people will die.
Which one of the two programs would you favor?
Put this way, a majority of respondents will now favor Program B. And yet there
is no material or moral difference between these two scenarios, because their outcomes
are the same. What this shows is that people tend to be risk-averse when considering
potential gains and risk seeking when considering potential losses, so describing the same
event in terms of gains and losses evokes different responses. Another way of stating this
is that people tend to overvalue certainty: finding the certainty of saving life inordinately
attractive and the certainty of losing life inordinately painful. When presented with the
Asian Disease Problem in both forms, however, people agree that each scenario merits
the same response. Invariance of reasoning, both logical and moral, is a norm to which
we all aspire. And when we catch others departing from this norm, whatever the other
merits of their thinking, the incoherency of their position suddenly becomes its most
impressive characteristic.
Of course, there are many other ways in which we can be misled by context. Few
studies illustrate this more powerfully than one conducted by the psychologist David L.
Rosenhan,73 in which he and seven confederates had themselves committed to psychiatric
hospitals in five different states in an effort to determine whether mental health

professionals could detect the presence of the sane among the mentally ill. In order to get
committed, each researcher complained of hearing a voice repeating the words “empty,”
“hollow,” and “thud.” Beyond that, each behaved perfectly normally. Upon winning
admission to the psychiatric ward, the pseudopatients stopped complaining of their
symptoms and immediately sought to convince the doctors, nurses, and staff that they felt
fine and were fit to be released. This proved surprisingly difficult. While these genuinely
sane patients wanted to leave the hospital, repeatedly declared that they experienced no
symptoms, and became “paragons of cooperation,” their average length of hospitalization
was nineteen days (ranging from seven to fifty-two days), during which they were
bombarded with an astounding range of powerful drugs (which they discreetly deposited
in the toilet). None were pronounced healthy. Each was ultimately discharged with a
diagnosis of schizophrenia “in remission” (with the exception of one who received a
diagnosis of bipolar disorder). Interestingly, while the doctors, nurses, and staff were
apparently blind to the presence of normal people on the ward, actual mental patients
frequently remarked on the obvious sanity of the researchers, saying things like “You’re
not crazy. You’re a journalist.”
In a brilliant response to the skeptics at one hospital who had heard of this
research before it was published, Rosenhan announced that he would send a few
confederates their way and challenged them to spot the coming pseudopatients. The
hospital kept vigil, while Rosenhan, in fact, sent no one. This did not stop the hospital
from “detecting” a steady stream of pseudopatients. Over a period of a few months fully
10 percent of their new patients were deemed to be shamming by both a psychiatrist and
a member of the staff. While we have all grown familiar with phenomena of this sort, it is
startling to see the principle so clearly demonstrated: expectation can be, if not
everything, almost everything. Rosenhan concluded his paper with this damning
summary: “It is clear that we cannot distinguish the sane from the insane in psychiatric
hospitals.”
There is no question that human beings regularly fail to achieve the norms of
rationality. But we do not merely fail—we fail reliably. We can, in other words, use
reason to understand, quantify, and predict our violations of its norms. This has moral
implications. We know, for instance, that the choice to undergo a risky medical procedure
will be heavily influenced by whether its possible outcomes are framed in terms of
survival rates or mortality rates. We know, in fact, that this framing effect is no less
pronounced among doctors than among patients. 74 Given this knowledge, physicians
have a moral obligation to handle medical statistics in ways that minimize unconscious
bias. Otherwise, they cannot help but inadvertently manipulate both their patients and one
another, guaranteeing that some of the most important decisions in life will be
unprincipled. 75
Admittedly, it is difficult to know how we should treat all of the variables that
influence our judgment about ethical norms. If I were asked, for instance, whether I
would sanction the murder of an innocent person if it would guarantee a cure for cancer, I
would find it very difficult to say “yes,” despite the obvious consequentialist argument in
favor of such an action. If I were asked to impose a one in a billion risk of death on
everyone for this purpose, however, I would not hesitate. The latter course would be
expected to kill six or seven people, and yet it still strikes me as obviously ethical. In fact,
such a diffusion of risk aptly describes how medical research is currently conducted. And

we routinely impose far greater risks than this on friends and strangers whenever we get
behind the wheel of our cars. If my next drive down the highway were guaranteed to
deliver a cure for cancer, I would consider it the most ethically important act of my life.
No doubt the role that probability is playing here could be experimentally calibrated. We
could ask subjects whether they would impose a 50 percent chance of death upon two
innocent people, a 10 percent chance on ten innocent people, etc. How we should view
the role that probability plays in our moral judgments is not clear, however. It seems
difficult to imagine ever fully escaping such framing effects.
Science has long been in the values business. Despite a widespread belief to the
contrary, scientific validity is not the result of scientists abstaining from making value
judgments; rather, scientific validity is the result of scientists making their best effort to
value principles of reasoning that link their beliefs to reality, through reliable chains of
evidence and argument. This is how norms of rational thought are made effective.
To say that judgments of truth and goodness both invoke specific norms seems
another way of saying that they are both matters of cognition, as opposed to mere
sentiment. That is why one cannot defend one’s factual or moral position by reference to
one’s preferences. One cannot say that water is H2O or that lying is wrong simply because
one wants to think this way. To defend such propositions, one must invoke a deeper
principle. To believe that X is true or that Y is ethical is also to believe others should
share these beliefs under similar circumstances.
The answer to the question “What should I believe, and why should I believe it?”
is generally a scientific one. Believe a proposition because it is well supported by theory
and evidence; believe it because it has been experimentally verified; believe it because a
generation of smart people have tried their best to falsify it and failed; believe it because
it is true (or seems so). This is a norm of cognition as well as the core of any scientific
mission statement. As far as our understanding of the world is concerned— there are no
facts without values.

Chapter 4
RELIGION

Since the nineteenth century, it has been widely assumed that the spread of
industrialized society would spell the end of religion. Marx,1 Freud, 2 and Weber 3—
along with innumerable anthropologists, sociologists, historians, and psychologists
influenced by their work—expected religious belief to wither in the light of modernity. It
has not come to pass. Religion remains one of the most important aspects of human life
in the twenty-first century. While most developed societies have grown predominantly
secular, 4 with the curious exception of the United States, orthodox religion is in florid
bloom throughout the developing world. In fact, humanity seems to be growing
proportionally more religious, as prosperous, nonreligious people have the fewest babies.
5
When one considers the rise of Islamism throughout the Muslim world, the explosive
spread of Pentecostalism throughout Africa, and the anomalous piety of the United
States, it becomes clear that religion will have geopolitical consequences for a long time
to come.
Despite the explicit separation of church and state provided for by the U.S.
Constitution, the level of religious belief in the United States (and the concomitant
significance of religion in American life and political discourse) rivals that of many
theocracies. The reason for this is unclear. While it has been widely argued that religious
pluralism and competition have caused religion to flourish in the United States, with
state-church monopolies leading to its decline in Western Europe,6 the support for this
“religious market theory” now appears weak. It seems, rather, that religiosity is strongly
coupled to perceptions of societal insecurity. Within a rich nation like the United States,
high levels of socioeconomic inequality may dictate levels of religiosity generally
associated with less developed (and less secure) societies. In addition to being the most
religious of developed nations, the United States also has the greatest economic
inequality. 7 The poor tend to be more religious than the rich, both within and between
nations. 8
Fifty-seven percent of Americans think that one must believe in God to have good
values and to be moral,9 and 69 percent want a president who is guided by “strong
religious beliefs.” 10 Such views are unsurprising, given that even secular scientists
regularly acknowledge religion to be the most common source of meaning and morality.
It is true that most religions offer a prescribed response to specific moral questions—the
Catholic Church forbids abortion, for instance. But research on people’s responses to
unfamiliar moral dilemmas suggests that religion has no effect on moral judgments that
involve weighing harms against benefits (e.g., lives lost vs. lives saved). 11
And on almost every measure of societal health, the least religious countries are
better off than the most religious. Countries like Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and the
Netherlands—which are the most atheistic societies on earth—consistently rate better

than religious nations on measures like life expectancy, infant mortality, crime, literacy,
GDP, child welfare, economic equality, economic competitiveness, gender equality,
health care, investments in education, rates of university enrollment, internet access,
environmental protection, lack of corruption, political stability, and charity to poorer
nations, etc.12 The independent researcher Gregory Paul has cast further light on this
terrain by creating two scales—the Successful Societies Scale and Popular Religiosity
Versus Secularism Scale—which offer greater support for a link between religious
conviction and societal insecurity. 13 And there is another finding which may be relevant
to this variable of societal insecurity: religious commitment in the United States is highly
correlated with racism. 14
While the mere correlation between societal dysfunction and religious belief does
not tell us what the connection is between them, these data should abolish the everpresent claim that religion is the most important guarantor of societal health. They also
prove, conclusively, that a high level of unbelief need not lead to the fall of civilization.15
Whether religion contributes to societal dysfunction, it seems clear that as
societies become more prosperous, stable, and democratic, they tend to become more
secular. Even in the United States, the trend toward secularism is visible. As Paul points
out, this suggests that, contrary to the opinions of many anthropologists and
psychologists, religious commitment “is superficial enough to be readily abandoned
when conditions improve to the required degree.”16

Religion and Evolution

The evolutionary origins of religion remain obscure. The earliest signs of human
burial practices date to 95,000 years ago, and many take these as evidence of the
emergence of religious belief.17 Some researchers consider the connection between
religion and evolution to be straightforward insofar as religious doctrines tend to view
sexual conduct as morally problematic and attempt to regulate it, both to encourage
fertility and to protect against sexual infidelity. Clearly, it is in the genetic interests of
every man that he not spend his life rearing another man’s children, and it is in the
genetic interests of every woman that her mate not squander his resources on other
women and their offspring. The fact that the world’s religions generally codify these
interests, often prescribing harsh penalties for their transgression, forms the basis for one
of their more persistent claims to social utility. It is, therefore, tempting to trace a line
between religious doctrines regarding marriage and sexuality to evolutionary fitness.18
Even here, however, the link to evolution appears less than straightforward: as evolution
should actually favor indiscriminate heterosexual activity on the part of men, as long as
these scoundrels can avoid squandering their resources in ways that imperil the
reproductive success of their offspring. 19
Human beings may be genetically predisposed to superstition: for natural
selection should favor rampant belief formation as long as the benefits of the occasional,
correct belief are great enough. 20 The manufacture of new religious doctrines and
identities, resulting in group conformity and xenophobia, may have offered some
protection against infectious illness: for to the degree that religion divides people, it

would inhibit the spread of novel pathogens. 21 However, the question of whether religion
(or anything else) might have given groups of human beings an evolutionary advantage
(so-called “group selection”) has been widely debated. 22 And even if tribes have
occasionally been the vehicles of natural selection, and religion proved adaptive, it would
remain an open question whether religion increases human fitness today. As already
mentioned, there are a wide variety of genetically entrenched human traits (e.g., outgroup aggression, infidelity, superstition, etc.) that, while probably adaptive at some point
in our past, may have been less than optimal even in the Pleistocene. In a world that is
growing ever more crowded and complex, many of these biologically selected traits may
yet imperil us.
Clearly, religion cannot be reduced to a mere concatenation of religious beliefs.
Every religion consists of rites, rituals, prayers, social institutions, holidays, etc., and
these serve a wide variety of purposes, conscious and otherwise.23 However, religious
belief—that is, the acceptance of specific historical and metaphysical propositions as
being true—is generally what renders these enterprises relevant, or even comprehensible.
I share with anthropologist Rodney Stark the view that belief precedes ritual and that a
practice like prayer is usually thought to be a genuine act of communication with a God
(or gods). 24 Religious adherents generally believe that they possess knowledge of sacred
truths, and every faith provides a framework for interpreting experience so as to lend
further credence to its doctrine. 25
There seems little question that most religious practices are the direct
consequence of what people believe to be true about both external and internal reality.
Indeed, most religious practices become intelligible only in light of these underlying
beliefs. The fact that many people have begun to doubt specific religious doctrines in the
meantime, while still mouthing the liturgy and aping the rituals, is beside the point. What
faith is best exemplified by those who are in the process of losing it? While there may be
many Catholics, for instance, who value the ritual of the Mass without believing that the
bread and wine are actually transformed into the body and blood of Jesus Christ, the
doctrine of Transubstantiation remains the most plausible origin of this ritual. And the
primacy of the Mass within the Church hinges on the fact that many Catholics still
consider the underlying doctrine to be true—which is a direct consequence of the fact that
the Church still promulgates and defends it. The following passage, taken from The
Profession of Faith of the Roman Catholic Church, represents the relevant case, and
illustrates the kind of assertions about reality that lie at the heart of most religions:
I likewise profess that in the Mass a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice is
offered to God on behalf of the living and the dead, and that the Body and the Blood,
together with the soul and the divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ is truly, really, and
substantially present in the most holy sacrament of the Eucharist, and there is a change of
the whole substance of the bread into the Body, and of the whole substance of the wine
into Blood; and this change the Catholic Mass calls transubstantiation. I also profess that
the whole and entire Christ and a true sacrament is received under each separate species.

There is, of course, a distinction to be made between mere profession of such
beliefs and actual belief26—a distinction that, while important, makes sense only in a
world in which some people actually believe what they say they believe. There seems

little reason to doubt that a significant percentage of human beings, likely a majority, falls
into this latter category with respect to one or another religious creed.
What is surprising, from a scientific point of view, is that 42 percent of Americans
believe that life has existed in its present form since the beginning of the world, and
another 21 percent believe that while life may have evolved, its evolution has been
guided by the hand of God (only 26 percent believe in evolution through natural
selection).27Seventy-eight percent of Americans believe that the Bible is the word of God
(either literal or “inspired”); and 79 percent of Christians believe that Jesus Christ will
physically return to earth at some point in the future. 28
How is it possible that so many millions of people believe these things? Clearly,
the taboo around criticizing religious beliefs must contribute to their survival. But, as the
anthropologist Pascal Boyer points out, the failure of reality testing does not explain the
specific character of religious beliefs:
People have stories about vanishing islands and talking cats, but they usually do
not insert them in their religious beliefs. In contrast, people produce concepts of ghosts
and person-like gods and make use of these concepts when they think about a whole
variety of social questions (what is moral behavior, what to do with dead people, how
misfortune occurs, why perform rituals, etc.). This is much more precise than just
relaxing the usual principles of sound reasoning. 29

According to Boyer, religious concepts must arise from mental categories that
predate religion—and these underlying structures determine the stereotypical form that
religious beliefs and practices take. These categories of thought relate to things like living
beings, social exchange, moral infractions, natural hazards, and ways of understanding
human misfortune. On Boyer’s account, people do not accept incredible religious
doctrines because they have relaxed their standards of rationality; they relax their
standards of rationality because certain doctrines fit their “inference machinery” in such a
way as to seem credible. And what most religious propositions may lack in plausibility
they make up for by being memorable, emotionally salient, and socially consequential.
All of these properties are a product of the underlying structure of human cognition, and
most of this architecture is not consciously accessible. Boyer argues, therefore, that
explicit theologies and consciously held dogmas are not a reliable indicator of the real
contents or causes of a person’s religious beliefs.
Boyer may be correct in his assertion that we have cognitive templates for
religious ideas that run deeper than culture (in the same way that we appear to have deep,
abstract concepts like “animal” and “tool”). The psychologist Justin Barrett makes a
similar claim, likening religion to language acquisition: we come into this world
cognitively prepared for language; our culture and upbringing merely dictate which
languages we will be exposed to. 30 We may also be what the psychologist Paul Bloom
has called “common sense dualists”—that is, we may be naturally inclined to see the
mind as distinct from the body and, therefore, we tend to intuit the existence of
disembodied minds at work in the world. 31 This propensity could lead us to presume
ongoing relationships with dead friends and relatives, to anticipate our own survival of
death, and generally to conceive of people as having immaterial souls. Similarly, several
experiments suggest that children are predisposed to assume both design and intention

behind natural events—leaving many psychologists and anthropologists to believe that
children, left entirely to their own devices, would invent some conception of God. 32 The
psychologist Margaret Evans has found that children between the ages of eight and ten,
whatever their upbringing, are consistently more inclined to give a Creationist account of
the natural world than their parents are. 33
The psychologist Bruce Hood likens our susceptibility to religious ideas to the
fact that people tend to develop phobias for evolutionarily relevant threats (like snakes
and spiders) rather than for things that are far more likely to kill them (like automobiles
and electrical sockets).34 And because our minds have evolved to detect patterns in the
world, we often detect patterns that aren’t actually there—ranging from faces in the
clouds to a divine hand in the workings of Nature. Hood posits an additional cognitive
schema that he calls “supersense”—a tendency to infer hidden forces in the world,
working for good or for ill. On his account, supersense generates beliefs in the
supernatural (religious and otherwise) all on its own, and such beliefs are thereafter
modulated, rather than instilled, by culture.
While religious affiliation is strictly a matter of cultural inheritance, religious
attitudes (e.g., social conservatism) and behaviors (e.g., church attendance) seem to be
moderately influenced by genetic factors. 35 The relevance of the brain’s dopaminergic
systems to religious experience, belief, and behavior is suggested by several lines of
evidence, including the fact that several clinical conditions involving the neurotransmitter
dopamine—mania, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and schizophrenia—are
regularly associated with hyperreligiosity. 36 Serotonin has also been implicated, as drugs
known to modulate it—like LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, N,N-dimethyltryptamine
(“DMT”), and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (“ecstasy”)—seem to be especially
potent drivers of religious/spiritual experience. 37 Links have also been drawn between
religious experience and temporal lobe epilepsy. 38
However predisposed the human mind may be to harboring religious beliefs, it
remains a fact that each new generation receives a religious worldview, at least in part, in
the form of linguistic propositions—far more so in some societies than in others.
Whatever the evolutionary underpinnings of religion, it seems extraordinarily unlikely
that there is a genetic explanation for the fact that the French, Swedes, and Japanese tend
not to believe in God while Americans, Saudis, and Somalis do. Clearly, religion is
largely a matter of what people teach their children to believe about the nature of reality.

Is Religious Belief Special?

While religious faith remains one of the most significant features of human life,
little has been known about its relationship to ordinary belief at the level of the brain. Nor
has it been clear whether religious believers and nonbelievers differ in how they evaluate
statements of fact. Several neuroimaging and EEG studies have been done on religious
practice and experience—primarily focusing on meditation39 and prayer. 40 But the
purpose of this research has been to evoke spiritual/contemplative experiences in
religious subjects and to compare these to more conventional states of consciousness.
None of these studies was designed to isolate belief itself.

Working in Mark Cohen’s cognitive neuroscience lab at UCLA, I published the
first neuroimaging study of belief as a general mode of cognition 41 (discussed in the
previous chapter). While another group at the National Institutes of Health later looked
specifically at religious belief, 42 no research had compared these two forms of belief
directly. In a subsequent study, Jonas T. Kaplan and I used fMRI to measure signal
changes in the brains of both Christians and nonbelievers as they evaluated the truth and
falsity of religious and nonreligious propositions. 43 For each trial, subjects were
presented with either a religious statement (e.g., “Jesus Christ really performed the
miracles attributed to him in the Bible”) or a nonreligious statement (e.g., “Alexander the
Great was a very famous military leader”), and they pressed a button to indicate whether
the statement was true or false.
For both groups, and in both categories of stimuli, our results were largely
consistent with our earlier findings. Believing a statement to be true was associated with
greater activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), a region important for selfrepresentation,44 emotional associations, 45 reward, 46 and goal-driven behavior. 47 This
area showed greater activity whether subjects believed statements about God and the
Virgin Birth or statements about ordinary facts. 48
Our study was designed to elicit the same responses from the two groups on
nonreligious stimuli (e.g., “Eagles really exist”) and opposite responses on religious
stimuli (e.g., “Angels really exist”). The fact that we obtained essentially the same result
for belief in both devout Christians and nonbelievers, on both categories of content,
argues strongly that the difference between belief and disbelief is the same, regardless of
what is being thought about.49
While the comparison between belief and disbelief produced similar activity for
both categories of questions, the comparison of all religious thinking to all nonreligious
thinking yielded a wide range of differences throughout the brain. Religious thinking was
associated with greater signal in the anterior insula and the ventral striatum. The anterior
insula has been linked to pain perception,50 to the perception of pain in others, 51 and to
negative feelings like disgust. 52 The ventral striatum has been frequently linked to
reward. 53 It would not be surprising if religious statements provoked more positive and
negative emotion in both groups of subjects.
It also seems that both Christians and nonbelievers were probably less certain of
their religious beliefs. In our previous study of belief, in which a third of our stimuli were
designed to provoke uncertainty, we found greater signal in the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) when subjects could not assess the truth-value of a proposition. Here we found
that religious thinking (when compared with nonreligious thinking) elicited this same
pattern in both groups. Both groups also took considerably longer to respond to religious
stimuli, despite the fact that these statements were no more complex than those in the
other category. Perhaps both atheists and religious believers are generally less sure about
the truth and falsity of religious statements. 54
Despite vast differences in the underlying processing responsible for religious and
nonreligious modes of thought, the distinction between believing and disbelieving a
proposition appears to transcend content. Our research suggests that these opposing states
of mind can be detected by current techniques of neuroimaging and are intimately tied to
networks involved in self-representation and reward. These findings may have many
areas of application—ranging from the neuropsychology of religion, to the use of “belief

detection” as a surrogate for “lie detection,” to understanding how the practice of science
itself, and truth claims generally, emerge from the biology of the human brain. And
again, results of this kind further suggest that a sharp boundary between facts and values
does not exist as a matter of human cognition.

Does Religion Matter?

While religious belief may be nothing more than ordinary belief applied to
religious content, such beliefs are clearly special in so far as they are deemed special by
their adherents. They also appear especially resistant to change. This is often attributed to
the fact that such beliefs treat matters aloof from the five senses, and thus are not usually
susceptible to disproof. But this cannot be the whole story. Many religious groups,
ranging from Christian sects to flying saucer cults, have anchored their worldviews to
specific, testable predictions. For instance, such groups occasionally claim that a great
cataclysm will befall the earth on a specific date in the near future. Inevitably, enthusiasts
of these prophecies also believe that once the earth starts to shake or the floodwaters
begin to rise, they will be spirited away to safety by otherworldly powers. Such people
often sell their homes and other possessions, abandon their jobs, and renounce the
company of skeptical friends and family—all in apparent certainty that the end of the
world is at hand. When the date arrives, and with it the absolute refutation of a cherished
doctrine, many members of these groups rationalize the failure of prophecy with
remarkable agility. 55 In fact, such crises of faith are often attended by increased
proselytizing and the manufacture of fresh prophecy—which provides the next target for
zealotry and, alas, subsequent collisions with empirical reality. Phenomena of this sort
have led many people to conclude that religious faith must be distinct from ordinary
belief.
On the other hand, one often encounters bewildering denials of the power of
religious belief, especially from scientists who are not themselves religious. For instance,
the anthropologist Scott Atran alleges that “core religious beliefs are literally senseless
and lacking in truth conditions”56 and, therefore, cannot actually influence a person’s
behavior. According to Atran, Muslim suicide bombing has absolutely nothing to do with
Islamic ideas about martyrdom and jihad; rather, it is the product of bonding among
“fictive kin.” Atran has publicly stated that the greatest predictor of whether a Muslim
will move from merely supporting jihad to actually perpetrating an act of suicidal
violence “has nothing to do with religion, it has to do with whether you belong to a
soccer club.” 57
Atran’s analysis of the causes of Muslim violence is relentlessly oblivious to what
jihadists themselves say about their own motives.58 He even ignores the role of religious
belief in inspiring Muslim terrorism when it bursts into view in his own research. Here is
a passage from one of his papers in which he summarizes his interviews with jihadists:
All were asked questions of the sort, ‘So what if your family were to be killed in
retaliation for your action?’ or ‘What if your father were dying and your mother found
out your plans for a martyrdom attack and asked you to delay until the family could get
back on its feet?’ To a person they answered along lines that there is duty to family but

duty to God cannot be postponed. ‘And what if your action resulted in no one’s death but
your own?’ The typical response is, ‘God will love you just the same.’ For example,
when these questions were posed to the alleged Emir of Jemaah Islamiyah, Abu Bakr
Ba’asyir, in Jakarta’s Cipinang prison in August 2005, he responded that martyrdom for
the sake of jihad is the ultimate fardh ’ain, an inescapable individual obligation that
trumps all others, including four of the five pillars of Islam (only profession of faith
equals jihad). What matters for him as for most would-be martyrs and their sponsors I
have interviewed is the martyr’s intention and commitment to God, so that blowing up
only oneself has the same value and reward as killing however many of the enemy. 59

What may appear to the untutored eye as patent declarations of religious
conviction are, on Atran’s account, merely “sacred values” and “moral obligations”
shared among kin and confederates; they have no propositional content. Atran’s bizarre
interpretation of his own data ignores the widespread Muslim belief that martyrs go
straight to Paradise and secure a place for their nearest and dearest there. In light of such
religious ideas, solidarity within a community takes on another dimension. And phrases
like “God will love you just the same” have a meaning worth unpacking. First, it is pretty
clear that Atran’s subjects believe that God exists. What is God’s love good for? It is
good for escaping the fires of hell and reaping an eternity of happiness after death. To say
that the behavior of Muslim jihadists has nothing to do with their religious beliefs is like
saying that honor killings have nothing to do with what their perpetrators believe about
women, sexuality, and male honor.
Beliefs have consequences. In Tanzania, there is a growing criminal trade in the
body parts of albino human beings—as it is widely imagined that albino flesh has
magical properties. Fishermen even weave the hair of albinos into their nets with the
expectation of catching more fish.60 I would not be in the least surprised if an
anthropologist like Atran refused to accept this macabre irrationality at face value and
sought a “deeper” explanation that had nothing to do with the belief in the magical power
of albino body parts. Many social scientists have a perverse inability to accept that people
often believe exactly what they say they believe. In fact, the belief in the curative powers
of human flesh is widespread in Africa, and it used to be common in the West. It is said
that “mummy paint” (a salve made from ground mummy parts) was applied to Lincoln’s
wounds as he lay dying outside Ford’s Theatre. As late as 1908 the Merck medical
catalog sold “genuine Egyptian mummy” to treat epilepsy, abscesses, fractures and the
like. 61 How can we explain this behavior apart from the content of people’s beliefs? We
need not try. Especially when, given the clarity with which they articulate their core
beliefs, there is no mystery whatsoever as to why certain people behave as they do.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), published
by the American Psychiatric Association, is the most widely used reference work for
clinicians in the field of mental health. It defines “delusion” as a “false belief based on
incorrect inference about external reality that is firmly sustained despite what almost
everyone else believes and despite what constitutes incontrovertible and obvious proof or
evidence to the contrary.” Lest we think that certain religious beliefs might fall under the
shadow of this definition, the authors exonerate religious doctrines, in principle, in the
next sentence: “The belief is not one ordinarily accepted by other members of the

person’s culture or subculture (e.g., it is not an article of religious faith)” (p. 765). As
others have observed, there are several problems with this definition. 62 As any clinician
can attest, delusional patients often suffer from religious delusions. And the criterion that
a belief be widely shared suggests that a belief can be delusional in one context and
normative in another, even if the reasons for believing it are held constant. Does a lone
psychotic become sane merely by attracting a crowd of devotees? If we are measuring
sanity in terms of sheer numbers of subscribers, then atheists and agnostics in the United
States must be delusional: a diagnosis which would impugn 93 percent of the members of
the National Academy of Sciences. 63 There are, in fact, more people in the United States
who cannot read than who doubt the existence of Yahweh. 64 In twenty-first-century
America, disbelief in the God of Abraham is about as fringe a phenomenon as can be
named. But so is a commitment to the basic principles of scientific thinking—not to
mention a detailed understanding of genetics, special relativity, or Bayesian statistics.
The boundary between mental illness and respectable religious belief can be
difficult to discern. This was made especially vivid in a recent court case involving a
small group of very committed Christians accused of murdering an eighteen-month-old
infant.65 The trouble began when the boy ceased to say “Amen” before meals. Believing
that he had developed “a spirit of rebellion,” the group, which included the boy’s mother,
deprived him of food and water until he died. Upon being indicted, the mother accepted
an unusual plea agreement: she vowed to cooperate in the prosecution of her
codefendants under the condition that all charges be dropped if her son were resurrected.
The prosecutor accepted this plea provided that that resurrection was “Jesus-like” and did
not include reincarnation as another person or animal. Despite the fact that this band of
lunatics carried the boy’s corpse around in a green suitcase for over a year, awaiting his
reanimation, there is no reason to believe that any of them suffer from a mental illness. It
is obvious, however, that they suffer from religion.

The Clash Between Faith and Reason

Introspection offers no clue that our experience of the world around us, and of
ourselves within it, depends upon voltage changes and chemical interactions taking place
inside our heads. And yet a century and a half of brain science declares it to be so. What
will it mean to finally understand the most prized, lamented, and intimate features of our
subjectivity in terms of neural circuits and information processing?
With respect to our current scientific understanding of the mind, the major
religions remain wedded to doctrines that are growing less plausible by the day. While
the ultimate relationship between consciousness and matter has not been settled, any
naïve conception of a soul can now be jettisoned on account of the mind’s obvious
dependency upon the brain. The idea that there might be an immortal soul capable of
reasoning, feeling love, remembering life events, etc., all the while being metaphysically
independent of the brain, seems untenable given that damage to the relevant neural
circuits obliterates these capacities in a living person. Does the soul of a person suffering
from total aphasia (loss of language ability) still speak and think fluently? This is rather
like asking whether the soul of a diabetic produces abundant insulin. The specific

character of the mind’s dependency on the brain also suggests that there cannot be a
unified self at work in each of us. There are simply too many separable components to
the human mind—each susceptible to independent disruption—for there to be a single
entity to stand as rider to the horse. 66
The soul doctrine suffers further upheaval in light of the fatal resemblance of the
human brain to the brains of other animals. The obvious continuity of our mental powers
with those of ostensibly soulless primates raises special difficulties. If the joint ancestors
of chimpanzees and human beings did not have souls, when did we acquire ours?67 Many
of the world’s major religions ignore these awkward facts and simply assert that human
beings possess a unique form of subjectivity that has no connection to the inner lives of
other animals. The soul is the preeminent keepsake here, but the claim of human
uniqueness generally extends to the moral sense as well: animals are thought to possess
nothing like it. Our moral intuitions must, therefore, be the work of God. Given the
pervasiveness of this claim, intellectually honest scientists cannot help but fall into overt
conflict with religion regarding the origins of morality.
Nevertheless, it is widely imagined that there is no conflict, in principle, between
science and religion because many scientists are themselves “religious,” and some even
believe in the God of Abraham and in the truth of ancient miracles. Even religious
extremists value some of the products of science—antibiotics, computers, bombs, etc.—
and these seeds of inquisitiveness, we are told, can be patiently nurtured in a way that
offers no insult to religious faith.
This prayer of reconciliation goes by many names and now has many advocates.
But it is based on a fallacy. The fact that some scientists do not detect any problem with
religious faith merely proves that a juxtaposition of good ideas and bad ones is possible.
Is there a conflict between marriage and infidelity? The two regularly coincide. The fact
that intellectual honesty can be confined to a ghetto—in a single brain, in an institution,
or in a culture—does not mean that there isn’t a perfect contradiction between reason and
faith, or between the worldview of science taken as a whole and those advanced by the
world’s “great,” and greatly discrepant, religions.
What can be shown by example is how poorly religious scientists manage to
reconcile reason and faith when they actually attempt to do so. Few such efforts have
received more public attention than the work of Francis Collins. Collins is currently the
director of the National Institutes of Health, having been appointed to the post by
President Obama. One must admit that his credentials were impeccable: he is a physical
chemist, a medical geneticist, and the former head of the Human Genome Project. He is
also, by his own account, living proof that there can be no conflict between science and
religion. I will discuss Collins’s views at some length, because he is widely considered
the most impressive example of “sophisticated” faith in action.
In 2006, Collins published a bestselling book, The Language of God, 68 in which
he claimed to demonstrate “a consistent and profoundly satisfying harmony” between
twenty-first-century science and Evangelical Christianity. The Language of God is a
genuinely astonishing book. To read it is to witness nothing less than an intellectual
suicide. It is, however, a suicide that has gone almost entirely unacknowledged: The body
yielded to the rope; the neck snapped; the breath subsided; and the corpse dangles in
ghastly discomposure even now—and yet polite people everywhere continue to celebrate
the great man’s health.

Collins is regularly praised by his fellow scientists for what he is not: he is not a
“young earth creationist,” nor is he a proponent of “intelligent design.” Given the state of
the evidence for evolution, these are both very good things for a scientist not to be. But as
director of the NIH, Collins now has more responsibility for biomedical and healthrelated research than any person on earth, controlling an annual budget of more than $30
billion. He is also one of the foremost representatives of science in the United States. We
need not congratulate him for believing in evolution.
Here is how Collins, as a scientist and educator, summarizes his understanding of
the universe for the general public (what follows are a series of slides, presented in order,
from a lecture Collins gave at the University of California, Berkeley, in 2008):
Slide 1
Almighty God, who is not limited in space or time, created a universe 13.7 billion
years ago with its parameters precisely tuned to allow the development of complexity
over long periods of time.
Slide 2
God’s plan included the mechanism of evolution to create the marvelous diversity
of living things on our planet. Most especially, that creative plan included human beings.
Slide 3
After evolution had prepared a sufficiently advanced “house” (the human brain),
God gifted humanity with the knowledge of good and evil (the Moral Law), with free
will, and with an immortal soul.
Slide 4
We humans use our free will to break the moral law, leading to our estrangement
from God. For Christians, Jesus is the solution to that estrangement.
Slide 5
If the Moral Law is just a side effect of evolution, then there is no such thing as
good or evil. It’s all an illusion. We’ve been hoodwinked. Are any of us, especially the
strong atheists, really prepared to live our lives within that worldview?
Is it really so difficult to perceive a conflict between Collin’s science and his
religion? Just imagine how scientific it would seem to most Americans if Collins, as a
devout Hindu, informed his audience that Lord Brahma had created the universe and now
sleeps; Lord Vishnu sustains it and tinkers with our DNA (in a way that respects the law
of karma and rebirth); and Lord Shiva will eventually destroy it in a great conflagration.
69
Is there any chance that Collins would be running the NIH if he were an outspoken
polytheist?
Early in his career as a physician, Collins attempted to fill the God-shaped hole in
his life by studying the world’s major religions. He admits, however, that he did not get
very far with this research before seeking the tender mercies of “a Methodist minister
who lived down the street.” In fact, Collins’s ignorance of world religion appears
prodigious. For instance, he regularly repeats the Christian canard about Jesus being the
only person in human history who ever claimed to be God (as though this would render
the opinions of an uneducated carpenter of the first century especially credible). Collins
seems oblivious to the fact that saints, yogis, charlatans, and schizophrenics by the
thousands claim to be God at this very instant. And it has always been thus. Forty years
ago, a very unprepossessing Charles Manson convinced a band of misfits in the San
Fernando Valley that he was both God and Jesus. Should we, therefore, consult Manson

on questions of cosmology? He still walks among us—or at least sits—in Corcoran State
Prison. The fact that Collins, as both a scientist and as an influential apologist for
religion, repeatedly emphasizes the silly fiction of Jesus’ singular self-appraisal is one of
many embarrassing signs that he has lived too long in the echo chamber of Evangelical
Christianity.
But the pilgrim continues his progress: next, we learn that Collins’s uncertainty
about the identity of God could not survive a collision with C. S. Lewis. The following
passage from Lewis proved decisive:
I am trying here to prevent anyone saying the really foolish thing that people often
say about Him: “I’m ready to accept Jesus as a great moral teacher, but I don’t accept His
claim to be God.” That is one thing we must not say. A man who was merely a man and
said the sort of things Jesus said would not be a great moral teacher. He would either be a
lunatic—on a level with the man who says He is a poached egg—or else He would be the
Devil of Hell. You must make your choice. Either this man was, and is, the Son of God:
or else a madman or something worse. You can shut Him up for a fool, you can spit at
Him and kill Him as a demon; or you can fall at His feet and call him Lord and God. But
let us not come with any patronizing nonsense about His being a great human teacher. He
has not left that open to us. He did not intend to.

Collins provides this pabulum for our contemplation and then describes how it
irrevocably altered his view of the universe:
Lewis was right. I had to make a choice. A full year had passed since I decided to
believe in some sort of God, and now I was being called to account. On a beautiful fall
day, as I was hiking in the Cascade Mountains during my first trip west of the
Mississippi, the majesty and beauty of God’s creation overwhelmed my resistance. As I
rounded a corner and saw a beautiful and unexpected frozen waterfall, hundreds of feet
high, I knew the search was over. The next morning, I knelt in the dewy grass as the sun
rose and surrendered to Jesus Christ.70

This is self-deception at full gallop. It is simply astounding that this passage was
written by a scientist with the intent of demonstrating the compatibility of faith and
reason. And if we thought Collins’s reasoning could grow no more labile, he has since
divulged that the waterfall was frozen into three streams, which put him in mind of the
Holy Trinity. 71
It should go without saying that if a frozen waterfall can confirm the specific
tenets of Christianity, anything can confirm anything. But this truth was not obvious to
Collins as he “knelt in the dewy grass,” and it is not obvious to him now. Nor was it
obvious to the editors of Nature, which is the most important scientific publication in any
language. The journal praised Collins for engaging “with people of faith to explore how
science—both in its mode of thought and its results—is consistent with their religious
beliefs.” 72 According to Nature, Collins was engaged in the “moving” and “laudable”
exercise of building “a bridge across the social and intellectual divide that exists between
most of U.S. academia and the so-called heartlands.” And here is Collins, hard at work on
that bridge:

As believers, you are right to hold fast to the concept of God as Creator; you are
right to hold fast to the truths of the Bible; you are right to hold fast to the conclusion that
science offers no answers to the most pressing questions of human existence; and you are
right to hold fast to the certainty that the claims of atheistic materialism must be
steadfastly resisted.73

God, who is not limited to space and time, created the universe and established
natural laws that govern it. Seeking to populate this otherwise sterile universe with living
creatures, God chose the elegant mechanism of evolution to create microbes, plants, and
animals of all sorts. Most remarkably, God intentionally chose the same mechanism to
give rise to special creatures who would have intelligence, a knowledge of right and
wrong, free will, and a desire to seek fellowship with Him. He also knew these creatures
would ultimately choose to disobey the Moral Law.74
Imagine: the year is 2006; half of the American population believes that the
universe is 6,000 years old; our president has just used his first veto to block federal
funding for the world’s most promising medical research on religious grounds; and one
of the foremost scientists in the land has this to say, straight from the heart (if not the
brain).
Of course, once the eyes of faith have opened, confirmation can be found
everywhere. Here Collins considers whether to accept the directorship of the Human
Genome Project:
I spent a long afternoon praying in a little chapel, seeking guidance about this
decision. I did not “hear” God speak—in fact, I’ve never had that experience. But during
those hours, ending in an evensong service that I had not expected, a peace settled over
me. A few days later, I accepted the offer. 75

One hopes to see, but does not find, the phrase “Dear Diary” framing these
solemn excursions from honest reasoning. Again we find a peculiar emphasis on the most
unremarkable violations of expectation: just as Collins had not expected to see a frozen
waterfall, he had not expected an evensong service. How unlikely would it be to
encounter an evensong service (generally celebrated just before sunset) while spending “a
long afternoon praying in a little chapel”? And what of Collins’s feeling of “peace”? We
are clearly meant to view it as some indication, however slight, of the veracity of his
religious beliefs. Elsewhere in his book Collins states, correctly, that “monotheism and
polytheism cannot both be right.” But doesn’t he think that at some point in the last
thousand years a Hindu or two has prayed in a temple, perhaps to the elephant-headed
god Ganesh, and experienced similar feelings of peace? What might he, as a scientist,
make of this fact?
I should say at this point that I see nothing irrational about seeking the states of
mind that lie at the core of many of the world’s religions. Compassion, awe, devotion,
and feelings of oneness are surely among the most valuable experiences a person can
have. What is irrational, and irresponsible in a scientist and educator, is to make
unjustified and unjustifiable claims about the structure of the universe, about the divine
origin of certain books, and about the future of humanity on the basis of such

experiences. And by the standards of even ordinary contemplative experience, the
phenomena that Collins puts forward in support of his religious beliefs scarcely merit
discussion. A beautiful waterfall? An unexpected church service? A feeling of peace?
The fact that these are the most salient landmarks on Collins’s journey out of bondage
may be the most troubling detail in this positive sea of troubles.
Collins argues that science makes belief in God “intensely plausible”—the Big
Bang, the fine-tuning of Nature’s constants, the emergence of complex life, the
effectiveness of mathematics, 76 all suggest to him that a “loving, logical, and consistent”
God exists. But when challenged with alternate (and far more plausible) accounts of these
phenomena—or with evidence that suggests that God might be unloving, illogical,
inconsistent, or, indeed, absent—Collins declares that God stands outside of Nature, and
thus science cannot address the question of His existence at all. Similarly, Collins insists
that our moral intuitions attest to God’s existence, to His perfectly moral character, and to
His desire to have fellowship with every member of our species; but when our moral
intuitions recoil at the casual destruction of innocent children by tidal wave or
earthquake, Collins assures us that our time-bound notions of good and evil cannot be
trusted and that God’s will is a perfect mystery. 77 As is often the case with religious
apology, it is a case of heads, faith wins; tails, reason loses.
Like most Christians, Collins believes in a suite of canonical miracles, including
the virgin birth and literal resurrection of Jesus Christ. He cites N. T. Wright78 and John
Polkinghorne 79 as the best authorities on these matters, and when pressed on points of
theology, he recommends that people consult their books for further illumination. To give
readers a taste of this literature, here is Polkinghorne describing the physics of the
coming resurrection of the dead:
If we regard human beings as psychosomatic unities, as I believe both the Bible
and contemporary experience of the intimate connection between mind and brain
encourage us to do, then the soul will have to be understood in an Aristotelian sense as
the “form,” or information-bearing pattern, of the body. Though this pattern is dissolved
at death it seems perfectly rational to believe that it will be remembered by God and
reconstituted in a divine act of resurrection. The “matter” of the world to come, which
will be the carrier of the reembodiment, will be the transformed matter of the present
universe, itself redeemed by God beyond its cosmic death. The resurrected universe is not
a second attempt by the Creator to produce a world ex nihilo but it is the transmutation of
the present world in an act of new creation ex vetere. God will then truly be “all in all” (1
Cor. 15:28) in a totally sacramental universe whose divine infused “matter” will be
delivered from the transience and decay inherent in the present physical process. Such
mysterious and exciting beliefs depend for their motivation not only on the faithfulness of
God, but also on Christ’s resurrection, understood as the seminal event from which the
new creation grows, and indeed also on the detail of the empty tomb, with its implication
that the Lord’s risen and glorified body is the transmutation of his dead body, just as the
world to come will be the transformation of this present mortal world. 80

These beliefs are, indeed, “mysterious and exciting.” As it happens, Polkinghorne
is also a scientist. The problem, however, is that it is impossible to differentiate his
writing on religion—which now fills an entire shelf of books—from an extraordinarily

patient Sokal-style hoax.81 If one intended to embarrass the religious establishment with
carefully constructed nonsense, this is exactly the sort of pseudoscience, pseudoscholarship, and pseudoreasoning one would employ. Unfortunately, I see no reason to
doubt Polkinghorne’s sincerity. Neither, it would seem, does Francis Collins.
Even for a scientist of Collins’s stature, who has struggled to reconcile his belief
in the divinity of Jesus with modern science, it all boils down to the “empty tomb.”
Collins freely admits that if all his scientific arguments for the plausibility of God were
proven to be in error, his faith would be undiminished, as it is founded upon the belief,
shared by all serious Christians, that the Gospel account of the miracles of Jesus is true.
The problem, however, is that miracle stories are as common as house dust, even in the
twenty-first century. For instance, all of Jesus’ otherworldly powers have been attributed
to the South Indian guru Sathya Sai Baba by vast numbers of living eyewitnesses. Sai
Baba even claims to have been born of a virgin. This is actually not an uncommon claim
in the history of religion, or in history generally. Even worldly men like Genghis Khan
and Alexander were once thought to have been born of virgins (parthenogenesis
apparently offers no guarantee that a man will turn the other cheek). Thus, Collins’s faith
is predicated on the claim that miracle stories of the sort that today surround a person like
Sathya Sai Baba—and do not even merit an hour on cable television—somehow become
especially credible when set in the prescientific religious context of the first-century
Roman Empire, decades after their supposed occurrence, as evidenced by discrepant and
fragmentary copies of copies of copies of ancient Greek manuscripts. 82 It is on this basis
that the current head of the NIH recommends that we believe the following propositions:
1. Jesus Christ, a carpenter by trade, was born of a virgin, ritually murdered as a
scapegoat for the collective sins of his species, and then resurrected from death after an
interval of three days.
2. He promptly ascended, bodily, to “heaven”—where, for two millennia, he has
eavesdropped upon (and, on occasion, even answered) the simultaneous prayers of
billions of beleaguered human beings.
3. Not content to maintain this numinous arrangement indefinitely, this invisible
carpenter will one day return to earth to judge humanity for its sexual indiscretions and
skeptical doubts, at which time he will grant immortality to anyone who has had the good
fortune to be convinced, on Mother’s knee, that this baffling litany of miracles is the most
important series of truths ever revealed about the cosmos.
4. Every other member of our species, past and present, from Cleopatra to
Einstein, no matter what his or her terrestrial accomplishments, will be consigned to a far
less desirable fate, best left unspecified.
5. In the meantime, God/Jesus may or may not intervene in our world, as He
pleases, curing the occasional end-stage cancer (or not), answering an especially earnest
prayer for guidance (or not), consoling the bereaved (or not), through His perfectly wise
and loving agency.
Just how many scientific laws would be violated by this scheme? One is tempted
to say “all of them.” And yet, judging from the way that journals like Nature have treated
Collins, one can only conclude that there is nothing in the scientific worldview, or in the
intellectual rigor and self-criticism that gave rise to it, that casts these convictions in an
unfavorable light.
Prior to his appointment as head of the NIH, Collins started an organization called

the BioLogos Foundation, whose purpose (in the words of its mission statement) is to
communicate “the compatibility of the Christian faith with scientific discoveries about
the origins of the universe and life.” BioLogos is funded by the Templeton Foundation,
an organization that claims to seek answers to “life’s biggest questions,” but appears
primarily dedicated to erasing the boundary between religion and science. Because of its
astonishing wealth, Templeton seems able to purchase the complicity of otherwise
secular academics as it seeks to rebrand religious faith as a legitimate arm of science.
True to form, Nature has adopted an embarrassingly supine posture with respect to
Templeton as well. 83
Would Collins have received the same treatment in Nature if he had argued for
the compatibility between science and witchcraft, astrology, or Tarot cards? On the
contrary, he would have been met by an inferno of criticism. As a point of comparison,
we should recall that the biochemist Rupert Sheldrake had his academic career neatly
decapitated by a single Nature editorial. 84 In his book A New Science of Life, Sheldrake
advanced a theory of “morphic resonance,” in an attempt to account for how living
systems and other patterns in nature develop. 85 Needless to say, the theory stands a very
good chance of being utterly wrong. But there is not a single sentence in Sheldrake’s
book to rival the intellectual dishonesty that Collins achieves on nearly every page of The
Language of God. 86 What accounts for the double standard? Clearly, it remains taboo to
criticize mainstream religion (which, in the West, means Christianity, Judaism, and
Islam).
According to Collins, the moral law applies exclusively to human beings:
Though other animals may at times appear to show glimmerings of a moral sense,
they are certainly not widespread, and in many instances other species’ behavior seems to
be in dramatic contrast to any sense of universal rightness. 87

One wonders if the author has ever read a newspaper. The behavior of humans
offers no such “dramatic contrast”? How badly must human beings behave to put this
“sense of universal rightness” in doubt? While no other species can match us for altruism,
none can match us for sadistic cruelty either. And just how widespread must
“glimmerings” of morality be among other animals before Collins—who, after all, knows
a thing or two about genes—begins to wonder whether our moral sense has evolutionary
precursors? What if mice show greater distress at the suffering of familiar mice than
unfamiliar ones? (They do.88) What if monkeys will starve themselves to prevent their
cage mates from receiving painful shocks? (They will. 89) What if chimps have a
demonstrable sense of fairness when receiving food rewards? (They have. 90) What if
dogs do too? (Ditto. 91) Wouldn’t these be precisely the sorts of findings one would
expect if our morality were the product of evolution?
Collins’s case for the supernatural origin of morality rests on the further assertion
that there can be no evolutionary explanation for genuine altruism. Because self-sacrifice
cannot increase the likelihood that an individual creature will survive and reproduce,
truly self-sacrificing behavior stands as a primordial rejoinder to any biological account
of morality. In Collins’s view, therefore, the mere existence of altruism offers compelling
evidence of a personal God. A moment’s thought reveals, however, that if we were to
accept this neutered biology, almost everything about us would be bathed in the warm

glow of religious mystery. Smoking cigarettes isn’t a healthy habit and is unlikely to
offer an adaptive advantage—and there were no cigarettes in the Paleolithic—but this
habit is very widespread and compelling. Is God, by any chance, a tobacco farmer?
Collins can’t seem to see that human morality and selfless love may arise from more
basic biological and psychological traits, which were themselves products of evolution. It
is hard to interpret this oversight in light of his scientific training. If one didn’t know
better, one might be tempted to conclude that religious dogmatism presents an obstacle to
scientific reasoning.
There are, of course, ethical implications to believing that human beings are the
only species made in God’s image and vouchsafed with “immortal souls.” Concern about
souls is a very poor guide to ethical behavior—that is, to actually mitigating the suffering
of conscious creatures like ourselves. The belief that the soul enters the zygote at (or very
near) the moment of conception leads to spurious worries about the fate of
undifferentiated cells in Petri dishes and, therefore, to profound qualms over embryonic
stem cell research. Rather often, a belief in souls leaves people indifferent to the suffering
of creatures thought not to possess them. There are many species of animals that can
suffer in ways that three-day-old human embryos cannot. The use of apes in medical
research, the exposure of whales and dolphins to military sonar 92—these are real ethical
dilemmas, with real suffering at issue. Concern over human embryos smaller than the
period at the end of this sentence—when, for years they have constituted one of the most
promising contexts for medical research—is one of the many delusional products of
religion that has led to an ethical blind alley, and to terrible failures of compassion. While
Collins appears to support embryonic stem-cell research, he does so after much (literal)
soul searching and under considerable theological duress. Everything he has said and
written about the subject needlessly complicates an ethical question that is—if one is
actually concerned about human and animal well-being—utterly straightforward.
The ethics of embryonic stem-cell research, which currently entails the
destruction of human embryos, can be judged only by considering what embryos at the
150-cell-stage actually are. We must contemplate their destruction in light of how we
treat organisms at similar and greater stages of complexity, as well as how we treat
human beings at later stages of development. For instance, there are a variety of
conditions that can occur during gestation, the remedy for which entails the destruction of
far more developed embryos—and yet these interventions offer far less potential benefit
to society. Curiously, no one objects to such procedures. A child can be born with his
underdeveloped yet living twin lodged inside him—a condition known as fetus in fetu.
Occasionally this condition isn’t discovered until years after birth, when the first child
complains about having something moving around inside his body. This second child is
then removed like a tumor and destroyed. 93 As God seems to love diversity, there are
countless permutations of this condition, and twins can fuse in almost any way
imaginable. The second twin can also be a disorganized mass called a teratoma. Needless
to say, any parasitic twin, however disorganized, will be a far more developed entity than
an embryo at the 150-cell stage. Even the intentional sacrifice of one conjoined
(“Siamese”) twin to save the other has occurred in the United States, with shared organs
being given to the survivor. In fact, there have been cases where unshared organs have
been transferred from the twin that is to be sacrificed. 94
Some have argued that the “viability” of an organism is the primary issue here:

for without some extraordinary intervention such twins cannot survive. But many fully
developed human beings answer to this condition of utter dependency at some point in
their lives (e.g., a kidney patient on dialysis). And embryos themselves are not viable
unless placed in the proper conditions. Indeed, embryos could be engineered to not be
viable past a certain age even if implanted in a womb. Would this obviate the ethical
concerns of those who oppose embryonic stem-cell research?
At the time of this writing, the Obama administration still has not removed the
most important impediments to embryonic stem-cell research. Currently, federal funding
is only allowed for work on stem cells that have been derived from surplus embryos at
fertility clinics. This delicacy is a clear concession to the religious convictions of the
American electorate. While Collins seems willing to go further and support research on
embryos created through somatic-cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), he is very far from being
a voice of ethical clarity in this debate. For instance, he considers embryos created
through SCNT to be distinct from those formed through the union of sperm and egg
because the former are “not part of God’s plan to create a human individual” while “the
latter is very much part of God’s plan, carried out through the millennia by our own
species and many others.”95 What is to be gained in a serious discussion of bioethics by
talking about “God’s plan”? If such embryos were brought to term and became sentient
and suffering human beings, would it be ethical to kill these people and harvest their
organs because they had been conceived apart from “God’s plan”? While Collins’s
stewardship of the NIH seems unlikely to impede our mincing progress on embryonic
stem-cell research, his appointment is one of President Obama’s efforts to split the
difference between real science and real ethics on the one hand and religious superstition
and taboo on the other.
Collins has written that “science offers no answers to the most pressing questions
of human existence” and that “the claims of atheistic materialism must be steadfastly
resisted.” One can only hope that these convictions will not affect his judgment at the
NIH. As I have argued throughout this book, understanding human well-being at the level
of the brain might very well offer some answers to the most pressing questions of human
existence—questions like, Why do we suffer? How can we achieve the deepest forms of
happiness? Or, indeed, Is it possible to love one’s neighbor as oneself? And wouldn’t any
effort to explain human nature without reference to a soul, and to explain morality
without reference to God, constitute “atheistic materialism”? Is it really wise to entrust
the future of biomedical research in the United States to a man who believes that
understanding ourselves through science is impossible, while our resurrection from death
is inevitable?
When I criticized President Obama’s appointment of Collins in TheNew York
Times, many readers considered it an overt expression of “intolerance.” 96 For instance,
the biologist Kenneth Miller claimed in a letter to the editor that my view was purely the
product of my own “deeply held prejudices against religion” and that I opposed Collins
merely because “he is a Christian.” 97 Writing in TheGuardian, Andrew Brown called my
criticism of Collins a “fantastically illiberal and embryonically totalitarian position that
goes against every possible notion of human rights and even the American constitution.”
Miller and Brown clearly feel that unjustified beliefs and disordered thinking should not
be challenged as long as they are associated with a mainstream religion—and that to do
so is synonymous with bigotry. They are not alone.

There is now a large and growing literature—spanning dozens of books and
hundreds of articles—attacking Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Christopher Hitchens,
and me (the so-called New Atheists) for our alleged incivility, bias, and ignorance of how
“sophisticated” believers practice their faith. It is often said that we caricature religion,
taking its most extreme forms to represent the whole. We do no such thing. We simply do
what a paragon of sophisticated faith like Francis Collins does: we take the specific
claims of religion seriously.
Many of our secular critics worry that if we oblige people to choose between
reason and faith, they will choose faith and cease to support scientific research; if, on the
other hand, we ceaselessly reiterate that there is no conflict between religion and science,
we might cajole great multitudes into accepting the truth of evolution (as though this
were an end in itself). Here is a version of this charge that, I fear, most people would
accept, taken from journalist Chris Mooney and marine biologist Sheril Kirshenbaum’s
book Unscientific America:
If the goal is to create an America more friendly toward science and reason, the
combativeness of the New Atheists is strongly counterproductive. If anything, they work
in ironic combination with their dire enemies, the anti-science conservative Christians
who populate the creation science and intelligent design movements, to ensure we’ll
continue to be polarized over subjects like the teaching of evolution when we don’t have
to be. America is a very religious nation, and if forced to choose between faith and
science, vast numbers of Americans will select the former. The New Atheists err in
insisting that such a choice needs to be made. Atheism is not the logically inevitable
outcome of scientific reasoning, any more than intelligent design is a necessary corollary
of religious faith. A great many scientists believe in God with no sense of internal
contradiction, just as many religious believers accept evolution as the correct theory to
explain the development, diversity, and inter-relatedness of life on Earth. The New
Atheists, like the fundamentalists they so despise, are setting up a false dichotomy that
can only damage the cause of scientific literacy for generations to come. It threatens to
leave science itself caught in the middle between extremes, unable to find cover in a
destructive, seemingly unending, culture war. 98

The first thing to observe is that Mooney and Kirshenbaum are confused about the
nature of the problem. The goal is not to get more Americans to merely accept the truth
of evolution (or any other scientific theory); the goal is to get them to value the principles
of reasoning and educated discourse that now make a belief in evolution obligatory.
Doubt about evolution is merely a symptom of an underlying condition; the condition is
faith itself—conviction without sufficient reason, hope mistaken for knowledge, bad
ideas protected from good ones, good ideas obscured by bad ones, wishful thinking
elevated to a principle of salvation, etc. Mooney and Kirshenbaum seem to imagine that
we can get people to value intellectual honesty by lying to them.
While it is invariably advertised as an expression of “respect” for people of faith,
the accommodationism that Mooney and Kirshenbaum recommend is nothing more than
naked condescension, motivated by fear. They assure us that people will choose religion
over science, no matter how good a case is made against religion. In certain contexts,
this fear is probably warranted. I wouldn’t be eager to spell out the irrationality of Islam

while standing in the Great Mosque in Mecca. But let’s be honest about how Mooney and
Kirshenbaum view public discourse in the United States: Watch what you say, or the
Christian mob will burn down the Library of Alexandria all over again. By comparison,
the “combativeness” of the “New Atheists” seems quite collegial. We are merely guilty
of assuming that our fellow Homo sapiens possess the requisite intelligence and
emotional maturity to respond to rational argument, satire, and ridicule on the subject of
religion—just as they respond to these discursive pressures on all other subjects. Of
course, we could be wrong. But let’s admit which side in this debate currently views our
neighbors as dangerous children and which views them as adults who might prefer not to
be completely mistaken about the nature of reality.
Finally, we come to the kernel of confusion that has been the subject of this
section—the irrelevant claim that “a great many scientists believe in God with no sense
of internal contradiction.” 99 The fact that certain people can reason poorly with a clear
conscience—or can do so while saying that they have a clear conscience—proves
absolutely nothing about the compatibility of religious and scientific ideas, goals, or ways
of thinking. It is possible to be wrong and to not know it (we call this “ignorance”). It is
possible to be wrong and to know it, but to be reluctant to incur the social cost of
admitting this publicly (we call this “hypocrisy”). And it may also be possible to be
wrong, to dimly glimpse this fact, but to allow the fear of being wrong to increase one’s
commitment to one’s erroneous beliefs (we call this “self-deception”). It seems clear that
these frames of mind do an unusual amount of work in the service of religion.
There is an epidemic of scientific ignorance in the United States. This isn’t
surprising, as very few scientific truths are self-evident and many are deeply
counterintuitive. It is by no means obvious that empty space has structure or that we share
a common ancestor with both the housefly and the banana. It can be difficult to think like
a scientist (even, we have begun to see, when one is a scientist). But it would seem that
few things make thinking like a scientist more difficult than an attachment to religion.

Chapter 5
THE FUTURE OF HAPPINESS

No one has ever mistaken me for an optimist. And yet when I consider one of the
more pristine sources of pessimism—the moral development of our species—I find
reasons for hope. Despite our perennial bad behavior, our moral progress seems to me
unmistakable. Our powers of empathy are clearly growing. Today, we are surely more
likely to act for the benefit of humanity as a whole than at any point in the past.
Of course, the twentieth century delivered some unprecedented horrors. But those
of us who live in the developed world are becoming increasingly disturbed by our
capacity to do one another harm. We are less tolerant of “collateral damage” in times of
war—undoubtedly because we now see images of it—and we are less comfortable with
ideologies that demonize whole populations, justifying their abuse or outright destruction.
Consider the degree to which racism in the United States has diminished in the
last hundred years. Racism is still a problem, of course. But the evidence of change is
undeniable. Most readers will have seen photos of lynchings from the first half of the
twentieth century, in which whole towns turned out, as though for a carnival, simply to
enjoy the sight of some young man or woman being tortured to death and strung up on a
tree or lamppost for all to see. These pictures often reveal bankers, lawyers, doctors,
teachers, church elders, newspaper editors, policemen, even the occasional senator and
congressman, smiling in their Sunday best, having consciously posed for a postcard photo
under a dangling, lacerated, and often partially cremated person. Such images are
shocking enough. But realize that these genteel people often took souvenirs of the body—
teeth, ears, fingers, kneecaps, genitalia, and internal organs—home to show their friends
and family. Sometimes, they even displayed these ghoulish trophies in their places of
business. 1
Consider the following response to boxer Jack Johnson’s successful title defense
against Jim Jeffries, the so-called “Great White Hope”:
A Word to the Black Man:
Do not point your nose too high
Do not swell your chest too much
Do not boast too loudly
Do not be puffed up
Let not your ambition be inordinate
Or take a wrong direction
Remember you have done nothing at all
You are just the same member of society you were last week
You are on no higher plane

Deserve no new consideration
And will get none
No man will think a bit higher of you
Because your complexion is the same
Of that of the victor at Reno2
A modern reader can only assume that this dollop of racist hatred appeared on a
leaflet printed by the Ku Klux Klan. On the contrary, this was the measured opinion of
the editors at the Los Angeles Times exactly a century ago. Is it conceivable that our
mainstream media will ever again give voice to such racism? I think it far more likely
that we will proceed along our current path: racism will continue to lose its subscribers;
the history of slavery in the United States will become even more flabbergasting to
contemplate; and future generations will marvel at the the ways that we, too, failed in our
commitment to the common good. We will embarrass our descendants, just as our
ancestors embarrass us. This is moral progress.
I am bolstered in this expectation by my view of the moral landscape: the belief
that morality is a genuine sphere of human inquiry, and not a mere product of culture,
suggests that progress is possible. If moral truths transcend the contingencies of culture,
human beings should eventually converge in their moral judgments. I am painfully aware,
however, that we are living at a time when Muslims riot by the hundreds of thousands
over cartoons, Catholics oppose condom use in villages decimated by AIDS, and one of
the few “moral” judgments guaranteed to unite the better part of humanity is that
homosexuality is an abomination. And yet I can detect moral progress even while
believing that most people are profoundly confused about good and evil. I may be a
greater optimist than I thought.

Science and Philosophy

Throughout this book, I have argued that the split between facts and values—and,
therefore, between science and morality—is an illusion. However, the discussion has
taken place on at least two levels: I have reviewed scientific data that, I believe, supports
my argument; but I have made a more basic, philosophical case, the validity of which
does not narrowly depend on current data. Readers may wonder how these levels are
related.
First, we should observe that a boundary between science and philosophy does
not always exist. Einstein famously doubted Bohr’s view of quantum mechanics, and yet
both physicists were armed with the same experimental findings and mathematical
techniques. Was their disagreement a matter of “philosophy” or “physics”? We cannot
always draw a line between scientific thinking and “mere” philosophy because all data
must be interpreted against a background theory, and different theories come bundled
with a fair amount of contextual reasoning. A dualist who believes in the existence of
immaterial souls might say that the entire field of neuroscience is beholden to the
philosophy of physicalism (the view that mental events should be understood as physical
events), and he would be right. The assumption that the mind is the product of the brain is

integral to almost everything neuroscientists do. Is physicalism a matter of “philosophy”
or “neuroscience”? The answer may depend upon where one happens to be standing on a
university campus. Even if we grant that only philosophers tend to think about
“physicalism” per se, it remains a fact that any argument or experiment that put this
philosophical assumption in doubt would be a landmark finding for neuroscience—likely
the most important in its history. So while there are surely some philosophical views that
make no contact with science, science is often a matter of philosophy in practice. It is
probably worth recalling that the original name for the physical sciences was, in fact,
“natural philosophy.”
Throughout the sections of this book that could be aptly described as
“philosophical,” I make many points that have scientific implications. Most scientists
treat facts and values as though they were distinct and irreconcilable in principle. I have
argued that they cannot be, as anything of value must be valuable to someone (whether
actually or potentially)—and, therefore, its value should be attributable to facts about the
well-being of conscious creatures. One could call this a “philosophical” position, but it is
one that directly relates to the boundaries of science. If I am correct, science has a far
wider purview than many of its practitioners suppose, and its findings may one day
impinge upon culture in ways that they do not expect. If I am wrong, the boundaries of
science are as narrow as most people assume. This difference of view might be ascribed
to “philosophy,” but it is a difference that will determine the practice of science in the
years to come.
Recall the work of Jonathan Haidt, discussed at some length in chapter 2: Haidt
has convinced many people, both inside and outside the scientific community, that there
are two types of morality: liberal morality focuses on two primary concerns (harm and
fairness), while conservative morality emphasizes five (harm, fairness, authority, purity,
and group loyalty). As a result, many people believe that liberals and conservatives are
bound to view human behavior in incompatible ways and that science will never be able
to say that one approach to morality is “better” or “truer” or more “moral” than the other.
I think that Haidt is wrong, for at least two reasons. First, I suspect that the extra
factors he attributes to conservatives can be understood as further concerns about harm.
That is, I believe that conservatives have the same morality as liberals do, they just have
different ideas about how harm accrues in this universe. 3 There is also some research to
suggest that conservatives are more prone to feelings of disgust, and this seems to
especially influence their moral judgments on the subject of sex. 4 More important,
whatever the differences between liberals and conservatives may or may not be, if my
argument about the moral landscape is correct, one approach to morality is likely more
conducive to human flourishing than the other. While my disagreement with Haidt may
be more a matter of argument than of experiment at present, whichever argument prevails
will affect the progress of science, as well as science’s impact on the rest of culture.

The Psychology of Happiness

I have said very little in this book about the current state of psychological science
as it relates to human well-being. This research—which occasionally goes by the name of

“positive psychology”—is in its infancy, especially when it comes to understanding the
relevant details at the level of the brain. And given the difficulty of defining human wellbeing, coupled with the general reluctance of scientists to challenge anyone’s beliefs
about it, it is sometimes hard to know what is being studied in this research. What does it
mean, for instance, to compare self-reported ratings of “happiness” or “life satisfaction”
between individuals or across cultures? I’m not at all sure. Clearly, a person’s conception
of what is possible in human life will affect her judgment of whether she has made the
best use of her opportunities, met her goals, developed deep friendships, etc. Some
people will go to bed tonight proud to have merely reduced their daily consumption of
methamphetamine; others will be frustrated that their rank on the Forbes 400 list has
slipped into the triple digits. Where one is satisfied to be in life often has a lot to do with
where one has been.
I once knew a very smart and talented man who sent an email to dozens of friends
and acquaintances declaring his intention to kill himself. As you might expect, this
communication prompted a flurry of responses. While I did not know him well, I sent
several emails urging him to seek professional counseling, to try antidepressants, to
address his sleep issues, and to do a variety of other obvious things to combat depression.
In each of his replies, however, he insisted that he was not depressed. He believed
himself to be acting on a philosophical insight: everyone dies eventually; life, therefore,
is ultimately pointless; thus, there is no reason to keep on living if one doesn’t want to.
We went back and forth on these topics, as I sought to persuade him that his
“insight” was itself a symptom of depression or some other mood disorder. I argued that
if he simply felt better, he wouldn’t believe that his life was no longer worth living. No
doubt many other people had similar exchanges with him. These communications seemed
to nudge him away from the precipice for a while. Four years later, however, he
committed suicide.
Experiences of this kind reveal how difficult it can be to discuss the subject of
human well-being. Communication on any subject can be misleading, of course, because
people often use the same words quite differently. Talking about states of mind poses
special difficulties, however. Was my friend really “depressed” in my sense of the term?
Did he even know what I meant by “depression”? Did I know what I should have meant
by it? For instance, are there forms of depression that have yet to be differentiated which
admit of distinct remedies? And is it possible that my friend suffered from none of these?
Is it, in other words, possible for a person to see no point in living another day, and to be
motivated to kill himself, without experiencing any disorder of mood? Two things seem
quite clear to me at this point: such questions have answers, and yet we often do not
know enough about human experience to even properly discuss the questions themselves.
We can mean many things when using words like “happiness” and “well-being.”
This makes it difficult to study the most positive aspects of human experience
scientifically. In fact, it makes it difficult for many of us to even know what goals in life
are worth seeking. Just how happy and fulfilled should we expect to be in our careers or
intimate relationships? Much of the skepticism I encounter when speaking about these
issues comes from people who think “happiness” is a superficial state of mind and that
there are far more important things in life than “being happy.” Some readers may think
that concepts like “well-being” and “flourishing” are similarly effete. However, I don’t
know of any better terms with which to signify the most positive states of being to which

we can aspire. One of the virtues of thinking about a moral landscape, the heights of
which remain to be discovered, is that it frees us from these semantic difficulties.
Generally speaking, we need only worry about what it will mean to move “up” as
opposed to “down.”
Some of what psychologists have learned about human well-being confirms what
everyone already knows: people tend to be happier if they have good friends, basic
control over their lives, and enough money to meet their needs. Loneliness, helplessness,
and poverty are not recommended. We did not need science to tell us this.
But the best of this research also reveals that our intuitions about happiness are
often quite wrong. For instance, most of us feel that having more choices available to
us—when seeking a mate, choosing a career, shopping for a new stove, etc.—is always
desirable. But while having some choice is generally good, it seems that having too many
options tends to undermine our feelings of satisfaction, no matter which option we
choose. 5 Knowing this, it could be rational to strategically limit one’s choices. Anyone
who has ever remodeled a home will know the glassy-eyed anguish of having gone to one
too many stores in search of the perfect faucet.
One of the most interesting things to come out of the research on human
happiness is the discovery that we are very bad judges of how we will feel in the future—
an ability that the psychologist Daniel Gilbert has called “affective forecasting.” Gilbert
and others have shown that we systematically overestimate the degree to which good and
bad experiences will affect us.6 Changes in wealth, health, age, marital status, etc., tend
not to matter as much as we think they will—and yet we make our most important
decisions in life based on these inaccurate assumptions. It is useful to know that what we
think will matter often matters much less than we think. Conversely, things we consider
trivial can actually impact our lives greatly. If you have ever been impressed by how
people often rise to the occasion while experiencing great hardship but can fall to pieces
over minor inconveniences, you have seen this principle at work. The general finding of
this research is now uncontroversial: we are poorly placed to accurately recall the past, to
perceive the present, or to anticipate the future with respect to our own happiness. It
seems little wonder, therefore, that we are so often unfulfilled.

Which Self Should We Satisfy?

If you ask people to report on their level of well-being moment-to-moment—by
giving them a beeper that sounds at random intervals, prompting them to record their
mental state—you get one measure of how happy they are. If, however, you simply ask
them how satisfied they are with their lives generally, you often get a very different
measure. The psychologist Daniel Kahneman calls the first source of information “the
experiencing self” and the second “the remembering self.” And his justification for
partitioning the human mind in this way is that these two “selves” often disagree. Indeed,
they can be experimentally shown to disagree, even across a relatively brief span of time.
We saw this earlier with respect to Kahneman’s data on colonoscopies: because “the
remembering self” evaluates any experience by reference to its peak intensity and its final
moments (the “peak/end rule”), it is possible to improve its lot, at the expense of “the

experiencing self,” by simply prolonging an unpleasant procedure at its lowest level of
intensity (and thereby reducing the negativity of future memories).
What applies to colonoscopies seems to apply elsewhere in life. Imagine, for
instance, that you want to go on vacation: You are deciding between a trip to Hawaii and
a trip to Rome. On Hawaii, you envision yourself swimming in the ocean, relaxing on the
beach, playing tennis, and drinking mai tais. Rome will find you sitting in cafés, visiting
museums and ancient ruins, and drinking an impressive amount of wine. Which vacation
should you choose? It is quite possible that your “experiencing self” would be much
happier on Hawaii, as indicated by an hourly tally of your emotional and sensory
pleasure, while your remembering self would give a much more positive account of
Rome one year hence. Which self would be right? Does the question even make sense?
Kahneman observes that while most of us think our “experiencing self” must be more
important, it has no voice in our decisions about what to do in life. After all, we can’t
choose from among experiences; we must choose from among remembered (or imagined)
experiences. And, according to Kahneman, we don’t tend to think about the future as a
set of experiences; we think of it as a set of “anticipated memories.” 7 The problem, with
regard to both doing science and living one’s life, is that the “remembering self” is the
only one who can think and speak about the past. It is, therefore, the only one who can
consciously make decisions in light of past experience.
According to Kahneman, the correlation in well-being between these two “selves”
is around 0.5.8 This is essentially the same correlation observed between identical twins,
or between a person and himself a decade later. 9 It would seem, therefore, that about half
the information about a person’s happiness is still left on the table whichever “self” we
consult. What are we to make of a “remembering self” who claims to have a wonderful
life, while his “experiencing self” suffers continuous marital stress, health complaints,
and career anxiety? And what of a person whose “remembering self” claims to be deeply
dissatisfied—having failed to reach his most important goals—but whose moment-tomoment state of happiness is quite high? Kahneman seems to think that there is no way to
reconcile disparities of this sort. If true, this would appear to present a problem for any
science of morality.
It seems clear, however, that the “remembering self” is simply the “experiencing
self” in one of its modes. Imagine, for instance, that you are going about your day quite
happily, experiencing one moment of contentment after the next, when you run into an
old rival from school. Looking like the very incarnation of success, he asks what you
have made of yourself in the intervening decades. At this point your “remembering self”
steps forward and, feeling great chagrin, admits “not so much.” Let us say that this
encounter pitches you into a crisis of self-doubt that causes you to make some drastic
decisions, affecting both your family and career. All of these moments are part of the
fabric of your experience, however, whether recollected or not. Conscious memories and
self-evaluations are themselves experiences that lay the foundation for future
experiences. Making a conscious assessment of your life, career, or marriage feels a
certain way in the present and leads to subsequent thoughts and behaviors. These changes
will also feel a certain way and have further implications for your future. But none of
these events occur outside the continuum of your experience in the present moment (i.e.,
the “experiencing self”).
If we could take the 2.5 billion seconds that make up the average human life and

assess a person’s well-being at each point in time, the distinction between the
“experiencing self” and the “remembering self” would disappear. Yes, the experience of
recalling the past often determines what we decide to do in the future—and this greatly
affects the character of one’s future experience. But it would still be true to say that in
each of the 2.5 billion seconds of an average life, certain moments were pleasant, and
others were painful; some were later recalled with greater or lesser fidelity, and these
memories had whatever effects they had later on. Consciousness and its ever-changing
contents remain the only subjective reality.
Thus, if your “remembering self” claims to have had a wonderful time in Rome,
while your “experiencing self” felt only boredom, fatigue, and despair, then your
“remembering self” (i.e., your recollection of the trip) is simply wrong about what it was
like to be you in Rome. This becomes increasingly obvious the more we narrow our
focus: Imagine a “remembering self” who thinks that you were especially happy while
sitting for fifteen minutes on the Spanish Steps; while your “experiencing self” was, in
fact, plunged deeper into misery for every one of those minutes than at any other point on
the trip. Do we need two selves to account for this disparity? No. The vagaries of
memory suffice.
As Kahneman admits, the vast majority of our experiences in life never get
recalled, and the time we spend actually remembering the past is comparatively brief.
Thus, the quality of most of our lives can be assessed only in terms of whatever fleeting
character it has as it occurs. But this includes the time we spend recalling the past. Amid
this flux, the moments in which we construct a larger story about our lives appear like
glints of sunlight on a dark river: they may seem special, but they are part of the current
all the same.

On Being Right or Wrong

It is clear that we face both practical and conceptual difficulties when seeking to
maximize human well-being. Consider, for instance, the tensions between freedom of
speech, the right to privacy, and the duty of every government to keep its citizens safe.
Each of these principles seems fundamental to a healthy society. The problem, however,
is that at their extremes, each is hostile to the other two. Certain forms of speech painfully
violate people’s privacy and can even put society itself in danger. Should I be able to film
my neighbor through his bedroom window and upload this footage onto YouTube as a
work of “journalism”? Should I be free to publish a detailed recipe for synthesizing
smallpox? Clearly, appropriate limits to free expression exist. Likewise, too much respect
for privacy would make it impossible to gather the news or to prosecute criminals and
terrorists. And too zealous a commitment to protecting innocent people can lead to
unbearable violations of both privacy and freedom of expression. How should we balance
our commitment to these various goods?
We may never be able to answer this question with absolute precision. It seems
quite clear, however, that questions like this have answers. Even if there are a thousand
different ways to optimally tune these three variables, given concomitant changes in the
rest of culture, there must be many more ways that are less than optimal—and people will

suffer as a result.
What would it mean for a couple to decide that they should have a child? It
probably means they think that their own well-being will tend to increase for having
brought another person into the world; it should also mean that they expect their child to
have a life that is, on balance, worth living. If they didn’t expect these things, it’s hard to
see why they would want to have a child in the first place.
However, most of the research done on happiness suggests that people actually
become less happy when they have children and do not begin to approach their prior level
of happiness until their children leave home. 10 Let us say that you are aware of this
research but imagine that you will be an exception. Of course, another body of research
shows that most people think that they are exceptions to rules of this sort: there is almost
nothing more common than the belief that one is above average in intelligence, wisdom,
honesty, etc. But you are aware of this research as well, and it does not faze you. Perhaps,
in your case, all relevant exceptions are true, and you will be precisely as happy a parent
as you hope to be. However, a famous study of human achievement suggests that one of
the most reliable ways to diminish a person’s contributions to society is for that person to
start a family. 11 How would you view your decision to have a child if you knew that all
the time you spent changing diapers and playing with Legos would prevent you from
developing the cure for Alzheimer’s disease that was actually within your reach?
These are not empty questions. But neither are they the sorts of questions that
anyone is likely to answer. The decision to have a child may always be made in the
context of reasonable (and not so reasonable) expectations about the future well-being of
all concerned. It seems to me that thinking in this way is, nevertheless, to contemplate the
moral landscape.
If we are not able to perfectly reconcile the tension between personal and
collective well-being, there is still no reason to think that they are generally in conflict.
Most boats will surely rise with the same tide. It is not at all difficult to envision the
global changes that would improve life for everyone: We would all be better off in a
world where we devoted fewer of our resources to preparing to kill one another. Finding
clean sources of energy, cures for disease, improvements in agriculture, and new ways to
facilitate human cooperation are general goals that are obviously worth striving for. What
does such a claim mean? It means that we have every reason to believe that the pursuit of
such goals will lead upward on the slopes of the moral landscape.

The claim that science could have something important to say about values
(because values relate to facts about the well-being of conscious creatures) is an
argument made on first principles. As such, it doesn’t rest on any specific empirical
results. That does not mean that this claim couldn’t be falsified, however. Clearly, if there
is a more important source of value that has nothing to do with the well-being of
conscious creatures (in this life or a life to come), my thesis would be disproved. As I
have said, however, I cannot conceive of what such a source of value could be: for if
someone claimed to have found it somewhere, it could be of no possible interest to
anyone, by definition.
There are other ways that my thesis could be falsified, however. There would be

no future science of morality, for instance, if human well-being were completely
haphazard and unrelated to states of the brain. If some people are made happiest by brain
state X, while others are made miserable by it, there would be no neural correlate of
human well-being. Alternately, a neural correlate of human well-being might exist, but it
could be invoked to the same degree by antithetical states of the world. In this case, there
would be no connection between a person’s inner life and his or her outer circumstances.
If either of these scenarios were true, we could not make any general claims about human
flourishing. However, if this is the way the world works, the brain would seem to be little
more than insulation for the skull, and the entire field of neuroscience would constitute an
elaborate and very costly method of misunderstanding the world. Again, this is an
intelligible claim, but that does not mean that intelligent people should take it seriously.
It is also conceivable that a science of human flourishing could be possible, and
yet people could be made equally happy by very different “moral” impulses. Perhaps
there is no connection between being good and feeling good—and, therefore, no
connection between moral behavior (as generally conceived) and subjective well-being.
In this case, rapists, liars, and thieves would experience the same depth of happiness as
the saints. This scenario stands the greatest chance of being true, while still seeming quite
far-fetched. Neuroimaging work already suggests what has long been obvious through
introspection: human cooperation is rewarding.12 However, if evil turned out to be as
reliable a path to happiness as goodness is, my argument about the moral landscape
would still stand, as would the likely utility of neuroscience for investigating it. It would
no longer be an especially “moral” landscape; rather it would be a continuum of wellbeing, upon which saints and sinners would occupy equivalent peaks.
Worries of this kind seem to ignore some very obvious facts about human beings:
we have all evolved from common ancestors and are, therefore, far more similar than we
are different; brains and primary human emotions clearly transcend culture, and they are
unquestionably influenced by states of the world (as anyone who has ever stubbed his toe
can attest). No one, to my knowledge, believes that there is so much variance in the
requisites of human well-being as to make the above concerns seem plausible.
Whether morality becomes a proper branch of science is not really the point. Is
economics a true science yet? Judging from recent events, it wouldn’t appear so. Perhaps
a deep understanding of economics will always elude us. But does anyone doubt that
there are better and worse ways to structure an economy? Would any educated person
consider it a form of bigotry to criticize another society’s response to a banking crisis?
Imagine how terrifying it would be if great numbers of smart people became convinced
that all efforts to prevent a global financial catastrophe must be either equally valid or
equally nonsensical in principle. And yet this is precisely where we stand on the most
important questions in human life.
Currently, most scientists believe that answers to questions of human value will
fall perpetually beyond our reach—not because human subjectivity is too difficult to
study, or the brain too complex, but because there is no intellectual justification for
speaking about right and wrong, or good and evil, across cultures. Many people also
believe that nothing much depends on whether we find a universal foundation for
morality. It seems to me, however, that in order to fulfill our deepest interests in this life,
both personally and collectively, we must first admit that some interests are more
defensible than others. Indeed, some interests are so compelling that they need no defense

at all.
This book was written in the hope that as science develops, we will recognize its
application to the most pressing questions of human existence. For nearly a century, the
moral relativism of science has given faith-based religion—that great engine of ignorance
and bigotry—a nearly uncontested claim to being the only universal framework for moral
wisdom. As a result, the most powerful societies on earth spend their time debating issues
like gay marriage when they should be focused on problems like nuclear proliferation,
genocide, energy security, climate change, poverty, and failing schools. Granted, the
practical effects of thinking in terms of a moral landscape cannot be our only reason for
doing so—we must form our beliefs about reality based on what we think is actually true.
But few people seem to recognize the dangers posed by thinking that there are no true
answers to moral questions.
If our well-being depends upon the interaction between events in our brains and
events in the world, and there are better and worse ways to secure it, then some cultures
will tend to produce lives that are more worth living than others; some political
persuasions will be more enlightened than others; and some world views will be mistaken
in ways that cause needless human misery. Whether or not we ever understand meaning,
morality, and values in practice, I have attempted to show that there must be something to
know about them in principle. And I am convinced that merely admitting this will
transform the way we think about human happiness and the public good.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Moral Landscape is based, in part, on the dissertation I wrote for my PhD in
neuroscience at the University of California, Los Angeles. Consequently, the book has
benefited greatly from the vetting that this first manuscript received from my thesis
committee. I am extremely grateful to Mark Cohen, Marco Iacoboni, Eran Zaidel, and
Jerome (“Pete”) Engel for their guidance and support—sustained, as it was, over many
years during which the progress of my scientific research was difficult to discern. Each
saved me from myself on several occasions—and, with unnerving frequency, from one
another.
I am especially indebted to Mark Cohen, my dissertation advisor. Mark is an
uncommonly gifted teacher and a model of caution in reporting scientific results. If our
academic interests did not always coincide, I was surely the poorer for it. I would also
like to thank Mark’s wife and colleague, Susan Bookheimer: I always profited from
Susan’s advice—delivered, in my case, with the compassionate urgency of a mother
rescuing a child from a busy intersection. I am also grateful to Suzie Vader, the smiling
face of the Interdepartmental PhD Program for Neuroscience at UCLA, for providing
generous encouragement and assistance over many years.
Sections of this book are based on two published papers: chapter 3 contains a
discussion of Harris, S., Sheth, S. A., and Cohen, M. S. (2008), Functional neuroimaging
of belief, disbelief, and uncertainty, Annals of Neurology, 63 (2), 141–147; part of
chapter 4 is drawn from Harris, S., Kaplan, J. T., Curiel, A., Bookheimer, S. Y., Iacoboni,
M., Cohen, M. S. (2009), The neural correlates of religious and nonreligious belief, PLoS
ONE4 (10). I gratefully acknowledge my coauthors on these works as well as their
original publishers. I would especially like to thank Jonas T. Kaplan, now at the Brain
and Creativity Institute at the University of Southern California, for partnering with me
on the second paper. This study was a joint effort at every stage, and Jonas’s involvement
was essential to its completion.
In addition to my dissertation committee at UCLA, several outside scholars and
scientists reviewed early drafts of this book. Paul Churchland, Daniel Dennett, Owen
Flanagan, and Steven Pinker read the text, in whole or in part, and offered extremely
helpful notes. A few sections contain cannibalized versions of essays that were first read
by a larger circle of scientists and writers: including Jerry Coyne, Richard Dawkins,
Daniel Dennett, Owen Flanagan, Anthony Grayling, Christopher Hitchens, and Steven
Pinker. I am pleased to notice that with friends like these, it has become increasingly
difficult to say something stupid. (Still, one does what one can.) It is an honor to be so
deeply in their debt.
My editor at the Free Press, Hilary Redmon, greatly improved The Moral
Landscape at every level, through several stages of revision. It was simply a joy to work
with her. My agents, John Brockman, Katinka Matson, and Max Brockman, were

extremely helpful in refining my initial conception of the book and in placing it with the
right publisher. Of course, JB, as his friends, colleagues, and clients well know, is much
more than an agent: he has become the world’s preeminent wrangler of scientific opinion.
We are all richer for his efforts to bring scientists and public intellectuals together
through his Edge Foundation to discuss the most interesting questions of our time.
I have been greatly supported in all things by my family and friends—especially
by my mother, who has always been a most extraordinary friend. She read the manuscript
of The Moral Landscape more than once and offered extremely valuable notes and
copyedits.
My wife, Annaka Harris, has continued to help me professionally on all fronts—
editing my books, essays, and public talks, and helping to run our nonprofit foundation. If
her abundant talent is not evident in every sentence I produce, it is because I remain a
hard case. Annaka has also raised our daughter, Emma, while I’ve worked, and herein
lies the largest debt of all: much of the time I spent researching and writing The Moral
Landscape belonged to “my girls.”

NOTES

Introduction: The Moral Landscape

1. Bilefsky, 2008; Mortimer & Toader, 2005.
2. For the purposes of this discussion, I do not intend to make a hard distinction
between “science” and other intellectual contexts in which we discuss “facts”—e.g.,
history. For instance, it is a fact that John F. Kennedy was assassinated. Facts of this kind
fall within the context of “science,” broadly construed as our best effort to form a rational
account of empirical reality. Granted, one doesn’t generally think of events like
assassinations as “scientific” facts, but the murder of President Kennedy is as fully
corroborated a fact as can be found anywhere, and it would betray a profoundly
unscientific frame of mind to deny that it occurred. I think “science,” therefore, should be
considered a specialized branch of a larger effort to form true beliefs about events in our
world.
3. This is not to deny that cultural conceptions of health can play an important
role in determining a person’s experience of illness (more so with some illnesses than
others). There is evidence that American notions of mental health have begun to
negatively affect the way people in other cultures suffer (Waters, 2010). It has even been
argued that, with a condition like schizophrenia, notions of spirit possession are palliative
when compared to beliefs about organic brain disease. My point, however, is that
whatever contributions cultural differences make to our experience of the world can
themselves be understood, in principle, at the level of the brain.
4. Pollard Sacks, 2009.
5. In the interests of both simplicity and relevance, I tend to keep my references to
religion focused on Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. Of course, most of what I say about
these faiths applies to Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, and to other religions as well.
6. There are many reasons to be pessimistic about the future of Europe: Ye’or,
2005; Bawer, 2006; Caldwell, 2009.
7. Gould, 1997.
8. Nature 432, 657 (2004).
9. I am not the first person to argue that morality can and should be integrated
with our scientific understanding of the natural world. Of late, the philosophers William
Casebeer and Owen Flanagan have each built similar cases (Casebeer, 2003; Flanagan,
2007). Both Casebeer and Flanagan have resurrected Aristotle’s concept of eudaimonia,
which is generally translated as “flourishing,” “fulfillment,” or “well-being.” While I rely
heavily on these English equivalents, I have elected not to pay any attention to Aristotle.
While much of what Aristotle wrote in his Nichomachean Ethics is of great interest and
convergent with the case I wish to make, some of it isn’t. And I’d rather not be beholden
to the quirks of the great man’s philosophy. Both Casebeer and Flanagan also seem to

place greater emphasis on morality as a skill and a form of practical knowledge, arguing
that living a good life is more a matter of “knowing how” than of “knowing that.” While I
think this distinction is often useful, I’m not eager to give up the fight for moral truth just
yet. For instance, I believe that the compulsory veiling of women in Afghanistan tends to
needlessly immiserate them and will breed a new generation of misogynistic, puritanical
men. This is an instance of “knowing that,” and it is a truth claim about which I am either
right or wrong. I am confident that both Casebeer and Flanagan would agree. The
difference in our approaches, therefore, seems to me to be more a matter of emphasis. In
any case, both Casebeer and Flanagan go into greater philosophical detail than I have on
many points, and both their books are well worth reading. Flanagan also offered very
helpful notes on an early draft of this book.
10. E. O. Wilson, 1998.
11. Keverne & Curley, 2004; Pedersen, Ascher, Monroe, & Prange, 1982;
Smeltzer, Curtis, Aragona, & Wang, 2006; Young & Wang, 2004.
12. Fries, Ziegler, Kurian, Jacoris, & Pollak, 2005.
13. Hume’s argument was actually directed against religious apologists who
sought to deduce morality from the existence of God. Ironically, his reasoning has since
become one of the primary impediments to linking morality to the rest of human
knowledge. However, Hume’s is/ought distinction has always had its detractors (e.g.,
Searle, 1964); here is Dennett:
If “ought” cannot be derived from “is,” just what can it be derived from?… ethics
must be somehow based on an appreciation of human nature—on a sense of what a
human being is or might be, and on what a human being might want to have or want to
be. If that is naturalism, then naturalism is no fallacy (Dennett, p. 468).
14. Moore [1903], 2004.
15. Popper, 2002, pp. 60–62.
16. The list of scientists who have followed Hume and Moore with perfect
obedience is very long and defies citation. For a recent example within neuroscience, see
Edelman (2006, pp. 84–91).
17. Fodor, 2007.
18. I recently had the pleasure of hearing the philosopher Patricia Churchland
draw this same analogy. (Patricia, I did not steal it!)
19. De Grey & Rae, 2007.
20. The problem with using a strictly hedonic measure of the “good” grows more
obvious once we consider some of the promises and perils of a maturing neuroscience. If,
for instance, we can one day manipulate the brain so as to render specific behaviors and
states of mind more pleasurable than they now are, it seems relevant to wonder whether
such refinements would be “good.” It might be good to make compassion more
rewarding than sexual lust, but would it be good to make hatred the most pleasurable
emotion of all? One can’t appeal to pleasure as the measure of goodness in such cases,
because pleasure is what we would be choosing to reassign.
21. Pinker, 2002, pp. 53–54.
22. It should be clear that the conventional distinction between “belief” and
“knowledge” does not apply here. As will be made clear in chapter 3, our propositional
knowledge about the world is entirely a matter of “belief” in the above sense. Whether
one chooses to say that one “believes” X or that one “knows” X is merely a difference of

emphasis, expressing one’s degree of confidence. As discussed in this book, propositional
knowledge is a form of belief. Understanding belief at the level of the brain has been the
focus of my recent scientific research, using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) (S. Harris et al., 2009; S. Harris, Sheth, & Cohen, 2008).
23. Edgerton, 1992.
24. Cited in Edgerton, 1992, p. 26.
25. Though perhaps even this attributes too much common sense to the field of
anthropology, as Edgerton (1992, p. 105) tells us: “A prevailing assumption among
anthropologists who study the medical practices of small, traditional societies is that
these populations enjoy good health and nutrition … Indeed, we are often told that
seemingly irrational food taboos, once fully understood, will prove to be adaptive.”
26. Leher, 2010.
27. Filkins, 2010.
28. For an especially damning look at the Bush administration’s Council on
Bioethics, see Steven Pinker’s response to its 555-page report, Human Dignity and
Bioethics (Pinker, 2008a).
29. S. Harris, 2004, 2006a, 2006b; S. Harris, 2006c; S. Harris, 2007a, 2007b.
30. Judson, 2008; Chris Mooney, 2005.

Chapter 1: Moral Truth

1. In February of 2010, I spoke at the TED conference about how we might one
day understand morality in universal, scientific terms (
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hj9oB4zpHww). Normally, when one speaks at a
conference the resulting feedback amounts to a few conversations in the lobby during a
coffee break. As luck would have it, however, my TED talk was broadcast on the internet
as I was in the final stages of writing this book, and this produced a blizzard of useful
commentary.
Many of my critics fault me for not engaging more directly with the academic
literature on moral philosophy. There are two reasons why I haven’t done this: First,
while I have read a fair amount of this literature, I did not arrive at my position on the
relationship between human values and the rest of human knowledge by reading the work
of moral philosophers; I came to it by considering the logical implications of our making
continued progress in the sciences of mind. Second, I am convinced that every
appearance of terms like “metaethics,” “deontology,” “noncognitivism,” “antirealism,”
“emotivism,” etc., directly increases the amount of boredom in the universe. My goal,
both in speaking at conferences like TED and in writing this book, is to start a
conversation that a wider audience can engage with and find helpful. Few things would
make this goal harder to achieve than for me to speak and write like an academic
philosopher. Of course, some discussion of philosophy will be unavoidable, but my
approach is to generally make an end run around many of the views and conceptual
distinctions that make academic discussions of human values so inaccessible. While this
is guaranteed to annoy a few people, the professional philosophers I’ve consulted seem to
understand and support what I am doing.

2. Given my experience as a critic of religion, I must say that it has been quite
disconcerting to see the caricature of the overeducated, atheistic moral nihilist regularly
appearing in my inbox and on the blogs. I sincerely hope that people like Rick Warren
have not been paying attention.
3. Searle, 1995, p. 8.
4. There has been much confusion on this point, and most of it is still influential
in philosophical circles. Consider the following from J. L. Mackie:
If there were objective values, then they would be entities or qualities or relations
of a very strange sort, utterly different from anything else in the universe.
Correspondingly, if we were aware of them, it would have to be by some special faculty
of moral perception or intuition, utterly different from our ordinary ways of knowing
everything else (Mackie 1977, p. 38).
Clearly, Mackie has conflated the two senses of the term “objective.” We need
not discuss “entities or qualities or relations of a very strange sort, utterly different from
anything else in the universe” in order to speak about moral truth. We need only admit
that the experiences of conscious creatures are lawfully dependent upon states of the
universe—and, therefore, that actions can cause more harm than good, more good than
harm, or be morally neutral. Good and evil need only consist in this, and it makes no
sense whatsoever to claim that an action that harms everyone affected by it (even its
perpetrator) might still be “good.” We do not require a metaphysical repository of right
and wrong, or actions that are mysteriously right or wrong in themselves, for there to be
right and wrong answers to moral questions; we simply need a landscape of possible
experiences that can be traversed in some orderly way in light of how the universe
actually is. The main criterion, therefore, is that misery and well-being not be completely
random. It seems to me that we already know that they are not—and, therefore, that it is
possible for a person to be right or wrong about how to move from one state to the other.
5. Is it always wrong to slice open a child’s belly with a knife? No. One might be
performing an emergency appendectomy.
6. One could respond by saying that scientists agree about science more than
ordinary people agree about morality (I’m not sure this is true). But this is an empty
claim, for at least two reasons: (1) it is circular, because anyone who insufficiently agrees
with the majority opinion in any domain of science won’t count as a “scientist” (so the
definition of scientist is question begging); (2) Scientists are an elite group, by definition.
“Moral experts” would also constitute an elite group, and the existence of such experts is
completely in line with my argument.
7. Obvious exceptions include “socially constructed” phenomena that require
some degree of consensus to be made real. The paper in my pocket really is “money”—
but it is only money because a sufficient number of people are willing to treat it as such
(see Searle, 1995).
8. Practically speaking, I think we have some very useful intuitions on this front.
We care more about creatures that can experience a greater range of suffering and
happiness—and we are right to, because suffering and happiness (defined in the widest
possible sense) are all that can be cared about. Are all animal lives equivalent? No. Do
monkeys suffer more than mice from medical experiments? If so, all other things being
equal, it is worse to run experiments on monkeys than on mice.
Are all human lives equivalent? No. I have no problem admitting that certain

people’s lives are more valuable than mine (I need only imagine a person whose death
would create much greater suffering and prevent much greater happiness). However, it
also seems quite rational for us to collectively act as though all human lives were equally
valuable. Hence, most of our laws and social institutions generally ignore differences
between people. I suspect that this is a very good thing. Of course, I could be wrong
about this—and that is precisely the point. If we didn’t behave this way, our world would
be different, and these differences would either affect the totality of human well-being, or
they wouldn’t. Once again, there are answers to such questions, whether we can ever
answer them in practice.
9. At bottom, this is purely a semantic point: I am claiming that whatever answer
a person gives to the question “Why is religion important?” can be framed in terms of a
concern about someone’s well-being (whether misplaced or not).
10. I do not think that the moral philosophy of Immanuel Kant represents an
exception either. Kant’s categorical imperative only qualifies as a rational standard of
morality given the assumption that it will be generally beneficial (as J. S. Mill pointed out
at the beginning of Utilitarianism). One could argue, therefore, that what is serviceable in
Kant’s moral philosophy amounts to a covert form of consequentialism. I offer a few
more remarks about Kant’s categorical imperative below.
11. For instance, many people assume that an emphasis on human “well-being”
would lead us to do terrible things like reinstate slavery, harvest the organs of the poor,
periodically nuke the developing world, or nurture our children on a continuous drip of
heroin. Such expectations are the result of not thinking about these issues seriously.
There are rather clear reasons not to do these things—all of which relate to the immensity
of suffering that such actions would cause and the possibilities of deeper happiness that
they would foreclose. Does anyone really believe that the highest possible state of human
flourishing is compatible with slavery, organ theft, and genocide?
12. Are there trade-offs and exceptions? Of course. There may be circumstances
in which the very survival of a community requires that certain of these principles be
violated. But this doesn’t mean that they aren’t generally conducive to human well-being.
13. Stewart, 2008.
14. I confess that, as a critic of religion, I have paid too little attention to the
sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic Church. Frankly, it felt somehow unsportsmanlike to
shoot so large and languorous a fish in so tiny a barrel. This scandal was one of the most
spectacular “own goals” in the history of religion, and there seemed to be no need to
deride faith at its most vulnerable and self-abased. Even in retrospect, it is easy to
understand the impulse to avert one’s eyes: Just imagine a pious mother and father
sending their beloved child to the Church of a Thousand Hands for spiritual instruction,
only to have him raped and terrified into silence by threats of hell. And then imagine this
occurring to tens of thousands of children in our own time—and to children beyond
reckoning for over a thousand years. The spectacle of faith so utterly misplaced, and so
fully betrayed, is simply too depressing to think about.
But there was always more to this phenomenon that should have compelled my
attention. Consider the ludicrous ideology that made it possible: the Catholic Church has
spent two millennia demonizing human sexuality to a degree unmatched by any other
institution, declaring the most basic, healthy, mature, and consensual behaviors taboo.
Indeed, this organization still opposes the use of contraception: preferring, instead, that

the poorest people on earth be blessed with the largest families and the shortest lives. As
a consequence of this hallowed and incorrigible stupidity, the Church has condemned
generations of decent people to shame and hypocrisy—or to Neolithic fecundity, poverty,
and death by AIDS. Add to this inhumanity the artifice of cloistered celibacy, and you
now have an institution—one of the wealthiest on earth—that preferentially attracts
pederasts, pedophiles, and sexual sadists into its ranks, promotes them to positions of
authority, and grants them privileged access to children. Finally, consider that vast
numbers of children will be born out of wedlock, and their unwed mothers vilified,
wherever Church teaching holds sway—leading boys and girls by the thousands to be
abandoned to Church-run orphanages only to be raped and terrorized by the clergy. Here,
in this ghoulish machinery set to whirling through the ages by the opposing winds of
shame and sadism, we mortals can finally glimpse how strangely perfect are the ways of
the Lord.
In 2009, the Irish Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse (CICA) investigated
such of these events as occurred on Irish soil. Their report runs to 2,600 pages
(www.childabusecommission.com/rpt/). Having read only an oppressive fraction of this
document, I can say that when thinking about the ecclesiastical abuse of children, it is
best not to imagine shades of ancient Athens and the blandishments of a “love that dare
not speak its name.” Yes, there have surely been polite pederasts in the priesthood,
expressing anguished affection for boys who would turn eighteen the next morning. But
behind these indiscretions there is a continuum of abuse that terminates in absolute evil.
The scandal in the Catholic Church—one might now safely say the scandal that is the
Catholic Church—includes the systematic rape and torture of orphaned and disabled
children. Its victims attest to being whipped with belts and sodomized until bloody—
sometimes by multiple attackers—and then whipped again and threatened with death and
hellfire if they breathed a word about their abuse. And yes, many of the children who
were desperate or courageous enough to report these crimes were accused of lying and
returned to their tormentors to be raped and tortured again.
The evidence suggests that the misery of these children was facilitated and
concealed by the hierarchy of the Catholic Church at every level, up to and including the
prefrontal cortex of the current pope. In his former capacity as Cardinal Ratzinger, Pope
Benedict personally oversaw the Vatican’s response to reports of sexual abuse in the
Church. What did this wise and compassionate man do upon learning that his employees
were raping children by the thousands? Did he immediately alert the police and ensure
that the victims would be protected from further torments? One still dares to imagine
such an effulgence of basic human sanity might have been possible, even within the
Church. On the contrary, repeated and increasingly desperate complaints of abuse were
set aside, witnesses were pressured into silence, bishops were praised for their defiance of
secular authority, and offending priests were relocated only to destroy fresh lives in
unsuspecting parishes. It is no exaggeration to say that for decades (if not centuries) the
Vatican has met the formal definition of a criminal organization devoted—not to
gambling, prostitution, drugs, or any other venial sin—but to the sexual enslavement of
children. Consider the following passages from the CICA report:
7.129 In relation to one School, four witnesses gave detailed accounts of sexual
abuse, including rape in all instances, by two or more Brothers and on one occasion along
with an older resident. A witness from the second School, from which there were several

reports, described being raped by three Brothers: “I was brought to the infirmary … they
held me over the bed, they were animals. … They penetrated me, I was bleeding.”
Another witness reported he was abused twice weekly on particular days by two Brothers
in the toilets off the dormitory:
One Brother kept watch while the other abused me … [sexually]… then they
changed over. Every time it ended with a severe beating. When I told the priest in
Confession, he called me a liar. I never spoke about it again.
I would have to go into his … [Br X’s] … room every time he wanted. You’d get a
hiding if you didn’t, and he’d make me do it … [masturbate] … to him. One night I didn’t
… [masturbate him] … and there was another Brother there who held me down and they
hit me with a hurley and they burst my fingers … [displayed scar] .…
7.232 Witnesses reported being particularly fearful at night as they listened to
residents screaming in cloakrooms, dormitories or in a staff member’s bedroom while
they were being abused. Witnesses were conscious that co-residents whom they described
as orphans had a particularly difficult time:
The orphan children, they had it bad. I knew … [who they were] … by the size of
them, I’d ask them and they’d say they come from … named institution. … They were
there from an early age. You’d hear the screams from the room where Br … X … would
be abusing them.
There was one night, I wasn’t long there and I seen one of the Brothers on the bed
with one of the young boys … and I heard the young lad screaming crying and Br … X …
said to me “if you don’t mind your own business you’ll get the same.”… I heard kids
screaming and you know they are getting abused and that’s a nightmare in anybody’s
mind. You are going to try and break out. … So there was no way I was going to let that
happen to me … I remember one boy and he was bleeding from the back passage and I
made up my mind, there was no way it … [anal rape] … was going to happen to me. …
That used to play on my mind.
This is the kind of abuse that the Church has practiced and concealed since time
out of memory. Even the CICA report declined to name the offending priests.
I have been awakened from my unconscionable slumber on this issue by recent
press reports (Goodstein and Callender, 2010; Goodstein, 2010a, 2010b; Donadio, 2010a,
2010b; Wakin and McKinley Jr., 2010), and especially by the eloquence of my
colleagues Christopher Hitchens (2010a, 2010b, 2010c, and 2010d), and Richard
Dawkins (2010a, 2010b).
15. The Church even excommunicated the girl’s mother (
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/7930380.stm).
16. The philosopher Hilary Putnam (2007) has argued that facts and values are
“entangled.” Scientific judgments presuppose “epistemic values”—coherence, simplicity,
beauty, parsimony, etc. Putnam has pointed out, as I do here, that all the arguments
against the existence of moral truth could be applied to scientific truth without any
change.
17. Many people find the idea of “moral experts” abhorrent. Indeed, this
ramification of my argument has been called “positively Orwellian” and a “recipe for
fascism.” Again, these concerns seem to arise from an uncanny reluctance to think about
what the concept of “well-being” actually entails or how science might shed light on its
causes and conditions. The analogy with health seems important to keep in view: Is there

anything “Orwellian” about the scientific consensus on the link between smoking and
lung cancer? Has the medical community’s insistence that people should not smoke led to
“fascism”? Many people’s reflexive response to the notion of moral expertise is to say, “I
don’t want anyone telling me how to live my life.” To which I can only respond, “If there
were a way for you and those you care about to be much happier than you now are,
would you want to know about it?”
18. This is the subject of that now infamous quotation from Albert Einstein,
endlessly recycled by religious apologists, claiming that “science without religion is
lame, religion without science is blind.” Far from indicating his belief in God, or his
respect for unjustified belief, Einstein was speaking about the primitive urge to
understand the universe, along with the “faith” that such understanding is possible:
Though religion may be that which determines the goal, it has, nevertheless,
learned from science, in the broadest sense, what means will contribute to the attainment
of the goals it has set up. But science can only be created by those who are thoroughly
imbued with the aspiration toward truth and understanding. This source of feeling,
however, springs from the sphere of religion. To this there also belongs the faith in the
possibility that the regulations valid for the world of existence are rational, that is,
comprehensible to reason. I cannot conceive of a genuine scientist without that profound
faith. This situation may be expressed by an image: science without religion is lame,
religion without science is blind (Einstein, 1954, p. 49).
19. These impasses are seldom as insurmountable as skeptics imagine. For
instance, Creationist “scientists” can be led to see that the very standards of reasoning
they use to vindicate scripture in light of empirical data also reveal hundreds of
inconsistencies within scripture—thereby undermining their entire project. The same is
true for moral impasses: those who claim to get their morality from God, without
reference to any terrestrial concerns, are often susceptible to such concerns in the end. In
an extreme case, the New York Times correspondent Thomas Friedman once reported
meeting a Sunni militant who had begun fighting alongside the American military against
al-Qaeda in Iraq, having been persuaded that the infidel troops were the lesser of two
evils. What convinced him? He witnessed a member of al-Qaeda decapitate an eightyear-old girl (Friedman, 2007). It would seem, therefore, that the boundary between the
crazy values of Islam and the utterly crazy can be discerned when drawn in the spilled
blood of little girls. This is a basis for hope, of sorts.
In fact, I think that morality will be on firmer ground than any other branch of
science in the end, since scientific knowledge is only valuable because it contributes to
our well-being. Of course, we must include among these contributions the claims of
people who say that they value knowledge “for its own sake”—for they are merely
describing the mental pleasure that comes with understanding the world, solving
problems, etc. It is clear that well-being must take precedence over knowledge, because
we can easily imagine situations in which it would be better not to know the truth, or
when false knowledge would be desirable. No doubt, there are circumstances in which
religious delusion functions in this way: where, for instance, soldiers are vastly
outnumbered on the battlefield but, being ignorant of the odds against them and
convinced that God is on their side, they manage to draw on emotional resources that
would be unavailable to people with complete information and fully justified beliefs.
However, the fact that a combination of ignorance and false knowledge can occasionally

be helpful is no argument for the general utility of religious faith (much less for its truth).
Indeed, the great weakness of religion, apart from the obvious implausibility of its
doctrines, is that the cost of holding irrational and divisive beliefs on a global scale is
extraordinarily high.
20. The physicist Sean Carroll finds Hume’s analysis of facts and values so
compelling that he elevates it to the status of mathematical truth:
Attempts to derive ought from is are like attempts to reach an odd number by
adding together even numbers. If someone claims that they’ve done it, you don’t have to
check their math; you know that they’ve made a mistake (Carroll, 2010a).
21. This spurious notion of “ought” can be introduced into any enterprise and
seem to plant a fatal seed of doubt. Asking why we “ought” to value well-being makes
even less sense than asking why we “ought” to be rational or scientific. And while it is
possible to say that one can’t move from “is” to “ought,” we should be honest about how
we get to “is” in the first place. Scientific “is” statements rest on implicit “oughts” all the
way down. When I say, “Water is two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen,” I have
uttered a quintessential statement of scientific fact. But what if someone doubts this
statement? I can appeal to data from chemistry, describing the outcome of simple
experiments. But in so doing, I implicitly appeal to the values of empiricism and logic.
What if my interlocutor doesn’t share these values? What can I say then? As it turns out,
this is the wrong question. The right question is, why should we care what such a person
thinks about chemistry?
So it is with the linkage between morality and well-being: To say that morality is
arbitrary (or culturally constructed, or merely personal) because we must first assume that
the well-being of conscious creatures is good, is like saying that science is arbitrary (or
culturally constructed, or merely personal) because we must first assume that a rational
understanding of the universe is good. Yes, both endeavors rest on assumptions (and, as I
have said, I think the former will prove to be more firmly grounded), but this is not a
problem. No framework of knowledge can withstand utter skepticism, for none is
perfectly self-justifying. Without being able to stand entirely outside of a framework, one
is always open to the charge that the framework rests on nothing, that its axioms are
wrong, or that there are foundational questions it cannot answer. Occasionally some of
our basic assumptions do turn out to be wrong or limited in scope—e.g., the parallel
postulate of Euclidean geometry does not apply to geometry as a whole—but these errors
can be detected only by the light of other assumptions that stand firm.
Science and rationality generally are based on intuitions and concepts that cannot
be reduced or justified. Just try defining “causation” in noncircular terms. Or try
justifying transitivity in logic: if A = B and B = C, then A = C. A skeptic could say, “This
is nothing more than an assumption that we’ve built into the definition of ‘equality.’
Others will be free to define ‘equality’ differently.” Yes, they will. And we will be free to
call them “imbeciles.” Seen in this light, moral relativism—the view that the difference
between right and wrong has only local validity within a specific culture—should be no
more tempting than physical, biological, mathematical, or logical relativism. There are
better and worse ways to define our terms; there are more and less coherent ways to think
about reality; and there are—is there any doubt about this?—many ways to seek
fulfillment in this life and to not find it.
22. We can, therefore, let this metaphysical notion of “ought” fall away, and we

will be left with a scientific picture of cause and effect. To the degree that it is in our
power to produce the worst possible misery for everyone in this universe, we can say that
if we don’t want everyone to experience the worst possible misery, we shouldn’t do X.
Can we readily conceive of someone who might hold altogether different values and want
all conscious beings, himself included, reduced to the state of worst possible misery? I
don’t think so. And I don’t think we can intelligibly ask questions like, “What if the worst
possible misery for everyone is actually good?” Such questions seem analytically
confused. We can also pose questions like “What if the most perfect circle is really a
square?” or “What if all true statements are actually false?” But if someone persists in
speaking this way, I see no obligation to take his views seriously.
23. And even if minds were independent of the physical universe, we could still
speak about facts relative to their well-being. But we would be speaking about some
other basis for these facts (souls, disembodied consciousness, ectoplasm, etc.).
24. On a related point, the philosopher Russell Blackford wrote in response to my
TED talk, “I’ve never yet seen an argument that shows that psychopaths are necessarily
mistaken about some fact about the world. Moreover, I don’t see how the argument could
run.” While I discuss psychopathy in greater detail in the next chapter, here is such an
argument in brief: We already know that psychopaths have brain damage that prevents
them from having certain deeply satisfying experiences (like empathy) that seem good for
people both personally and collectively (in that they tend to increase well-being on both
counts). Psychopaths, therefore, don’t know what they are missing (but we do). The
position of a psychopath also cannot be generalized; it is not, therefore, an alternative
view of how human beings should live (this is one point Kant got right: even a
psychopath couldn’t want to live in a world filled with psychopaths). We should also
realize that the psychopath we are envisioning is a straw man: watch interviews with real
psychopaths, and you will find that they do not tend to claim to be in possession of an
alternative morality or to be living deeply fulfilling lives. These people are generally
ruled by compulsions that they don’t understand and cannot resist. It is absolutely clear
that, whatever they might believe about what they are doing, psychopaths are seeking
some form of well-being (excitement, ecstasy, feelings of power, etc.), but because of
their neurological and social deficits, they are doing a very bad job of it. We can say that
a psychopath like Ted Bundy takes satisfaction in the wrong things, because living a life
purposed toward raping and killing women does not allow for deeper and more
generalizable forms of human flourishing. Compare Bundy’s deficits to those of a
delusional physicist who finds meaningful patterns and mathematical significance in the
wrong places. The mathematician John Nash, while suffering the symptoms of his
schizophrenia, seems a good example: his “Eureka!” detectors were poorly calibrated; he
saw meaningful patterns where his peers would not—and these patterns were a very poor
guide to the proper goals of science (i.e., understanding the physical world). Is there any
doubt that Ted Bundy’s “Yes! I love this!” detectors were poorly coupled to the
possibilities of finding deep fulfillment in this life, or that his obsession with raping and
killing young women was a poor guide to the proper goals of morality (i.e., living a
fulfilling life with others)?
While people like Bundy may want some very weird things out of life, no one
wants utter, interminable misery. People with apparently different moral codes are still
seeking forms of well-being that we recognize—like freedom from pain, doubt, fear,

etc.—and their moral codes, however vigorously they might want to defend them, are
undermining their well-being in obvious ways. And if someone claims to want to be truly
miserable, we are free to treat them like someone who claims to believe that 2 + 2 = 5 or
that all events are self-caused. On the subject of morality, as on every other subject, some
people are not worth listening to.
25. From the White House press release: www.bioethics.gov/about/creation.html.
26. Oxytocin is a neuroactive hormone that appears to govern social recognition
in animals and the experience of trust (and its reciprocation) in humans (Zak, Kurzban, &
Matzner, 2005; Zak, Stanton, & Ahmadi, 2007).
27. Appiah, 2008, p. 41.
28. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy has this to say on the subject of
moral relativism:
In 1947, on the occasion of the United Nations debate about universal human
rights, the American Anthropological Association issued a statement declaring that moral
values are relative to cultures and that there is no way of showing that the values of one
culture are better than those of another. Anthropologists have never been unanimous in
asserting this, and in recent years human rights advocacy on the part of some
anthropologists has mitigated the relativist orientation of the discipline. Nonetheless,
prominent contemporary anthropologists such as Clifford Geertz and Richard A. Shweder
continue to defend relativist positions. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/moral-relativism/.
1947? Please note that this was the best the social scientists in the United States
could do with the crematoria of Auschwitz still smoking. My spoken and written
collisions with Richard Shweder, Scott Atran, Mel Konner, and other anthropologists
have convinced me that awareness of moral diversity does not entail, and is a poor
surrogate for, clear thinking about human well-being.
29. Pinker, 2002, p. 273.
30. Harding, 2001.
31. For a more complete demolition of feminist and multicultural critiques of
Western science, see P. R. Gross, 1991; P. R. Gross & Levitt, 1994.
32. Weinberg, 2001, p. 105.
33. Dennett, 1995.
34. Ibid., p. 487.
35. See, for instance, M. D. Hauser, 2006. Experiments show that even eightmonth-old infants want to see aggressors punished (Bloom, 2010).
36. www.gallup.com/poll/118378/Majority-Americans-Continue-Oppose-GayMarriage.aspx.
37. There is now a separate field called “neuroethics,” formed by a confluence of
neuroscience and philosophy, which loosely focuses on matters of this sort. Neuroethics
is more than bioethics with respect to the brain (that is, it is more than an ethical
framework for the conduct of neuroscience): it encompasses our efforts to understand
ethics itself as a biological phenomenon. There is a quickly growing literature on
neuroethics (recent, book-length introductions can be found in Gazzaniga, 2005, and
Levy, 2007), and there are other neuroethical issues that are relevant to this discussion:
concerns about mental privacy, lie detection, and the other implications of an advancing
science of neuroimaging; personal responsibility in light of deterministic and random
processes in the brain (neither of which lend any credence to common notions of “free

will”); the ethics of emotional and cognitive enhancement; the implications of
understanding “spiritual” experience in physical terms; etc.

Chapter 2: Good and Evil

1. Consider, for instance, how much time and money we spend to secure our
homes, places of business, and cars against unwanted entry (and to have doors
professionally unlocked when keys are lost). Consider the cost of internet and credit card
security, and the time dissipated in the use and retrieval of passwords. When phone
service is interrupted for five minutes in a modern society the cost is measured in billions
of dollars. I think it safe to say that the costs of preventing theft are far higher. Add to the
expense of locking doors, the pains we take to prepare formal contracts—locks of another
sort—and the costs soar beyond all reckoning. Imagine a world that had no need for such
prophylactics against theft (admittedly, it is difficult). It would be a world of far greater
disposable wealth (measured in both time and money).
2. There are other ways of thinking about human cooperation, including politics
and law, but I take the normative claims of ethics to be foundational.
3. Hamilton, 1964a, 1964b.
4. McElreath & Boyd, 2007, p. 82.
5. Trivers, 1971.
6. G. F. Miller, 2007.
7. For a recent review that also looks at the phenomenon of indirect
reciprocity(i.e., A gives to B; and then B gives to C, or C gives to A, or both), see Nowak,
2005. For doubts about the sufficiency of kin selection and reciprocal altruism to account
for cooperation—especially among eusocial insects—see D. S. Wilson & Wilson, 2007;
E. O. Wilson, 2005.
8. Tomasello, 2007.
9. Smith, [1759] 1853, p. 3.
10. Ibid. pp. 192–193.
11. Benedict, 1934, p. 172.
12. Consequentialism has undergone many refinements since the original
utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill. My discussion will ignore most
of these developments, as they are generally of interest only to academic philosophers.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy provides a good summary article (SinnottArmstrong, 2006).
13. J. D. Greene, 2007; J. D. Greene, Nystrom, Engell, Darley, & Cohen, 2004; J.
D. Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001.
14. J. D. Greene, 2002, pp. 59–60.
15. Ibid., pp. 204–205.
16. Ibid., p. 264.
17. Let us briefly cover a few more philosophical bases: What would have to be
true for a practice like the forced veiling of women to be objectively wrong? Would this
practice have to cause unnecessary suffering in all possible worlds? No. It only need
cause unnecessary suffering in this world. Must it be analytically true that compulsory

veiling is immoral—that is, must the wrongness of the act be built into the meaning of the
word “veil”? No. Must it be true a priori—that is, must this practice be wrong
independent of human experience? No. The wrongness of the act very much depends on
human experience. It is wrong to force women and girls to wear burqas because it is
unpleasant and impractical to live fully veiled, because this practice perpetuates a view of
women as being the property of men, and because it keeps the men who enforce it
brutally obtuse to the possibility of real equality and communication between the sexes.
Hobbling half of the population also directly subtracts from the economic, social, and
intellectual wealth of a society. Given the challenges that face every society, this is a bad
practice in almost every case. Must compulsory veiling be ethically unacceptable without
exception in our world? No. We can easily imagine situations in which forcing one’s
daughter to wear a burqa could be perfectly moral—perhaps to escape the attention of
thuggish men while traveling in rural Afghanistan. Does this slide from brute, analytic, a
priori, and necessary truth to synthetic, a posteriori, contingent, exception-ridden truth
pose a problem for moral realism? Recall the analogy I drew between morality and chess.
Is it always wrong to surrender your Queen in a game of chess? No. But generally
speaking, it is a terrible idea. Even granting the existence of an uncountable number of
exceptions to this rule, there are still objectively good and objectively bad moves in every
game of chess. Are we in a position to say that the treatment of women in traditional
Muslim societies is generally bad? Absolutely we are. Should there be any doubt, I
recommend that readers consult Ayaan Hirsi Ali’s several fine books on the subject (A.
Hirsi Ali, 2006, 2007, 2010).
18. J. D. Greene, 2002, pp. 287–288.
19. The philosopher Richard Joyce (2006) has argued that the evolutionary origins
of moral beliefs undermine them in ways that the evolutionary origins of mathematical
and scientific beliefs do not. I do not find his reasoning convincing, however. For
instance, Joyce asserts that our mathematical and scientific intuitions could have been
selected for only by virtue of their accuracy, whereas our moral intuitions were selected
for based on an entirely different standard. In the case of arithmetic (which he takes as his
model), this may seem plausible. But science has progressed by violating many (if not
most) of our innate, proto-scientific intuitions about the nature of reality. By Joyce’s
reasoning, we should view these violations as a likely step away from the Truth.
20. Greene’s argument actually seems somewhat peculiar. Consequentialism is
not true, because there is simply too much diversity of opinion about morality; but he
seems to believe that most people will converge on consequentialist principles if given
enough time to reflect.
21. Faison, 1996.
22. Dennett, 1995, p. 498.
23. Churchland, 2008a.
24. Slovic, 2007.
25. This seems related to a more general finding in the reasoning literature, in
which people are often found to put more weight on a salient anecdote than on largesample statistics (Fong, Krantz, & Nisbett, 1986/07; Stanovich & West, 2000). It also
appears to be an especially perverse version of what Kahneman and Frederick call
“extension neglect” (Kahneman & Frederick, 2005): where our valuations reliably fail to
increase with the size of a problem. For instance, the value most people will place on

saving 2,000 lives will be less than twice as large as the value they will place on 1,000
lives. Slovic’s result, however, suggests that it could be less valuable (even if the larger
group contained the smaller). If ever there were a nonnormative result in moral
psychology, this is it.
26. There may be some exceptions to this principle: for instance, if you thought
that either child would suffer intolerably if the other died, you might believe that both
dying would be preferable than one dying. Whether such cases actually exist, they are
clearly exceptions to the general rule that negative consequences should be additive.
27. Does this sound crazy? Jane McGonigal designs games with such real-world
outcomes in mind: www.iftf.org/user/46.
28. Parfit, 1984.
29. While Parfit’s argument is rightfully celebrated, and Reasons and Persons is a
philosophical masterpiece, a very similar observation first appears in Rawls, [1971] 1999,
pp. 140–141.
30. For instance:
How Only France Survives. In one possible future, the worst-off people in the
world soon start to have lives that are well worth living. The quality of life in different
nations then continues to rise. Though each nation has its fair share of the world’s
resources, such things as climate and cultural traditions give to some nations a higher
quality of life. The best-off people, for many centuries, are the French.

In another possible future, a new infectious disease makes nearly everyone sterile.
French scientists produce just enough of an antidote for all of France’s population. All
other nations cease to exist. This has some bad effects on the quality of life for the
surviving French. Thus there is no new foreign art, literature, or technology that the
French can import. These and other bad effects outweigh any good effects. Throughout
this second possible future the French therefore have a quality of life that is slightly lower
than it would be in the first possible future (Parfit, ibid., p. 421).
31. P. Singer, 2009, p. 139.
32. Graham Holm, 2010.
33. Kahneman, 2003.
34. LaBoeuf & Shafir, 2005.
35. Tom, Fox, Trepel, & Poldrack, 2007. But as the authors note, this protocol
examined the brain’s appraisal of potential loss (i.e., decision utility) rather than
experienced losses, where other studies suggest that negative affect and associated
amygdala activity can be expected.
36. Pizarro and Uhlmann make a similar observation (D. A. Pizarro & Uhlmann,
2008).
37. Redelmeier, Katz, & Kahneman, 2003.
38. Schreiber & Kahneman, 2000.
39. Kahneman, 2003.
40. Rawls, [1971] 1999; Rawls & Kelly, 2001.
41. S. Harris, 2004, 2006a, 2006d.
42. He later refined his view, arguing that justice as fairness must be understood
as “a political conception of justice rather than as part of a comprehensive moral

doctrine” (Rawls & Kelly, 2001, p. xvi).
43. Rawls, [1971] 1999, p. 27.
44. Tabibnia, Satpute, & Lieberman, 2008.
45. It is not unreasonable, therefore, to expect people who are seeking to
maximize their well-being to also value fairness. Valuing fairness, they will tend to view
its breach as less than ethical—that is, as not being conducive to their collective wellbeing. But what if they don’t? What if the laws of nature allow for different and
seemingly antithetical peaks on the moral landscape? What if there is a possible world in
which the Golden Rule has become an unshakable instinct, while there is another world
of equivalent happiness where the inhabitants reflexively violate it? Perhaps this is a
world of perfectly matched sadists and masochists. Let’s assume that in this world every
person can be paired, one-for-one, with the saints in the first world, and while they are
different in every other way, these pairs are identical in every way relevant to their wellbeing. Stipulating all these things, the consequentialist would be forced to say that these
worlds are morally equivalent. Is this a problem? I don’t think so. The problem lies in
how many details we have been forced to ignore in the process of getting to this point.
What possible reason do we have to worry that the principles of human well-being are
this elastic? This is like worrying that there is a possible world in which the laws of
physics, while as consistent as they are in our world, are completely antithetical to
physics as we know it. Okay, what if? Exactly how much should this possibility concern
us as we try to predict the behavior of matter in our world?
And the Kantian commitment to viewing people as ends in themselves, while a
very useful moral principle, is difficult to map onto the world with precision. Not only
are the boundaries between self and world hard to define, one’s individuality with respect
to one’s own past and future is somewhat mysterious. For instance, we are each heirs to
our actions and to our failures of action. Does this have any moral implications? If I am
currently disinclined to do some necessary and profitable work, to eat well, to make
regular visits to doctor and dentist, to avoid dangerous sports, to wear my seat belt, to
save money, etc.—have I committed a series of crimes against the future self who will
suffer the consequences of my negligence? Why not? And if I do live prudently, despite
the pain it causes me, out of concern for the interests of my future self, is this an instance
of my being used as a means to someone else’s end? Am I merely a resource for the
person I will be in the future?
46. Rawls’s notion of “primary goods,” access to which must be fairly allocated
in any just society, seems parasitic upon a general notion of human well-being. Why are
“basic rights and liberties,” “freedom of movement and free choice of occupation,” “the
powers and prerogatives of offices and positions of authority,” “income and wealth,” and
“the social bases of self-respect” of any interest to us at all if not as constituents of happy
human lives? Of course, Rawls is at pains to say that his conception of the “good” is
partial and merely political—but to the degree that it is good at all, it seems beholden to a
larger conception of human well-being. See Rawls, 2001, pp. 58–60.
47. Cf. Pinker, 2008b.
48. Kant, [1785] 1995, p. 30.
49. As Patricia Churchland notes:
Kant’s conviction that detachment from emotions is essential in characterizing
moral obligation is strikingly at odds with what we know about our biological nature.

From a biological point of view, basic emotions are Mother Nature’s way of getting us to
do what we prudentially ought. The social emotions are a way of getting us to do what we
socially ought, and the reward system is a way of learning to use past experiences to
improve one’s performance in both domains (Churchland, 2008b).

50. However, one problem that people often have with consequentialism is that it
entails moral hierarchy: certain spheres of well-being (i.e., minds) will be more important
than others. The philosopher Robert Nozick famously observed that this opens the door to
“utility monsters”: hypothetical creatures who could get enormously greater life
satisfaction from devouring us than we would lose (Nozick 1974, p. 41). But, as Nozick
observes, we are just such utility monsters. Leaving aside the fact that economic
inequality allows many of us to profit from the drudgery of others, most of us pay others
to raise and kill animals so that we can eat them. This arrangement works out rather
badly for the animals. How much do these creatures actually suffer? How different is the
happiest cow, pig, or chicken from those who languish on our factory farms? We seem to
have decided, all things considered, that it is proper that the well-being of certain species
be entirely sacrificed to our own. We might be right about this. Or we might not. For
many people, eating meat is simply an unhealthy source of fleeting pleasure. It is very
difficult to believe, therefore, that all of the suffering and death we impose on our fellow
creatures is ethically defensible. For the sake of argument, however, let’s assume that
allowing some people to eat some animals yields a net increase in well-being on planet
earth.
In this context, would it be ethical for cows being led to slaughter to defend
themselves if they saw an opportunity—perhaps by stampeding their captors and
breaking free? Would it be ethical for a fish to fight against the hook in light of the
fisherman’s justified desire to eat it? Having judged some consumption of animals to be
ethically desirable (or at least ethically acceptable), we appear to rule out the possibility
of warranted resistance on their parts. We are their utility monsters.
Nozick draws the obvious analogy and asks if it would be ethical for our species
to be sacrificed for the unimaginably vast happiness of some superbeings. Provided that
we take the time to really imagine the details (which is not easy), I think the answer is
clearly “yes.” There seems no reason to suppose that we must occupy the highest peak on
the moral landscape. If there are beings who stand in relation to us as we do to bacteria, it
should be easy to admit that their interests must trump our own, and to a degree that we
cannot possibly conceive. I do not think that the existence of such a moral hierarchy
poses any problems for our ethics. And there is no compelling reason to believe that such
superbeings exist, much less ones that want to eat us.
51. Traditional utility theory has been unable to explain why people so often
behave in ways that they know they will later regret. If human beings were simply
inclined to choose the path leading to their most satisfying option, then willpower would
be unnecessary, and self-defeating behavior would be unheard of. In his fascinating book,
Breakdown of Will, the psychiatrist George Ainslie examines the dynamics of human
decision making in the face of competing preferences. To account for both the necessity
of human will, along with its predictable failures, Ainslie presents a model of decision
making in which each person is viewed as a community of present and future “selves” in

competition, and each “self” discounts future rewards more steeply than seems strictly
rational.
The multiplicity of competing interests in the human mind causes us each to
function as a loose coalition of interests that may be unified only by resource
limitations—like the fact that we have only one body with which to express our desires,
moment to moment. This obvious constraint upon our fulfilling mutually incompatible
ends keeps us bargaining with our “self” across time: “Ulysses planning for the Sirens
must treat Ulysses hearing them as a separate person, to be influenced if possible and
forestalled if not” (Ainslie, 2001, p. 40).
Hyperbolic discounting of future rewards leads to curiosities like “preference
reversal”: for example, most people prefer $10,000 today to $15,000 three years from
now, but prefer $15,000 in thirteen years to $10,000 in ten years. Given that the latter
scenario is simply the first seen at a distance of ten years, it seems clear that people’s
preferences reverse depending on the length of the delay. The deferral of a reward is less
acceptable the closer one gets to the possibility of enjoying it.
52. I am also not as healthy or as well educated as I could be. I believe that such
statements are objectively true (even where they relate to subjective facts about me).
53. Haidt, 2001, p. 821.
54. The wisdom of switching doors is seen more easily if you imagine having
made your initial selection among a thousand doors, rather than three. Imagine you
picked Door #17, and Monty Hall then opens every door except for #562, revealing goats
as far as the eye can see. What should you do next? Stick with Door #17 or switch to
Door #562? It should be obvious that your initial choice was made in a condition of great
uncertainty, with a 1-in-1,000 chance of success and a 999-in-1,000 chance of failure.
The opening of 998 doors has given you an extraordinary amount of information—
collapsing the remaining odds of 999-in-1,000 on door #562.
55. Haidt, 2008.
56. Haidt, 2001, p. 823.
57. http://newspolls.org/question.php?question_id=716. Incidentally, the same
research found that 16 percent of Americans also believe that it is “very likely” that the
“federal government is withholding proof of the existence of intelligent life from other
planets” ( http://newspolls.org/question.php? question_id=715).
58. This is especially obvious in split-brain research, when language areas in the
left hemisphere routinely confabulate explanations for right-hemisphere behavior
(Gazzaniga, 1998; M. S. Gazzaniga, 2005; Gazzaniga, 2008; Gazzaniga, Bogen, &
Sperry, 1962).
59. Blow, 2009.
60. “Multiculturalism ‘drives young Muslims to shun British values.’” The Daily
Mail (January 29, 2007).
61. Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, & Zahn, 2008; 2005.
62. Moll et al., 2008, p. 162.
63. Including the nucleus accumbens, the caudate nucleus, the ventromedial and
orbitofrontal cortex, and the rostral anterior cingulate (Rilling et al., 2002).
64. Though, as is often the case with neuroimaging work, the results do not divide
as neatly as all that. In fact, one of Moll’s earlier studies on disgust and moral indignation
found medial regions also involved in these negative states (Moll, de Oliveira-Souza et

al., 2005).
65. Koenigs et al., 2007.
66. J. D. Greene et al., 2001.
67. This thought experiment was first introduced by Foot (1967) and later
elaborated by Thompson (1976).
68. J. D. Greene et al., 2001.
69. Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2006.
70. J. D. Greene, 2007.
71. Moll et al., 2008, p. 168. There is the additional concern, which bedevils
much neuroimaging research: the regions that Greene et al. label as “emotional” have
been implicated in other types of processing—memory and language, for instance (G.
Miller, 2008b). This is an instance of the “reverse inference” problem raised by Poldrack
(2006), discussed below in the context of my own research on belief.
72. While some researchers have sought to differentiate these terms, most use
them interchangeably.
73. Salter, 2003, pp. 98–99. See also Stone, 2009.
74. www.missingkids.com.
75. Twenty percent of male and female prison inmates are psychopaths, and they
are responsible for more than 50 percent of serious crimes (Hare, 1999, p. 87). The
recidivism rate of psychopaths is three times higher than that of other offenders (and the
violent recidivism rate is three to five times higher) (Blair, Mitchell, & Blair, 2005, p.
16).
76. Nunez, Casey, Egner, Hare, & Hirsch, 2005. For reasons that may have
something to do with the sensationalism just mentioned, psychopathy does not exist as a
diagnostic category, or even as an index entry, in The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV). The two DSM-IV diagnoses that seek to address the
behavioral correlates of psychopathy—antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) and
conduct disorder—do not capture its interpersonal and emotional components at all.
Antisocial behavior is common to several disorders, and people with ASPD may not
score high on the PCL-R (de Oliveira-Souza et al., 2008; Narayan et al., 2007). The
inadequacies of the DSM-IV’s treatment of the syndrome are very well brought out in
Blair et al., 2005. There are many motives for antisocial behavior and many routes to
becoming a violent felon. The hallmark of psychopathy isn’t bad behavior per se, but an
underlying spectrum of emotional and interpersonal impairments. And psychopathy, as a
construct, is far more predictive of specific behaviors (e.g., recidivism) than the DSM-IV
criteria are.
77. It would appear, however, that the same could be said of the great Erwin
Schrödinger (Teresi, 2010).
78. Frontal lobe injury can result in a condition known as “acquired sociopathy,”
which shares some of the features of developmental psychopathy. While they are often
mentioned in the same context, acquired sociopathy and psychopathy differ, especially
with regard to the type of aggression they produce. Reactive aggression is triggered by an
annoying or threatening stimuli and is often associated with anger. Instrumental
aggression is purposed toward a goal. The man who lashes out after being jostled on the
street has expressed reactive aggression; the man who attacks another man to steal his
wallet or to impress his fellow gang members has displayed instrumental aggression.

Subjects suffering from acquired sociopathy, who have generally sustained injuries to
their orbitofrontal lobes, display poor impulse control and tend to exhibit increased levels
of reactive aggression. However, they do not show a heightened tendency toward
instrumental aggression. Psychopaths are prone to aggression of both types. Most
important, instrumental aggression seems most closely linked to the
callousness/unemotional (CU) trait that is the hallmark of the disorder. Studies of samesex twins suggest that the CU trait is also most associated with heritable causes of
antisocial behavior (Viding, Jones, Frick, Moffitt, & Plomin, 2008).
Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, and colleagues found that the correlation between gray
matter reductions and psychopathy extends beyond the frontal cortex, and this would
explain why acquired sociopathy and psychopathy are distinct disorders. Psychopathy
was correlated with gray matter reductions in a wide network of structures: including the
bilateral insula, the superior temporal sulci, the supra-marginal/angular gyri, the caudate
(head), the fusiform cortex, the middle frontal gyri, among others. It would be
exceedingly unlikely to injure such a wide network selectively.
79. Kiehl et al., 2001; Glenn, Raine, & Schug, 2009. However, when given
personal vs. impersonal moral dilemmas to solve, unlike MPFC patients, psychopaths
tend to produce the same answers as normal controls, albeit without the same emotional
response (Glenn, Raine, Schug, Young, & Hauser, 2009).
80. Hare, 1999, p. 76.
81. Ibid., p. 132.
82. Blair et al., 2005.
83. Buckholtz et al., 2010.
84. Richell et al., 2003.
85. Dolan & Fullam, 2004.
86. Dolan & Fullam, 2006; Blair et al., 2005.
87. Blair et al., 2005. The first book-length treatment of psychopathy appears to
be Cleckley’s The Mask of Sanity. While it is currently out of print, this book is still
widely referenced and much revered. It is worth reading, if only for the author’s highly
(and often inadvertently) amusing prose. Hare, 1999, Blair et al., 2005, and Babiak &
Hare, 2006, provide more recent book-length discussions of the disorder.
88. Blair et al., 2005. The developmental literature suggests that, because
punishment (the unconditioned stimulus) rarely follows a specific transgression (the
conditioned stimulus) closely in time, the aversive conditioning brought on by corporal
punishment tends to get associated with the person who metes it out, rather than with the
behavior in need of correction. Blair also observes that if punishment were the primary
source of moral instruction, children would be unable to observe the difference between
conventional transgressions (e.g., talking in class) and moral ones (e.g., hitting another
student), as breaches of either sort tend to elicit punishment. And yet healthy children can
readily distinguish between these forms of misbehavior. Thus, it would seem that they
receive their correction directly from the distress that others exhibit when true moral
boundaries have been crossed. Other mammals also find the suffering of their
conspecifics highly aversive. We know this from work in monkeys (Masserman,
Wechkin, & Terris, 1964) and rats (Church, 1959) that would seem scarcely ethical to
perform today. For instance, the conclusion of the former study reads: “A majority of
rhesus monkeys will consistently suffer hunger rather than secure food at the expense of

electroshock to a conspecific.”
89. Subsequent reviews of the neuroimaging literature have produced a somewhat
muddled view of the underlying neurology of psychopathy (Raine & Yaling, 2006).
While individual studies have found anatomical and functional abnormalities in a wide
variety of brain regions—including the amygdala, hippocampus, corpus callosum, and
putamen—the only result common to all studies is that psychopaths tend to show reduced
gray matter in the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Reductions in gray matter in three regions of
the PFC—the medial and lateral orbital areas and the frontal poles—correlate with
psychopathy scores, and these regions have been shown in other work to be directly
involved in the regulation of social conduct (de Oliveira-Souza et al., 2008). Recent
findings suggest that the correlation between cortical thinning and psychopathy may be
significant only for the right hemisphere (Yang, Raine, Colletti, Toga, & Narr, 2009).
The brains of psychopaths also show reduced white matter connections between orbital
frontal regions and the amygdala (M. C. Craig et al., 2009). In fact, the difference in the
average volume of gray matter in orbitofrontal regions seems to account for half of the
variation in antisocial behavior between the sexes: men and women don’t seem to differ
in their experience of anger, but women tend to be both more fearful and more
empathetic—and are thus better able to control their antisocial impulses (Jones, 2008).
90. Blair et al. hypothesize that the orbitofrontal deficits of psychopathy underlie
the propensity for reactive aggression, while the amygdala dysfunction leads to
“impairments in aversive conditioning, instrumental learning, and the processing of
fearful and sad expressions” that allow for learned, instrumental aggression and make
normal socialization impossible. Kent Kiehl, author of the first fMRI study on
psychopathy, now believes that the functional neuroanatomy of the disorder includes a
network of structures including the orbital frontal cortex, insula, anterior and posterior
cingulate, amygdala, parahippocampal gyrus, and anterior superior temporal gyrus (Kiehl
et al., 2001). He refers to this network as the “the paralimbic system” (Kiehl, 2006).
Kiehl is currently engaged in a massive and ongoing fMRI study of incarcerated
psychopaths, using a 1.5 Tesla scanner housed in a tractor-trailer that can be moved from
prison to prison. He hopes to build a neuroimaging database of 10,000 subjects (G.
Miller, 2008a; Seabrook, 2008).
91. Trivers, 2002, p. 53. For an extensive discussion of the details here, see
Dawkins, [1976] 2006, pp. 202–233.
92. Jones, 2008.
93. Diamond, 2008. Pinker, 2007, makes the same point: “If the wars of the
twentieth century had killed the same proportion of the population that die in the wars of
a typical tribal society, there would have been two billion deaths, not 100 million.”
It is easy to conclude that life is cheap in an honor culture, ruled by vengeance
and the law of talion (“eye for an eye”), but, as William Ian Miller observes, by at least
one measure these societies value life even more than we do. Our modern economies
thrive because we tend to limit personal liability. If I sell you a defective ladder, and you
fall and break your neck, I may have to pay you some compensation. But I will not have
to pay you nearly as much as I would be willing to pay to avoid having my own neck
broken. In our society we are constrained by the value a court places on the other guy’s
neck; in a culture ruled by talion law, we are constrained by the value we place on our
own (W. I. Miller, 2006).

94. Bowles, 2006, 2008, 2009.
95. Churchland, 2008a.
96. Libet, Gleason, Wright, & Pearl, 1983.
97. Soon, Brass, Heinze, & Haynes, 2008. Libet later argued that while we don’t
have free will with respect to initiating behavior, we might have free will to veto an
intention before it becomes effective (Libet, 1999, 2003). I think his reasoning was
clearly flawed, as there is every reason to think that a conscious veto must also arise on
the basis of unconscious neural events.
98. Fisher, 2001; Wegner, 2002; Wegner, 2004.
99. Heisenberg, 2009; Kandel, 2008; Karczmar, 2001; Libet, 1999; McCrone,
2003; Planck & Murphy, 1932; Searle, 2001; Sperry, 1976.
100. Heisenberg, 2009.
101. One problem with this approach is that quantum mechanical effects are
probably not, as a general rule, biologically salient. Quantum effects do drive evolution,
as high-energy particles like cosmic rays cause point mutations in DNA, and the behavior
of such particles passing through the nucleus of a cell is governed by the laws of quantum
mechanics. Evolution, therefore, seems unpredictable in principle (Silver, 2006).
102. The laws of nature do not strike most of us as incompatible with free will
because we have not imagined how human action would appear if all cause-and-effect
relationships were understood. But imagine that a mad scientist has developed a means of
controlling the human brain at a distance: What would it be like to watch him send a
person to and fro on the wings of her “will”? Would there be even the slightest
temptation to impute freedom to her? No. But this mad scientist is nothing more than
causal determinism personified. What makes his existence so inimical to our notion of
free will is that when we imagine him lurking behind a person’s thoughts and actions—
tweaking electrical potentials, manufacturing neurotransmitters, regulating genes, etc.—
we cannot help but let our notions of freedom and responsibility travel up the puppet’s
strings to the hand that controls them. To see that the addition of randomness does
nothing to change this situation, we need only imagine the scientist basing the inputs to
his machine on a shrewd arrangement of roulette wheels. How would such unpredictable
changes in the states of a person’s brain constitute freedom?
Swapping any combination of randomness and natural law for a mad scientist, we
can see that all the relevant features of a person’s inner life would be conserved—
thoughts, moods, and intentions would still arise and beget actions—and yet we are left
with the undeniable fact that the conscious mind cannot be the source of its own thoughts
and intentions. This discloses the real mystery of free will: if our experience is
compatible with its utter absence, how can we say that we see any evidence for it in the
first place?
103. Dennett, 2003.
104. The phrase “alien hand syndrome” describes a variety of neurological
disorders in which a person no longer recognizes ownership of one of his hands. Actions
of the nondominant hand in the split-brain patient can have this character, and in the
acute phase after surgery this can lead to overt, intermanual conflict. Zaidel et al. (2003)
prefer the phrase “autonomous hand,” as patients typically experience their hand to be out
of control but do not ascribe ownership of it to someone else. Similar anomalies can be
attributed to other neurological causes: for instance, in sensory alien hand syndrome

(following a stroke in the right posterior cerebral artery) the right arm will sometimes
choke or otherwise attack the left side of the body (Pryse-Philips, 2003).
105. See S. Harris, 2004, pp. 272–274.
106. Burns & Bechara, 2007, p. 264.
107. Others have made a similar argument. See Burns & Bechara, 2007, p. 264; J.
Greene & Cohen, 2004, p. 1776.
108. Cf. Levy, 2007.
109. The neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga writes:
Neuroscience will never find the brain correlate of responsibility, because that is
something we ascribe to humans—to people—not to brains. It is a moral value we
demand of our fellow, rule-following human beings. Just as optometrists can tell us how
much vision a person has (20/20 or 20/200) but cannot tell us when someone is legally
blind or has too little vision to drive a school bus, so psychiatrists and brain scientists
might be able to tell us what someone’s mental state or brain condition is but cannot tell
us (without being arbitrary) when someone has too little control to be held responsible.
The issue of responsibility (like the issue of who can drive school buses) is a social
choice. In neuroscientific terms, no person is more or less responsible than any other for
actions. We are all part of a deterministic system that someday, in theory, we will
completely understand. Yet the idea of responsibility, a social construct that exists in the
rules of a society, does not exist in the neuronal structures of the brain (Gazzaniga, 2005,
pp. 101–102).

While it is true that responsibility is a social construct attributed to people and not
to brains, it is a social construct that can make more or less sense given certain facts
about a person’s brain. I think we can easily imagine discoveries in neuroscience, as well
as brain imaging technology, that would allow us to attribute responsibility to persons in
a far more precise way than we do at present. A “Twinkie defense” would be entirely
uncontroversial if we learned that there was something in the creamy center of every
Twinkie that obliterated the frontal lobe’s inhibitory control over the limbic system.
But perhaps “responsibility” is simply the wrong construct: for Gazzaniga is
surely correct to say that “in neuroscientific terms, no person is more or less responsible
than any other for actions.” Conscious actions arise on the basis of neural events of which
we are not conscious. Whether they are predictable or not, we do not cause our causes.
110. Diamond, 2008.
111. In the philosophical literature, one finds three approaches to the problem:
determinism, libertarianism, and compatibilism. Both determinism and libertarianism are
often referred to as “incompatibilist” views, in that both maintain that if our behavior is
fully determined by background causes, free will is an illusion. Determinists believe that
we live in precisely such a world; libertarians (no relation to the political view that goes
by this name) believe that our agency rises above the field of prior causes—and they
inevitably invoke some metaphysical entity, like a soul, as the vehicle for our freely
acting wills. Compatibilists, like Daniel Dennett, maintain that free will is compatible
with causal determinism (see Dennett, 2003; for other compatibilist arguments see Ayer,
Chisholm, Strawson, Frankfurt, Dennett, and Watson—all in Watson, 1982). The
problem with compatibilism, as I see it, is that it tends to ignore that people’s moral

intuitions are driven by deeper, metaphysical notions of free will. That is, the free will
that people presume for themselves and readily attribute to others (whether or not this
freedom is, in Dennett’s sense, “worth wanting”) is a freedom that slips the influence of
impersonal, background causes. The moment you show that such causes are effective—as
any detailed account of the neurophysiology of human thought and behavior would—
proponents of free will can no longer locate a plausible hook upon which to hang their
notions of moral responsibility. The neuroscientists Joshua Greene and Jonathan Cohen
make the same point:
Most people’s view of the mind is implicitly dualist and libertarian and not
materialist and compatibilist … [I]ntuitive free will is libertarian, not compatibilist. That
is, it requires the rejection of determinism and an implicit commitment to some kind of
magical mental causation … contrary to legal and philosophical orthodoxy, determinism
really does threaten free will and responsibility as we intuitively understand them (J.
Greene & Cohen, 2004, pp. 1779–1780).

Chapter 3: Belief

1. Brains do not fossilize, so we cannot examine the brains of our ancient
ancestors. But comparing the neuroanatomy of living primates offers some indication of
the types of physical adaptations that might have led to the emergence of language. For
instance, diffusion-tensor imaging of macaque, chimpanzee, and human brains reveals a
gradual increase in the connectivity of the arcuate fasciculus—the fiber tract linking the
temporal and frontal lobes. This suggests that the relevant adaptations were incremental,
rather than saltatory (Ghazanfar, 2008).
2. N. Patterson, Richter, Gnerre, Lander, & Reich, 2006, 2008.
3. Wade, 2006.
4. Sarmiento, Sawyer, Milner, Deak, & Tattersall, 2007; Wade, 2006.
5. It seems, however, that the Neanderthal copy of the FOXP2 gene carried the
same two crucial mutations that distinguish modern humans from other primates (Enard
et al., 2002; Krause et al., 2007). FOXP2 is now known to play a central role in spoken
language, and its disruption leads to severe linguistic impairments in otherwise healthy
people (Lai, Fisher, Hurst, Vargha-Khadem, & Monaco, 2001). The introduction of a
human FOXP2 gene into mice changes their ultrasonic vocalizations, decreases
exploratory behavior, and alters cortico-basal ganglia circuits (Enard et al., 2009). The
centrality of FOXP2 for language development in humans has led some researchers to
conclude that Neanderthals could speak (Yong, 2008). In fact, one could argue that the
faculty of speech must precede Homo sapiens, as “it is difficult to imagine the emergence
of complex subsistence behaviors and selection for a brain size increase of approximately
75 percent, both since about 800,000 years ago, without complex social communication”
(Trinkaus, 2007).
Whether or not they could speak, the Neanderthals were impressive creatures.
Their average cranial capacity was 1,520 cc, slightly larger than that of their Homo
sapien contemporaries. In fact, human cranial capacity has decreased by about 150 cc
over the millennia to its current average of 1,340 cc (Gazzaniga, 2008). Generally

speaking, the correlation between brain size and cognitive ability is less than
straightforward, as there are several species that have larger brains than we do (e.g.,
elephants, whales, dolphins) without exhibiting signs of greater intelligence. There have
been many efforts to find some neuroanatomical measure that reliably tracks cognitive
ability, including allometric brain size (brain size proportional to body mass),
“encephalization quotient” (brain size proportional to the expected brain size for similar
animals, corrected for body mass; for primates EQ = [brain weight] / [0.12 × body weight
0.67
]), the size of the neocortex relative to the rest of the brain, etc. None of these metrics
has proved especially useful. In fact, among primates, there is no better predictor of
cognitive ability than absolute brain size, irrespective of body mass (Deaner, Isler,
Burkart, & van Schaik, 2007). By this measure, our competition with Neanderthals looks
especially daunting.
There are several genes involved in brain development that have been found to be
differentially regulated in human beings compared to other primates; two of special
interest are microcephalin and ASPM (the abnormal spindlelike microcephaly-associated
gene). The modern variant of microcephalin, which regulates brain size, appeared
approximately 37,000 years ago (more or less coincident with the ascendance of modern
humans) and has increased in frequency under positive selection pressure ever since (P.
D. Evans et al., 2005). One modern variant of ASPM, which also regulates brain size, has
spread with great frequency in the last 5,800 years (Mekel-Bobrov et al., 2005). As these
authors note, this can be loosely correlated with the spread of cities and the development
of written language. The possible significance of these findings is also discussed in
Gazzaniga (2008).
6. Fitch, Hauser, & Chomsky, 2005; Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002; Pinker &
Jackendoff, 2005.
7. Regrettably, language is also the basis of our ability to wage war effectively, to
perpetrate genocide, and to render our planet uninhabitable.
8. While general information sharing has been undeniably useful, there is good
reason to think that the communication of specifically social information has driven the
evolution of language (Dunbar, 1998, 2003). Humans also transmit social information
(i.e., gossip) in greater quantity and with higher fidelity than nonsocial information
(Mesoudi, Whiten, & Dunbar, 2006).
9. Cf. S. Harris, 2004, pp. 243–244.
10. A. R. Damasio, 1999.
11. Westbury & Dennett, 1999.
12. Bransford & McCarrell, 1977.
13. Rumelhart, 1980.
14. Damasio draws a similar distinction (A. R. Damasio, 1999).
15. For the purposes of studying belief in the lab, therefore, there seems to be
little problem in defining the phenomenon of interest: believing a proposition is the act of
accepting it as “true” (e.g., marking it as “true” on a questionnaire); disbelieving a
proposition is the act of rejecting it as “false”; and being uncertain about the truth value
of a proposition is the disposition to do neither of these things, but to judge it, rather, as
“undecidable.”
In our search for the neural correlates of subjective states like belief and disbelief,
we are bound to rely on behavioral reports. Therefore, having presented an experimental

subject with a written statement—e.g., the United States is larger than Guatemala—and
watched him mark it as “true,” it may occur to us to wonder whether we can take him at
his word. Does he really believe that the United States is larger than Guatemala? Does
this statement, in other words, really seem true to him? This is rather like worrying, with
reference to a subject who has just performed a lexical decision task, whether a given
stimulus really seems like a word to him. While it may seem reasonable to worry that
experimental subjects might be poor judges of what they believe, or that they might
attempt to deceive experimenters, such concerns seem misplaced—or if appropriate here,
they should haunt all studies of human perception and cognition. As long as we are
content to rely on subjects to report their perceptual judgments (about when, or whether,
a given stimulus appeared), or their cognitive ones (about what sort of stimulus it was),
there seems to be no special problem taking reports of belief, disbelief, and uncertainty at
face value. This does not ignore the possibility of deception (or self-deception), implicit
cognitive conflict, motivated reasoning, and other sources of confusion.
16. Blakeslee, 2007.
17. These considerations run somewhat against David Marr’s influential thesis
that any complex information-processing system should be understood first at the level of
“computational theory” (i.e., the level of highest abstraction) in terms of its “goals”
(Marr, 1982). Thinking in terms of goals can be extremely useful, of course, in that it
unifies (and ignores) a tremendous amount of bottom-up detail: the goal of “seeing,” for
instance, is complicated at the level of its neural realization and, what is more, it has been
achieved by at least forty separate evolutionary routes (Dawkins, 1996, p. 139).
Consequently, thinking about “seeing” in terms of abstract computational goals can make
a lot of sense. In a structure like the brain, however, the “goals” of the system can never
be fully specified in advance. We currently have no inkling what else a region like the
insula might be “for.”
18. There has been a long debate in neuroscience over whether the brain is best
thought of as a collection of discrete modules or as a distributed, dynamical system. It
seems clear, however, that both views are correct, depending on one’s level of focus (J.
D. Cohen & Tong, 2001). Some degree of modularity is now an undeniable property of
brain organization, as damage to one brain region can destroy a specific ability (e.g., the
recognition of faces) while sparing most others. There are also distinct differences in cell
types and patterns of connectivity that articulate sharp borders between regions. And
some degree of modularity is ensured by limitations on information transfer over large
distances in the brain.
While regional specialization is a general fact of brain organization, strict
partitioning generally isn’t: as has already been said, most regions of the brain serve
multiple functions. And even within functionally specific regions, the boundaries
between their current function and their possible functions are provisional, fuzzy, and in
the case of any individual brain, guaranteed to be idiosyncratic. For instance, the brain
shows a general capacity to recover from focal injuries, and this entails the recruitment
and repurposing of other (generally adjacent) brain areas. Such considerations suggest
that we cannot expect true isomorphism between brains—or even between a brain and
itself across time.
There is legitimate concern, however, that current methods of neuroimaging tend
to beg the question in favor of the modularity thesis—leading, among uncritical

consumers of this research, to a naïve picture of functional segregation in the brain.
Consider functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which is the most popular
method of neuroimaging at present. This technique does not give us an absolute measure
of neural activity. Rather, it allows us to compare changes in blood flow throughout the
brain between two experimental conditions. We can, for example, compare instances in
which subjects believe statements to be true to instances in which they believe statements
to be false. The resulting image reveals which regions of the brain are more active in one
condition or the other. Because fMRI allows us to detect signal changes throughout the
brain, it is not, in principle, blind to widely distributed or combinatorial processing. But
its dependence on blood flow as a marker for neural activity reduces spatial and temporal
resolution, and the statistical techniques we use to analyze our data require that we focus
on relatively large clusters of activity. It is, therefore, in the very nature of the tool to
deliver images that appear to confirm the modular organization of brain function (cf.
Henson, 2005). The problem, as far as critics are concerned, is that this method of
studying the brain ignores the fact that the whole brain is active in both experimental
conditions (e.g., during belief and disbelief), and regions that don’t survive this
subtractive procedure may well be involved in the relevant information processing.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) also rests on the assumption that
there is a more or less linear relationship between changes in blood flow, as measured by
blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) changes in the MR signal, and changes in
neuronal activity. While the validity of fMRI seems generally well supported (Logothetis,
Pauls, Augath, Trinath, & Oeltermann, 2001), there is some uncertainty about whether
the assumed linear relationship between blood flow and neuronal activity holds for all
mental processes (Sirotin & Das, 2009). There are also potential problems with
comparing one brain state to another on the assumption that changes in brain function are
additive in the way that the components of an experimental task may be (this is often
referred to as the problem of “pure insertion”) (Friston et al., 1996). There are also
questions about what “activity” is indicated by changes in the BOLD signal. The
principal correlate of blood-flow changes in the brain appears to be
presynaptic/neuromodulatory activity (as measured by local field potentials), not axonal
spikes. This fact poses a few concerns related to the interpretation of fMRI data: fMRI
cannot readily differentiate activity that is specific to a given task and neuromodulation;
nor can it differentiate bottom-up from top-down processing. In fact, fMRI may be blind
to the difference between excitatory and inhibitory signals, as metabolism also increases
with inhibition. It seems quite possible, for instance, that increases in recurrent inhibition
in a given region might be associated with greater BOLD signal but decreased neuronal
firing. For a discussion of these and other limitations of the technology, see Logothetis,
2008; M. S. Cohen, 1996, 2001. Such concerns notwithstanding, fMRI remains the most
important tool for studying brain function in human beings noninvasively.
A more sophisticated, neural network analysis of fMRI data has shown that
representational content—which can appear, under standard methods of data analysis, to
be strictly segregated (e.g., face-vs.-object perception in the ventral temporal lobe)—is
actually intermingled and dispersed across a wider region of the cortex. Information
encoding appears to depend not on strict localization, but on a combinatorial pattern of
variations in the intensity of the neural response across regions once thought to be
functionally distinct (Hanson, Matsuka, & Haxby, 2004).

There are also epistemological questions about what it means to correlate any
mental state with physiological changes in the brain. And yet, while I consider the socalled “hard problem” of consciousness (Chalmers, 1996) a real barrier to scientific
explanation, I do not think it will hinder the progress of cognitive neuroscience generally.
The distinction between consciousness and its contents seems paramount. It is true that
we do not understand how consciousness emerges from the unconscious activity of neural
networks—or even how it could emerge. But we do not need such knowledge to compare
states of mind through neuroimaging. To consider one among countless examples from
the current literature: neuroscientists have begun to investigate how envy and
schadenfreude are related in neuroanatomical terms. One group found activity in the
ACC (anterior cingulate cortex) to be correlated with envy, and the magnitude of signal
change was predictive of activity in the striatum (a region often associated with reward)
when subjects witnessed those they envied experiencing misfortune (signifying the
pleasure of schadenfreude) (Takahashi et al., 2009). This reveals something about the
relationship between these mental states that may not be obvious by introspection. The
finding that right-sided lesions in the MPFC impair the perception of envy (a negative
emotion), while analogous left-sided lesions impair the perception of schadenfreude (a
positive emotion) fills in a few more details (Shamay-Tsoory, Tibi-Elhanany, & AharonPeretz, 2007)—as there is a wider literature on the lateralization of positive and negative
mental states. Granted, the relationship between envy and schadenfreude was somewhat
obvious without our learning their neural correlates. But improvements in neuroimaging
may one day allow us to understand the relationship between such mental states with
great precision. This may deliver conceptual surprises and even personal epiphanies. And
if the mental states and capacities most conducive to human well-being are ever
understood in terms of their underlying neurophysiology, neuroimaging may become an
integral part of any enlightened approach to ethics.
It seems to me that progress on this front does not require that we solve the “hard
problem” of consciousness (or that it even admit of a solution). When comparing mental
states, the reality of human consciousness is a given. We need not understand how
consciousness relates to the behavior of atoms to investigate how emotions like love,
compassion, trust, greed, fear, and anger differ (and interact) in neurophysiological terms.
19. Most inputs to cortical dendrites come from neurons in the same region of
cortex: very few arrive from other cortical regions or from ascending pathways. For
instance, only 5 percent to 10 percent of inputs to layer 4 of visual cortex arrive from the
thalamus (R. J. Douglas & Martin, 2007).
20. The apparent (qualified) existence of “grandmother cells” notwithstanding
(Quiroga, Reddy, Kreiman, Koch, & Fried, 2005). For a discussion of the limits of
traditional “connectionist” accounts of mental representation, see Doumas & Hummel,
2005.
21. These data were subsequently published as Harris, S., Sheth, & Cohen 2008.
22. The post-hoc analysis of neuroimaging data is a limitation of many studies,
and in our original paper we acknowledged the importance of distinguishing between
results predicted by a specific model of brain function and those that arise in the absence
of a prior hypothesis. This caveat notwithstanding, I believe that too much has been made
of the distinction between descriptive and hypothesis-driven research in science generally
and in neuroscience in particular. There must always be a first experimental observation,

and one gets no closer to physical reality by running a follow-up study. To have been the
first person to observe blood-flow changes in the right fusiform gyrus in response to
visual stimuli depicting faces (Sergent, Ohta, & MacDonald, 1992)—and to have
concluded, on the basis of these data, that this region of cortex plays a role in facial
recognition—was a perfectly legitimate instance of scientific induction. Subsequent
corroboration of these results increased our collective confidence in this first set of data
(Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997) but did not constitute an epistemological
advance over the first study. All subsequent hypothesis-driven research that has taken the
fusiform gyrus as a region of interest derives its increased legitimacy from the descriptive
study upon which it is based (or, as has often been the case in neuroscience, from the
purely descriptive, clinical literature). If the initial descriptive study was in error, then
any hypothesis based on it would be empty (or only accidentally correct); if the initial
work was valid, then follow-up work would merely corroborate it and, perhaps, build
upon it. The injuries suffered by Phineas Gage and H.M. were inadvertent, descriptive
experiments, and the wealth of information learned from these cases—arguably more
than was learned from any two experiments in the history of neuroscience—did not suffer
for lack of prior hypothesis. Indeed, these clinical observations became the basis of all
subsequent hypotheses about the function of the frontal and medial temporal lobes.
23. E. K. Miller & Cohen, 2001; Desimone & Duncan, 1995. While damage to the
PFC can result in a range of deficits, the most common is haphazard, inappropriate, and
impulsive behavior, along with the inability to acquire new behavioral rules (Bechara,
Damasio, & Damasio, 2000). As many parents can attest, the human capacity for selfregulation does not fully develop until after adolescence; this is when the white-matter
connections in the PFC finally mature (Sowell, Thompson, Holmes, Jernigan, & Toga,
1999).
24. Spinoza, [1677] 1982.
25. D. T. K. Gilbert, 1991; D. T. K. Gilbert, Douglas, & Malone, 1990; J. P.
Mitchell, Dodson, & Schacter, 2005.
26. This truth bias may interact with (or underlie) what has come to be known as
the “confirmation bias” or “positive test strategy” heuristic in reasoning (Klayman & Ha,
1987): people tend to seek evidence that confirms an hypothesis rather than evidence that
refutes it. This strategy is known to produce frequent reasoning errors. Our bias toward
belief may also explain the “illusory-truth effect,” where mere exposure to a proposition,
even when it was revealed to be false or attributed to an unreliable source, increases the
likelihood that it will later be remembered as being true (Begg, Robertson, Gruppuso,
Anas, & Needham, 1996; J. P. Mitchell et al., 2005).
27. This was due to a greater decrease in signal during disbelief trials than during
belief trials. This region of the brain is known to have a high level of resting-state activity
and to show reduced activity compared to baseline for a wide variety of cognitive tasks
(Raichle et al., 2001).
28. Bechara et al., 2000. The MPFC is also activated by reasoning tasks that
incorporate high emotional salience (Goel & Dolan, 2003b; Northoff et al., 2004).
Individuals with MPFC lesions test normally on a variety of executive function tasks but
often fail to integrate appropriate emotional responses into their reasoning about the
world. They also fail to habituate normally to unpleasant somatosensory stimuli (Rule,
Shimamura, & Knight, 2002). The circuitry in this region that links decision making to

emotions seems rather specific, as MPFC lesions do not disrupt fear conditioning or the
normal modulation of memory by emotionally charged stimuli (Bechara et al., 2000).
While reasoning appropriately about the likely consequences of their actions, these
persons seem unable to feel the difference between good and bad choices.
29. Hornak et al., 2004; O’Doherty, Kringelbach, Rolls, Hornak, & Andrews,
2001.
30. Matsumoto & Tanaka, 2004.
31. Schnider, 2001.
32. Northoff et al., 2006.
33. Kelley et al., 2002.
34. When compared with both belief and uncertainty, disbelief was associated in
our study with bilateral activation of the anterior insula, a primary region for the
sensation of taste (Faurion, Cerf, Le Bihan, & Pillias, 1998; O’Doherty, Rolls, Francis,
Bowtell, & McGlone, 2001). This area is widely thought to be involved with negatively
valenced feelings like disgust (Royet, Plailly, Delon-Martin, Kareken, & Segebarth,
2003; Wicker et al., 2003), harm avoidance (Paulus, Rogalsky, Simmons, Feinstein, &
Stein, 2003), and the expectation of loss in decision tasks (Kuhnen & Knutson, 2005).
The anterior insula has also been linked to pain perception (Wager et al., 2004) and even
to the perception of pain in others (T. Singer et al., 2004). The frequent association
between activity in the anterior insula and negative affect appears to make at least
provisional sense of the emotional tone of disbelief.
While disgust is regularly classed as a primary human emotion, infants and
toddlers do not appear to feel it (Bloom, 2004, p. 155). This would account for some of
their more arresting displays of incivility. Interestingly, people suffering from
Huntington’s disease, as well as presymptomatic carriers of the HD allele, exhibit
reduced feelings of disgust and are generally unable to recognize the emotion in others
(Calder, Keane, Manes, Antoun, & Young, 2000; Gray, Young, Barker, Curtis, &
Gibson, 1997; Halligan, 1998; Hayes, Stevenson, & Coltheart, 2007; I. J. Mitchell,
Heims, Neville, & Rickards, 2005; Sprengelmeyer, Schroeder, Young, & Epplen, 2006).
The recognition deficit has been correlated with reduced activity in the anterior insula
(Hennenlotter et al., 2004; Kipps, Duggins, McCusker, & Calder, 2007)—though other
work has found that HD patients and carriers are impaired in processing a range of
(predominantly negative) emotions: including disgust, anger, fear, sadness, and surprise
(Henley et al., 2008; Johnson et al., 2007; Snowden et al., 2008).
We must be careful not to draw too strong a connection between disbelief and
disgust (or any other mental state) on the basis of these data. While a connection between
these states of mind seems intuitively plausible, equating disbelief with disgust represents
a “reverse inference” of a sort known to be problematic in the field of neuroimaging
(Poldrack, 2006). One cannot reliably infer the presence of a mental state on the basis of
brain data alone, unless the brain regions in question are known to be truly selective for a
single mental state. If it were known, for instance, that the anterior insulae were active if
and only if subjects experienced disgust, then we could draw quite a strong inference
about the role of disgust in disbelief. But there are very few regions of the brain whose
function is so selective as to justify inferences of this kind. The anterior insula, for
instance, appears to be involved in a wide range of neutral/positive states—including
time perception, music appreciation, self-recognition, and smiling (A. D. Craig, 2009).

And there may also be many forms of disgust: While subjects tend to rate a wide
range of stimuli as equivalently “disgusting,” one group found that disgust associated
with pathogen-related acts, social-sexual acts (e.g., incest), and nonsexual moral
violations activated different (but overlapping) brain networks (J. S. Borg, Lieberman, &
Kiehl, 2008). To further complicate matters, they did not find the insula implicated in any
of this disgust processing, with the exception of the subjects’ response to incest. This
group is not alone in suggesting that the insula may not be selective for disgust and may
be more generally sensitive to other factors, including self-monitoring and emotional
salience. As the authors note, the difficulty in interpreting these results is compounded by
the fact that their subjects were engaged in a memory task and not required to explicitly
evaluate how disgusting a stimulus was until after the scanning session. This may have
selected against insular activity; at least one other study suggests that the insula may only
be preferentially active in response to attended stimuli (Anderson, Christoff, Panitz, De
Rosa, & Gabrieli, 2003).
35. These results seem to pull the rug out from under one widely subscribed view
in moral philosophy, generally described as “non-cognitivism.” Non-cognitivists hold
that moral claims lack propositional content and, therefore, do not express genuine beliefs
about the world. Unfortunately for this view, our brains appear to be unaware of this
breakthrough in metaethics: we seem to accept the truth of moral assertions in the same
way as we accept any other statements of fact.
In this first experiment on belief, we also analyzed the brain’s response to
uncertainty: the mental state in which the truth value of a proposition cannot be judged.
Not knowing what one believes to be true—Is the hotel north of Main Street, or south of
Main Street? Was he talking to me, or to the man behind me?—has obvious
behavioral/emotional consequences. Uncertainty prevents the link between thought and
subsequent behavior/emotion from forming. It can be distinguished readily from belief
and disbelief in this regard, because in the latter states, the mind has settled upon a
specific, actionable representation of the world. The results of our study suggest two
mechanisms that might account for this difference.
The contrasts—uncertainty minus belief and uncertainty minus disbelief—yielded
signal in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). This region of the brain has been widely
implicated in error detection (Schall, Stuphorn, & Brown, 2002) and response conflict
(Gehring & Fencsik, 2001), and it regularly responds to increases in cognitive load and
interference (Bunge, Ochsner, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 2001). It has also been
shown to play a role in the perception of pain (Coghill, McHaffie, & Yen, 2003).
The opposite contrasts, belief minus uncertainty and disbelief minus uncertainty,
showed increased signal in the caudate nucleus, which is part of the basal ganglia. One of
the primary functions of the basal ganglia is to provide a route by which cortical
association areas can influence motor action. The caudate has displayed context-specific,
anticipatory, and reward-related activity in a variety of animal studies (Mink, 1996) and
has been associated with cognitive planning in humans (Monchi, Petrides, Strafella,
Worsley, & Doyon, 2006). It has also been shown to respond to feedback in both
reasoning and guessing tasks when compared to the same tasks without feedback (Elliott,
Frith, & Dolan, 1997).
In cognitive terms, one of the principal features of feedback is that it
systematically removes uncertainty. The fact that both belief and disbelief showed highly

localized signal changes in the caudate, when compared to uncertainty, appears to
implicate basal ganglia circuits in the acceptance or rejection of linguistic representations
of the world. Delgado et al. showed that the caudate response to feedback can be
modulated by prior expectations (Delgado, Frank, & Phelps, 2005). In a trust game
played with three hypothetical partners (neutral, bad, and good), they found that the
caudate responded strongly to violations of trust by a neutral partner, to a lesser degree
with a bad partner, but not at all when the partner was assumed to be morally good. On
their account, it seems that the assumption of moral goodness in a partner led subjects to
ignore or discount feedback. This result seems convergent with our own: one might say
that subjects in their study were uncertain of what to conclude when a trusted collaborator
failed to cooperate.
The ACC and the caudate display an unusual degree of connectivity, as the
surgical lesioning of the ACC (a procedure known as a cingulotomy) causes atrophy of
the caudate, and the disruption of this pathway is thought to be the basis of the
procedure’s effect in treating conditions like obsessive-compulsive disorder (Rauch et al.,
2000; Rauch et al., 2001).
There are, however, different types of uncertainty. For instance, there is a
difference between expected uncertainty—where one knows that one’s observations are
unreliable—and unexpected uncertainty, where something in the environment indicates
that things are not as they seem. The difference between these two modes of cognition
has been analyzed within a Bayesian statistical framework in terms of their underlying
neurophysiology. It appears that expected uncertainty is largely mediated by
acetylcholine and unexpected uncertainty by norepinephrine (Yu & Dayan, 2005).
Behavioral economists sometimes distinguish between “risk” and “ambiguity”: the
former being a condition where probability can be assessed, as in a game of roulette, the
latter being the uncertainty borne of missing information. People are generally more
willing to take even very low-probability bets in a condition of risk than they are to act in
a condition of missing information. One group found that ambiguity was negatively
correlated with activity in the dorsal striatum (caudate/putamen) (Hsu, Bhatt, Adolphs,
Tranel, & Camerer, 2005). This result fits very well with our own, as the uncertainty
provoked by our stimuli would have taken the form of “ambiguity” rather than “risk.”
36. There are many factors that bias our judgment, including: arbitrary anchors on
estimates of quantity, availability biases on estimates of frequency, insensitivity to the
prior probability of outcomes, misconceptions of randomness, nonregressive predictions,
insensitivity to sample size, illusory correlations, overconfidence, valuing of worthless
evidence, hindsight bias, confirmation bias, biases based on ease of imaginability, as well
as other nonnormative modes of thinking. See Baron, 2008; J. S. B. T. Evans, 2005;
Kahneman, 2003; Kahneman, Krueger, Schkade, Schwarz, & Stone, 2006; Kahneman,
Slovic, & Tversky, 1982; Kahneman & Tversky, 1996; Stanovich & West, 2000; Tversky
& Kahneman, 1974.
37. Stanovich & West, 2000.
38. Fong et al., 1986/07. Once again, asking whether something is rationally or
morally normative is distinct from asking whether it has been evolutionarily adaptive.
Some psychologists have sought to minimize the significance of the research on cognitive
bias by suggesting that subjects make decisions using heuristics that conferred adaptive
fitness on our ancestors. As Stanovich and West (2000) observe, what serves the genes

does not necessarily advance the interests of the individual. We could also add that what
serves the individual in one context may not serve him in another. The cognitive and
emotional mechanisms that may (or may not) have optimized us for face-to-face conflict
(and its resolution) have clearly not prepared us to negotiate conflicts waged from afar—
whether with email or other long-range weaponry.
39. Ehrlinger, Johnson, Banner, Dunning, & Kruger, 2008; Kruger & Dunning,
1999.
40. Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski, & Sulloway, 2003. Amodio et al. (2007) used EEG
to look for differences in neurocognitive function between liberals and conservatives on a
Go/No-Go task. They found that liberalism correlated with increased event-related
potentials in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Given the ACC’s well-established role
in mediating cognitive conflict, they concluded that this difference might, in part, explain
why liberals are less set in their ways than conservatives, and more aware of nuance,
ambiguity, etc. Inzlicht (2009) found a nearly identical result for religious nonbelievers
versus believers.
41. Rosenblatt, Greenberg, Solomon, Pyszczynski, & Lyon, 1989.
42. Jost et al., 2003, p. 369.
43. D. A. Pizarro & Uhlmann, 2008.
44. Kruglanski, 1999. The psychologist Drew Westen describes motivated
reasoning as “a form of implicit affect regulation in which the brain converges on
solutions that minimize negative and maximize positive affect states” (Westen, Blagov,
Harenski, Kilts, & Hamann, 2006). This seems apt.
45. The fact that this principle often breaks down, spectacularly and
unselfconsciously, in the domain of religion is precisely why one can reasonably question
whether the world’s religions are in touch with reality at all.
46. Bechara et al., 2000; Bechara, Damasio, Tranel, & Damasio, 1997; A.
Damasio, 1999.
47. S. Harris et al., 2008.
48. Burton, 2008.
49. Frith, 2008, p. 45.
50. Silver, 2006, pp. 77–78.
51. But this allele has also been linked to a variety of psychological traits, like
novelty seeking and extraversion, which might also account for its persistence in the
genome (Benjamin et al., 1996).
52. Burton, 2008, pp. 188–195.
53. Joseph, 2009.
54. Houreld, 2009; LaFraniere, 2007; Harris, 2009.
55. Mlodinow, 2008.
56. Wittgenstein, 1969, p. 206.
57. Analogical reasoning is generally considered a form of induction (Holyoak,
2005).
58. Sloman & Lagnado, 2005; Tenenbaum, Kemp, & Shafto, 2007.
59. For a review of the literature on deductive reasoning see Evans, 2005.
60. Cf. J. S. B. T. Evans, 2005, pp. 178–179.
61. For example, Canessa et al., 2005; Goel, Gold, Kapur, & Houle, 1997;
Osherson et al., 1998; Prabhakaran, Rypma, & Gabrieli, 2001; Prado, Noveck, & Van

Der Henst, 2009; Rodriguez-Moreno & Hirsch, 2009; Strange, Henson, Friston, & Dolan,
2001. Goel and Dolan (2003a) found that when syllogistic reasoning was modulated by a
strong belief bias, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex was preferentially engaged, while
such reasoning without an effective belief bias appeared to be driven by a greater
activation of the (right) lateral prefrontal cortex. Elliot et al. (1997) found that guessing
appears to be mediated by the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Bechara et al. (1997) report
that patients suffering ventromedial prefrontal damage fail to act according to their
correct conceptual beliefs while engaged in a gambling task. Prior to our 2008 study, it
was unclear how these findings would relate to belief and disbelief per se. They
suggested, however, that the medial prefrontal cortex would be among our regions of
interest.
While decision making is surely related to belief processing, the “decisions” that
neuroscientists have tended to study are those that precede voluntary movements in tests
of sensory discrimination (Glimcher, 2002). The initiation of such movements requires
the judgment that a target stimulus has appeared—we might even say that this entails the
“belief” that an event has occurred—but such studies are not designed to examine belief
as a propositional attitude. Decision making in the face of potential reward is obviously
of great interest to anyone who would understand the roots of human and animal
behavior, but the link to belief per se appears tenuous. For instance, in a visual-decision
task (in which monkeys were trained to detect the coherent motion of random dots and
signal their direction with eye movements), Gold and Shadlen found that the brain
regions responsible for this sensory judgment were the very regions that subsequently
initiated the behavioral response (Gold & Shadlen, 2000, 2002; Shadlen & Newsome,
2001). Neurons in these regions appear to act as integrators of sensory information,
initiating the trained behavior whenever a threshold of activation has been reached. We
might be tempted to say, therefore, that the “belief” that a stimulus is moving to the left is
located in the lateral intraparietal area, the frontal eye fields, and the superior colliculus—
as these are the brain regions responsible for initiating eye movements. But here we are
talking about the “beliefs” of a monkey—a monkey that has been trained to reproduce a
stereotyped response to a specific stimulus in expectation of an immediate reward. This is
not the kind of “belief” that has been the subject of my research.
The literature on decision making has generally sought to address the link
between voluntary action, error detection, and reward. Insofar as the brain’s reward
system involves a prediction that a specific behavior will lead to future reward, we might
say that this is a matter of belief formation—but there is nothing to indicate that such
beliefs are explicit, linguistically mediated, or propositional. We know that they cannot
be, as most studies of reward processing have been done in rodents, monkeys, titmice,
and pigeons. This literature has investigated the link between sensory judgments and
motor responses, not the difference between belief and disbelief in matters of
propositional truth. This is not to minimize the fascinating progress that has occurred in
this field. In fact, the same economic modeling that allows behavioral ecologists to
account for the foraging behavior of animal groups also allows neurophysiologists to
describe the activity of the neuronal assemblies that govern an individual animal’s
response to differential rewards (Glimcher, 2002). There is also a growing literature on
neuroeconomics, which examines human decision making (as well as trust and
reciprocity) using neuroimaging. Some of these findings are discussed here.

62. This becomes especially feasible using more sophisticated techniques of data
analysis, like multivariate pattern classification (Cox & Savoy, 2003; P. K. Douglas,
Harris, & Cohen, 2009). Most analyses of fMRI data are univariate and merely look for
correlations between the activity at each point in the brain and the task paradigm. This
approach ignores the interrelationships that surely exist between regions. Cox and Savoy
demonstrated that a multivariate approach, in which statistical pattern recognition
methods are used to look for correlations across all regions, allows for a very subtle
analysis of fMRI data in a way that is far more sensitive to distributed patterns of activity
(Cox & Savoy, 2003). With this approach, they were able to determine which visual
stimulus a subject was viewing (out of ten possible types) by examining a mere 20
seconds of his experimental run.
Pamela Douglas, a graduate student in Mark Cohen’s cognitive neuroscience lab
at UCLA, recently took a similar approach to analyzing my original belief data (P. K.
Douglas, Harris, & Cohen, 2009). She created an unsupervised machine-learning
classifier by first performing an independent component (IC) analysis on each of our
subjects’ three scanning sessions. She then selected the IC time-course values that
corresponded to the maximum value of the hemodynamic response function (HRF)
following either “belief” or “disbelief” events. These values were fed into a selection
process, whereby ICs that were “good predictors” were promoted as features in a
classification network for training a Naïve Bayes classifier. To test the accuracy of her
classification, Douglas performed a leave-one-out cross-validation. Using this criterion,
her Naïve Bayes classifier correctly labeled the “left out” trial 90 percent of the time.
Given such results, it does not seem far-fetched that, with further refinements in both
hardware and techniques of data analysis, fMRI could become a means for accurate lie
detection.
63. Holden, 2001.
64. Broad, 2002.
65. Pavlidis, Eberhardt, & Levine, 2002.
66. Allen & Iacono, 1997; Farwell & Donchin, 1991. Spence et al. (2001) appear
to have published the first neuroimaging study on deception. Their research suggests that
“deception” is associated with bilateral increases in activity in the ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex (BA 47), a region often associated with response inhibition and the suppression of
inappropriate behavior (Goldberg, 2001).
The results of the Spence study were susceptible to some obvious limitations,
however—perhaps most glaring was the fact that the subjects were told precisely when to
lie by being given a visual cue. Needless to say, this did much to rob the experiment of
verisimilitude. The natural ecology of deception is one in which a potential liar must
notice when questions draw near to factual terrain that he is committed to keeping
hidden, and he must lie as the situation warrants, while respecting the criteria for logical
coherence and consistency that he and his interlocutor share. (It is worth noting that
unless one respects the norms of reasoning and belief formation, it is impossible to lie
successfully. This is not an accident.) To be asked to lie automatically in response to a
visual cue simply does not simulate ordinary acts of deception. Spence et al. did much to
remedy this problem in a subsequent study, where subjects could lie at their own
discretion and on subjects related to their personal histories (Spence, Kaylor-Hughes,
Farrow, & Wilkinson, 2008). This study largely replicated their findings with respect to

the primary involvement of the ventrolateral PFC (though now almost entirely in the left
hemisphere). There have been other neuroimaging studies of deception—as “guilty
knowledge” (Langleben et al., 2002), “feigned memory impairment” (Lee et al., 2005),
etc.—but the challenge, apart from reliably finding the neural correlates of any of these
states, is to find a result that generalizes to all forms of deception.
It is not entirely obvious that these studies have given us a sound basis for
detecting deception through neuroimaging. Focusing on the neural correlates of belief
and disbelief might obviate whatever differences exist between types of deception, the
mode of stimulus presentation, etc. Is there a difference, for instance, between denying
what is true and asserting what is false? Recasting the question in terms of a proposition
to be believed or disbelieved might circumvent any problem posed by the “directionality”
of a lie. Another group (Abe et al., 2006) took steps to address the directionality issue by
asking subjects to alternately deny true knowledge and assert false knowledge. However,
this study suffered from the usual limitations, in that subjects were directed when to lie,
and their lies were limited to whether they had previously viewed an experimental
stimulus.
A functional neuroanatomy of belief might also add to our understanding of the
placebo response—which can be both profound and profoundly unhelpful to the process
of vetting pharmaceuticals. For instance, 65 percent to 80 percent of the effect of
antidepressant medication seems attributable to positive expectation (Kirsch, 2000).
There are even forms of surgery that, while effective, are no more effective than sham
procedures (Ariely, 2008). While some neuroimaging work has been done in this area,
the placebo response is currently operationalized in terms of symptom relief, without
reference to a subject’s underlying state of mind (Lieberman et al., 2004; Wager et al.,
2004). Finding the neural correlates of belief might allow us to eventually control for this
effect during the process of drug design.
67. Stoller & Wolpe, 2007.
68. Grann, 2009.
69. There are, however, reasons to doubt that our current methods of
neuroimaging, like fMRI, will yield a practical mind-reading technology. Functional MRI
studies as a group have several important limitations. Perhaps first and most important
are those of statistical power and sensitivity. If one chooses to analyze one’s data at
extremely conservative thresholds to exclude the possibility of type I (false positive)
detection errors, this necessarily increases one’s type II (false negative) error. Further,
most studies implicitly assume uniform detection sensitivity throughout the brain, a
condition known to be violated for the low-bandwidth, fast-imaging scans used for fMRI.
Field inhomogeneity also tends to increase the magnitude of motion artifacts. When
motion is correlated to the stimuli, this can produce false positive activations, especially
in the cortex.
We may also discover that the underlying physics of neuroimaging grants only so
much scope for human ingenuity. If so, an era of cheap, covert lie detection might never
dawn, and we will be forced to rely upon some relentlessly costly, cumbersome
technology. Even so, I think it safe to say that the time is not far off when lying, on the
weightiest matters—in court, before a grand jury, during important business negotiations,
etc.—will become a practical impossibility. This fact will be widely publicized, of
course, and the relevant technology will be expected to be in place, or accessible,

whenever the stakes are high. This very assurance, rather than the incessant use of these
machines, will change us.
70. Ball, 2009.
71. Pizarro & Uhlmann, 2008.
72. Kahneman, 2003.
73. Rosenhan, 1973.
74. McNeil, Pauker, Sox, & Tversky, 1982.
75. There are other reasoning biases that can affect medical decisions. It is well
known, for instance, that the presence of two similar options can create “decisional
conflict,” biasing a choice in favor of a third alternative. In one experiment, neurologists
and neurosurgeons were asked to determine which patients to admit to surgery first. Half
the subjects were given a choice between a woman in her early fifties and a man in his
seventies. The other half were given the same two patients, plus another woman in her
fifties who was difficult to distinguish from the first: 38 percent of doctors chose to
operate on the older man in the first scenario; 58 percent chose him in the second
(LaBoeuf & Shafir, 2005). This is a bigger change in outcomes than might be apparent at
first glance: in the first case, the woman’s chance of getting the surgery is 62 percent; in
the second it is 21 percent.

Chapter 4: Religion

1. Marx, [1843] 1971.
2. Freud, [1930] 1994; Freud & Strachey, [1927] 1975.
3. Weber, [1922] 1993.
4. Zuckerman, 2008.
5. Norris & Inglehart, 2004.
6. Finke & Stark, 1998.
7. Norris & Inglehart, 2004, p. 108.
8. It does not seem, however, that socioeconomic inequality explains religious
extremism in the Muslim world, where radicals are, on average, wealthier and more
educated than moderates (Atran, 2003; Esposito, 2008).
9. http://pewglobal.org/reports/display.php?ReportID=258.
10. http://pewforum.org/surveys/campaign08/.
11. Pyysiäinen & Hauser, 2010.
12. Zuckerman, 2008.
13. Paul, 2009.
14. Hall, Matz, & Wood, 2010.
15. Decades of cross-cultural research on “subjective well-being” (SWB) by the
World Values Survey ( www.worldvaluessurvey.org) indicate that religion may make an
important contribution to human happiness and life satisfaction at low levels of societal
development, security, and freedom. The happiest and most secure societies, however,
tend to be the most secular. The greatest predictors of a society’s mean SWB are social
tolerance (of homosexuals, gender equality, other religions, etc.) and personal freedom
(Inglehart, Foa, Peterson, & Welzel, 2008). Of course, tolerance and personal freedom

are directly linked, and neither seems to flourish under the shadow of orthodox religion.
16. Paul, 2009.
17. Culotta, 2009.
18. Buss, 2002.
19. I am indebted to the biologist Jerry Coyne for pointing this out (personal
communication). The neuroscientist Mark Cohen has further observed (personal
communication), however, that many traditional societies are far more tolerant of male
promiscuity than female—for instance, the sanction for being raped has often been as
bad, or worse, than for initiating a rape. Cohen speculates that in such cases religion may
offer a post-hoc justification for a biological imperative. This may be so. I would only
add that here, as elsewhere, the task of maximizing human well-being is clearly separable
from Pleistocene biological imperatives.
20. Foster & Kokko, 2008.
21. Fincher, Thornhill, Murray, & Schaller, 2008.
22. Dawkins, 1994; D. Dennett, 1994; D. C. Dennett, 2006; D. S. Wilson &
Wilson, 2007; E. O. Wilson, 2005; E. O. Wilson & Holldobler, 2005, pp. 169–172;
Dawkins, 2006.
23. Boyer, 2001; Durkheim & Cosman, [1912] 2001.
24. Stark, 2001, pp. 180–181.
25. Livingston, 2005.
26. Dennett, 2006.
27. http://pewforum.org/docs/?DocID=215.
28. http://pewforum.org/docs/?DocID=153.
29. Boyer, 2001, p. 302.
30. Barrett, 2000.
31. Bloom, 2004.
32. Brooks, 2009.
33. E. M. Evans, 2001.
34. Hood, 2009.
35. D’Onofrio, Eaves, Murrelle, Maes, & Spilka, 1999.
36. Previc, 2006.
37. In addition, the densities of a specific type of serotonin receptor have been
inversely correlated with high scores on the “spiritual acceptance” subscale of the
Temperament and Character Inventory (J. Borg, Andree, Soderstrom, & Farde, 2003).
38. Asheim, Hansen & Brodtkorb, 2003; Blumer, 1999; Persinger & Fisher, 1990.
39. Brefczynski-Lewis, Lutz, Schaefer, Levinson, & Davidson, 2007; Lutz,
Brefczynski-Lewis, Johnstone, & Davidson, 2008; Lutz, Greischar, Rawlings, Ricard, &
Davidson, 2004; Lutz, Slagter, Dunne, & Davidson, 2008; A. Newberg et al., 2001.
40. Anastasi & Newberg, 2008; Azari et al., 2001; A. Newberg, Pourdehnad,
Alavi, & d’Aquili, 2003; A. B. Newberg, Wintering, Morgan, & Waldman, 2006;
Schjoedt, Stodkilde-Jorgensen, Geertz, & Roepstorff, 2008, 2009.
41. S. Harris et al., 2008.
42. Kapogiannis et al., 2009.
43. S. Harris et al., 2009.
44. D’Argembeau et al., 2008; Moran, Macrae, Heatherton, Wyland, & Kelley,
2006; Northoff et al., 2006; Schneider et al., 2008.

45. Bechara et al., 2000.
46. Hornak et al., 2004; O’Doherty et al., 2003; Rolls, Grabenhorst, & Parris,
2008.
47. Matsumoto & Tanaka, 2004.
48. A direct comparison of belief minus disbelief in Christians and nonbelievers
did not show any significant group differences for nonreligious stimuli. For religious
stimuli, there were additional regions of the brain that did differ by group; however, these
results seem best explained by a common reaction in both groups to statements that
violate religious doctrines (i.e., “blasphemous” statements).
The opposite contrast, disbelief minus belief, yielded increased signal in the
superior frontal sulcus and the precentral gyrus. The engagement of these areas is not
readily explained on the basis of prior work. However, a region-of-interest analysis
revealed increased signal in the insula for this contrast. This partially replicates our
previous finding for this contrast and supports the work of Kapogiannis et al., who also
found signal in the insula to be correlated with the rejection of religious statements
deemed false. The significance of the anterior insula for negative affect/appraisal has
been discussed above. Because Kapogiannis et al. did not include a nonreligious control
condition in their experiment, they interpreted the insula’s recruitment as a sign that
violations of religious doctrine might provoke “aversion, guilt, or fear of loss” in people
of faith. Whereas, our prior work suggests that the insula is active for disbelief generally.
In our study, Christians appeared to make the largest contribution to the insula
signal bilaterally, while the pooled data from both groups produced signal in the left
hemisphere exclusively. Kapogiannis et al. also found that religious subjects produced
bilateral insula signal on disbelief trials, while data from both believers and nonbelievers
yielded signal only on the left. Taken together, these findings suggest that there may be a
group difference between religious believers and nonbelievers with respect to insular
activity. In fact, Inbar et al. found that heightened feelings of disgust are predictive of
social conservatism (as measured by self-reported disgust in response to homosexuality)
(Inbar, Pizarro, Knobe, & Bloom, 2009). Our finding of bilateral insula signal for this
contrast in our first study might be explained by the fact that we did not control for
religious belief (or political orientation) during recruitment. Given the rarity of
nonbelievers in the United States, even on college campuses, one would expect that most
of the subjects in our first study possessed some degree of religious faith.
49. We obtained these results, despite the fact that our two groups accepted and
rejected diametrically opposite statements in half of our experimental trials. This would
seem to rule out the possibility that our data could be explained by any property of the
stimuli apart from their being deemed “true” or “false” by the participants in our study.
50. Wager et al., 2004.
51. T. Singer et al., 2004.
52. Royet et al., 2003; Wicker et al., 2003.
53. Izuma, Saito, & Sadato, 2008.
54. Another key region that appears to be preferentially engaged by religious
thinking is the posterior medial cortex. This area is part of the “resting state” network that
shows greater activity during both rest and self-referential tasks (Northoff et al., 2006). It
is possible that one difference between responding to religious and nonreligious stimuli is
that, for both groups, a person’s answers serve to affirm his or her identity: i.e., for every

religious trial, Christians were explicitly affirming their religious worldview, while
nonbelievers were explicitly denying the truth claims of religion.
The opposite contrast, nonreligious minus religious statements, produced greater
signal in left hemisphere memory networks, including the hippocampus, the
parahippocampal gyrus, middle temporal gyrus, temporal pole, and retrosplenial cortex. It
is well known that the hippocampus and the parahippocampal gyrus are involved in
memory retrieval (Diana, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2007). The anterior temporal lobe is
also engaged by semantic memory tasks (K. Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007), and the
retrosplenial cortex displays especially strong reciprocal connectivity with structures in
the medial temporal lobe (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008). Thus, judgments
about the nonreligious stimuli presented in our study seemed more dependent upon those
brain systems involved in accessing stored knowledge.
Among our religious stimuli, the subset of statements that ran counter to Christian
doctrine yielded greater signal for both groups in several brain regions, including the
ventral striatum, paracingulate cortex, middle frontal gyrus, the frontal poles, and inferior
parietal cortex. These regions showed greater signal both when Christians rejected stimuli
contrary to their doctrine (e.g., The Biblical god is a myth) and when nonbelievers
affirmed the truth of those same statements. In other words, these brain areas responded
preferentially to “blasphemous” statements in both subject groups. The ventral striatum
signal in this contrast suggests that decisions about these stimuli may have been more
rewarding for both groups: Nonbelievers may take special pleasure in making assertions
that explicitly negate religious doctrine, while Christians may enjoy rejecting such
statements as false.
55. Festinger, Riecken, & Schachter, [1956] 2008.
56. Atran, 2006a.
57. Atran, 2007.
58. Bostom, 2005; Butt, 2007; Ibrahim, 2007; Oliver & Steinberg, 2005; Rubin,
2009; Shoebat, 2007.
59. Atran, 2006b.
60. Gettleman, 2008.
61. Ariely, 2008, p. 177.
62. Pierre, 2001.
63. Larson & Witham, 1998.
64. Twenty-one percent of American adults (and 14 percent of those born on
American soil) are functionally illiterate ( www.nifl.gov/nifl/facts/reading_facts.html),
while only 3 percent of Americans agree with the statement “I don’t believe in God.”
Despite their near invisibility, atheists are the most stigmatized minority in the United
States—beyond homosexuals, African Americans, Jews, Muslims, Asians, or any other
group. Even after September 11, 2001, more Americans would vote for a Muslim for
president than would vote for an atheist (Edgell, Geteis, & Hartmann, 2006).
65. Morse, 2009.
66. And if there were a rider to this horse, he would be entirely without structure
and oblivious to the details of perception, cognition, emotion, and intention that owe their
existence to electrochemical activity in specific regions of the brain. If there is a “pure
consciousness” that might occupy such a role, it will bear little resemblance to what most
religious people mean by a “soul.” A soul this diaphanous would be just as at home in the

brain of a hyena (and seems just as likely to be there) as it would in the brain of a human
being.
67. Levy (2007) poses the same question.
68. Collins, 2006.
69. It is worth recalling in this context that it is, in fact, possible for an established
scientist to destroy his career by saying something stupid. James Watson, the
codiscoverer of the structure of DNA, a Nobel laureate, and the original head of the
Human Genome Project, recently accomplished this feat by asserting in an interview that
people of African descent appear to be innately less intelligent than white Europeans
(Hunte-Grubbe, 2007). A few sentences, spoken off the cuff, resulted in academic
defenestration: lecture invitations were revoked, award ceremonies canceled, and Watson
was forced to immediately resign his post as chancellor of Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory.
Watson’s opinions on race are disturbing, but his underlying point was not, in
principle, unscientific. There may very well be detectable differences in intelligence
between races. Given the genetic consequences of a population living in isolation for tens
of thousands of years, it would be very surprising if there were no differences between
racial or ethnic groups waiting to be discovered. I say this not to defend Watson’s
fascination with race, or to suggest that such race-focused research might be worth doing.
I am merely observing that there is, at least, a possible scientific basis for his views.
While Watson’s statement was obnoxious, one cannot say that his views are utterly
irrational or that, by merely giving voice to them, he has repudiated the scientific
worldview and declared himself immune to its further discoveries. Such a distinction
would have to be reserved for Watson’s successor at the Human Genome Project, Dr.
Francis Collins.
70. Collins, 2006, p. 225.
71. Van Biema, 2006; Paulson, 2006.
72. Editorial, 2006.
73. Collins, 2006, p. 178.
74. Ibid., pp. 200–201.
75. Ibid., p. 119.
76. It is true that the mysterious effectiveness of mathematics for describing the
physical world has lured many scientists to mysticism, philosophical Platonism, and
religion. The physicist Eugene Wigner famously posed the problem in a paper entitled
“The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences” (Wigner,
1960). While I’m not at all sure that it exhausts this mystery, I think there is something to
be said for Craik’s idea (Craik, 1943) that an isomorphism between brain processes and
the processes in the world that they represent might account for the utility of numbers and
certain mathematical operations. Is it really so surprising that certain patterns of brain
activity (i.e., numbers) can map reliably onto the world?
77. Collins also has a terrible tendency of cherry-picking and misrepresenting the
views of famous scientists like Stephen Hawking and Albert Einstein. For instance he
writes:
Even Albert Einstein saw the poverty of a purely naturalistic worldview.
Choosing his words carefully, he wrote, “science without religion is lame, religion
without science is blind.”

The one choosing words carefully here is Collins. As we saw above, when read in
context (Einstein, 1954, pp. 41–49), this quote reveals that Einstein did not in the least
endorse theism and that his use of the word “God” was a poetical way of referring to the
laws of nature. Einstein had occasion to complain about such deliberate distortions of his
work:
It was, of course, a lie what you read about my religious convictions, a lie which
is being systematically repeated. I do not believe in a personal God and I have never
denied this but have expressed it clearly. If something is in me which can be called
religious then it is the unbounded admiration for the structure of the world so far as our
science can reveal it (cited in R. Dawkins, 2006, p. 36).

78. Wright, 2003, 2008.
79. Polkinghorne, 2003; Polkinghorne & Beale, 2009.
80. Polkinghorne, 2003, pp. 22–23.
81. In 1996, the physicist Alan Sokal submitted the nonsense paper
“Transgressing the Boundaries: Towards a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum
Gravity” to the journal Social Text. While the paper was patently insane, this journal,
which still stands “at the forefront of cultural theory,” avidly published it. The text is
filled with gems like following:
[T]he discourse of the scientific community, for all its undeniable value, cannot
assert a privileged epistemological status with respect to counter-hegemonic narratives
emanating from dissident or marginalized communities … In quantum gravity, as we
shall see, the space-time manifold ceases to exist as an objective physical reality;
geometry becomes relational and contextual; and the foundational conceptual categories
of prior science—among them, existence itself—become problematized and relativized.
This conceptual revolution, I will argue, has profound implications for the content of a
future postmodern and liberatory science (Sokal, 1996, p. 218).

82. Ehrman, 2005. Bible scholars agree that the earliest Gospels were written
decades after the life of Jesus. We don’t have the original texts of any of the Gospels.
What we have are copies of copies of copies of ancient Greek manuscripts that differ
from one another in literally thousands of places. Many show signs of later
interpolation—which is to say that people have added passages to these texts over the
centuries, and these passages have found their way into the canon. In fact, there are whole
sections of the New Testament, like the Book of Revelation, that were long considered
spurious, that were included in the Bible only after many centuries of neglect; and there
are other books, like the Shepherd of Hermas, that were venerated as part of the Bible for
hundreds of years only to be rejected finally as false scripture. Consequently, it is true to
say that generations of Christians lived and died having been guided by scripture that is
now deemed to be both mistaken and incomplete by the faithful. In fact, to this day,
Roman Catholics and Protestants cannot agree on the full contents of the Bible. Needless
to say, such a haphazard and all-too-human process of cobbling together the authoritative

word of the Creator of the Universe seems a poor basis for believing that the miracles of
Jesus actually occurred.
The philosopher David Hume made a very nice point about believing in miracles
on the basis of testimony: “No testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle, unless the
testimony be of such a kind, that its falsehood would be more miraculous, than the fact,
which it endeavours to establish …” (Hume, 1996, vol. IV, p. 131). This is a good rule of
thumb. Which is more likely, that Mary, the mother of Jesus, would have sex outside of
wedlock and then feel the need to lie about it, or that she would conceive a child through
parthenogenesis the way aphids and Komodo dragons do? On the one hand, we have the
phenomenon of lying about adultery—in a context where the penalty for adultery is
death—and on the other, we have a woman spontaneously mimicking the biology of
certain insects and reptiles. Hmm …
83. Editorial, 2008.
84. Maddox, 1981.
85. Sheldrake, 1981.
86. I have publicly lamented this double standard on a number of occasions (S.
Harris, 2007a; S. Harris & Ball, 2009)
87. Collins, 2006, p. 23.
88. Langford et al., 2006.
89. Masserman et al., 1964.
90. Our picture of chimp notions of fairness is somewhat muddled. There is no
question that they notice inequity, but they do not seem to care if they profit from it
(Brosnan, 2008; Brosnan, Schiff, & de Waal, 2005; Jensen, Call, & Tomasello, 2007;
Jensen, Hare, Call, & Tomasello, 2006; Silk et al., 2005).
91. Range et al., 2009.
92. Siebert, 2009.
93. Silver, 2006, p. 157.
94. Ibid., p. 162.
95. Collins, 2006.
96. Of course, I also received much support, especially from scientists, and even
from scientists at the NIH.
97. Miller, it should be noted, is also a believing Christian and the author of
Finding Darwin’s God (K. R. Miller, 1999). For all its flaws, this book contains an
extremely useful demolition of “intelligent design.”
98. C. Mooney & S. Kirshenbaum, 2009, pp. 97–98.
99. The claim is ubiquitous, even at the highest levels of scientific discourse.
From a recent editorial in Nature, insisting on the reality of human evolution:
The vast majority of scientists, and the majority of religious people, see little
potential for pleasure or progress in the conflicts between religion and science that are
regularly fanned into flame by a relatively small number on both sides of the debate.
Many scientists are religious, and perceive no conflict between the values of their
science—values that insist on disinterested, objective inquiry into the nature of the
Universe—and those of their faith (Editorial, 2007).

From the National Academy of Sciences:
Science can neither prove nor disprove religion … Many scientists have written
eloquently about how their scientific studies have increased their awe and understanding
of a creator … The study of science need not lessen or compromise faith (National
Academy of Sciences [U.S.] & Institute of Medicine [U.S.], 2008, p. 54).

Chapter 5: The Future of Happiness

1. Allen, 2000.
2. Los Angeles Times, July 5, 1910.
3. As indicated above, I think it is reasonably clear that concerns about angering
God and/or suffering an eternity in hell are based on specific notions of harm. Not
believing in God or hell leaves one blissfully unconcerned about such liabilities. Under
Haidt’s analysis, concerns about God and the afterlife would seem to fall under the
categories of “authority” and/or “purity.” I think such assignments needlessly parcel what
is, at bottom, a more general concern about harm.
4. Inbar et al., 2009.
5. Schwartz, 2004.
6. D. T. Gilbert, 2006.
7.
www.ted.com/talks/daniel_kahneman_the_riddle_of_experience_vs_memory.html.
8. Ibid.
9. Lykken & Tellegen, 1996.
10. D. T. Gilbert, 2006, pp. 220–222.
11. Simonton, 1994.
12. Rilling et al., 2002.

REFERENCES

Aaronovitch, D. (2010). Voodoo histories: The role of the conspiracy theory in
shaping modern history. New York: Riverhead Books.
Abe, N., Suzuki, M., Tsukiura, T., Mori, E., Yamaguchi, K., Itoh, M., et al.
(2006). Dissociable roles of prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices in deception. Cereb
Cortex, 16 (2), 192–199.
Abraham, A., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2009). Reality = relevance? Insights from
spontaneous modulations of the brain’s default network when telling apart reality from
fiction. PLoS ONE, 4 (3), e4741.
Abraham, A., von Cramon, D. Y., & Schubotz, R. I. (2008). Meeting George
Bush versus meeting Cinderella: The neural response when telling apart what is real from
what is fictional in the context of our reality. J Cogn Neurosci, 20 (6), 965–976.
Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Koenigs, M., & Damasio, A. R. (2005). Preferring one
taste over another without recognizing either. Nat Neurosci, 8 (7), 860–861.
Ainslie, G. (2001). Breakdown of will. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Allen, J. (2000). Without sanctuary: Lynching photography in America. Santa Fe,
NM: Twin Palms.
Allen, J. J., & Iacono, W. G. (1997). A comparison of methods for the analysis of
event-related potentials in deception detection. Psychophysiology, 34 (2), 234–240.
Amodio, D. M., Jost, J. T., Master, S. L., & Yee, C. M. (2007). Neurocognitive
correlates of liberalism and conservatism. Nat Neurosci, 10 (10), 1246–1247.
Anastasi, M. W., & Newberg, A. B. (2008). A preliminary study of the acute
effects of religious ritual on anxiety. J Altern Complement Med, 14 (2), 163–165.
Anderson, A. K., Christoff, K., Panitz, D., De Rosa, E., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2003).
Neural correlates of the automatic processing of threat facial signals. J Neurosci, 23 (13),
5627–5633.
Andersson, J. L. R., Jenkinson, M., & Smith, S. M. (2007). Non-linear
registration, aka spatial normalisation. FMRIB technical report, TR07JA2.
Andersson, J. L. R., Jenkinson, M., & Smith, S. M. (2007). Non-linear
optimisation. FMRIB technical report, TR07JA1.
Appiah, A. (2008). Experiments in ethics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Ariely, D. (2008). Predictably irrational. New York: Harper Collins.
Asheim Hansen, B., & Brodtkorb, E. (2003). Partial epilepsy with “ecstatic”
seizures. Epilepsy Behav, 4 (6), 667–673.
Atchley, R. A., Ilardi, S. S., & Enloe, A. (2003). Hemispheric asymmetry in the
processing of emotional content in word meanings: The effect of current and past
depression. Brain Lang, 84 (1), 105–119.
Atran, S. (2003, May 5). Who wants to be a martyr? New York Times.
Atran, S. (2006a). Beyond belief: Further discussion. Retrieved June 11, 2008,

from www.edge.org/discourse/bb.html.
Atran, S. (2006b). What would Gandhi do today? Nonviolence in an age of
terrorism. Retrieved from
http://sitemaker.umich.edu/satran/relevant_articles_on_terrorism.
Atran, S. (2007). Paper presented at the Beyond Belief: Enlightenment 2.0.
Retrieved from http://thesciencenetwork.org/programs/beyond-belief-enlightenment-20/scott-atran.
Azari, N. P., Nickel, J., Wunderlich, G., Niedeggen, M., Hefter, H., Tellmann, L.,
et al. (2001). Neural correlates of religious experience. Eur J Neurosci, 13 (8), 1649–
1652.
Baars, B. J., & Franklin, S. (2003). How conscious experience and working
memory interact. Trends Cogn Sci, 7 (4), 166–172.
Babiak, P., & Hare, R. D. (2006). Snakes in suits: When psychopaths go to work
(1st ed.). New York: Regan Books.
Ball, P. (2009, June 25). And another thing … Retrieved July 6, 2009, from
http://philipball.blogspot.com.
Baron, A. S., & Banaji, M. R. (2006). The development of implicit attitudes.
Evidence of race evaluations from ages 6 and 10 and adulthood. Psychol Sci, 17 (1), 53–
58.
Baron, J. (2008). Thinking and deciding (4th ed.). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barrett, J. L. (2000). Exploring the natural foundations of religion. Trends Cogn
Sci, 4 (1), 29–34.
Bauby, J.-D. (1997). The diving bell and the butterfly (1st U.S. ed.). New York:
A. A. Knopf.
Baumeister, R. F. (2001). Violent pride. Sci Am, 284 (4), 96–101.
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J. I., & Vohs, K. D. (2005).
Exploding the self-esteem myth. Sci Am, 292 (1), 70–77.
Bawer, B. (2006). While Europe slept: How radical Islam is destroying the West
from within (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (2000). Emotion, decision making
and the orbitofrontal cortex. Cereb Cortex, 10 (3), 295–307.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R. (1997). Deciding
advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science, 275 (5304), 1293–
1295.
Begg, I. M., Robertson, R. K., Gruppuso, V., Anas, A., & Needham, D. R. (1996).
The Illusory-knowledge effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 410–433.
Benedetti, F., Mayberg, H. S., Wager, T. D., Stohler, C. S., & Zubieta, J. K.
(2005). Neurobiological mechanisms of the placebo effect. J Neurosci, 25 (45), 10390–
10402.
Benedict, R. (1934). Patterns of culture. Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Benjamin, J., Li, L., Patterson, C., Greenberg, B. D., Murphy, D. L., & Hamer, D.
H. (1996). Population and familial association between the D4 dopamine receptor gene
and measures of novelty seeking. Nat Genet, 12 (1), 81–84.

Bilefsky, D. (2008, July 10). In Albanian feuds, isolation engulfs families. New
York Times.
Blackmore, S. J. (2006). Conversations on consciousness: What the best minds
think about the brain, free will, and what it means to be human. Oxford, UK; New York:
Oxford University Press.
Blair, J., Mitchell, D. R., & Blair, K. (2005). The psychopath: Emotion and the
brain. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Blakemore, S. J., & Frith, C. (2003). Self-awareness and action. Curr Opin
Neurobiol, 13 (2), 219–224.
Blakemore, S. J., Oakley, D. A., & Frith, C. D. (2003). Delusions of alien control
in the normal brain. Neuropsychologia, 41 (8), 1058–1067.
Blakemore, S. J., Rees, G., & Frith, C. D. (1998). How do we predict the
consequences of our actions? A functional imaging study. Neuropsychologia, 36 (6),
521–529.
Blakeslee, S. (2007, February 6). A small part of the brain, and its profound
effects. New York Times.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about the function of consciousness. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 18, 227–247.
Block, N., Flanagan, O., & Güzeldere, G. (1997). The Nature of Consciousness:
Philosophical Debates. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Bloom, P. (2004). Descartes’ baby: How the science of child development
explains what makes us human. New York: Basic Books.
Bloom, P. (2010, May 9). The moral life of babies. New York Times Magazine.
Blow, C. M. (2009, June 26). The prurient trap. New York Times.
Blumer, D. (1999). Evidence supporting the temporal lobe epilepsy personality
syndrome. Neurology, 53 (5 Suppl 2), S9–12.
Bogen, G. M., & Bogen, J. E. (1986). On the relationship of cerebral duality to
creativity. Bull Clin Neurosci, 51, 30–32.
Bogen, J. E. (1986). Mental duality in the intact brain. Bull Clin Neurosci, 51, 3–
29.
Bogen, J. E. (1995a). On the neurophysiology of consciousness: Pt. II.
Constraining the semantic problem. Conscious Cogn, 4 (2), 137–158.
Bogen, J. E. (1995b). On the neurophysiology of consciousness: Pt. I. An
overview. Conscious Cogn, 4 (1), 52–62.
Bogen, J. E. (1997). Does cognition in the disconnected right hemisphere require
right hemisphere possession of language? Brain Lang, 57 (1), 12–21.
Bogen, J. E. (1998). My developing understanding of Roger Wolcott Sperry’s
philosophy. Neuropsychologia, 36 (10), 1089–1096.
Bogen, J. E., Sperry, R. W., & Vogel, P. J. (1969). Addendum: Commissural
section and propagation of seizures. In Jasper et al. (Ed.), Basic mechanisms of the
epilepsies. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 439.
Bok, H. (2007). The implications of advances in neuroscience for freedom of the
will. Neurotherapeutics, 4 (3), 555–559.
Borg, J., Andree, B., Soderstrom, H., & Farde, L. (2003). The serotonin system
and spiritual experiences. Am J Psychiatry, 160 (11), 1965–1969.
Borg, J. S., Lieberman, D., & Kiehl, K. A. (2008). Infection, incest, and iniquity:

investigating the neural correlates of disgust and morality. J Cogn Neurosci, 20 (9),
1529–1546.
Bostom, A. G. (2005). The legacy of Jihad: Islamic holy war and the fate of nonMuslims. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Bostrom, N. (2003). Are we living in a computer simulation? Philosophical
Quarterly, 53 (211), 243–255.
Bostrom, N., & Ord, T. (2006). The reversal test: Eliminating status quo bias in
applied ethics. Ethics 116, 656–679.
Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (1994). Genes, environment, and personality. Science, 264
(5166), 1700–1701.
Bouchard, T. J., Jr., Lykken, D. T., McGue, M., Segal, N. L., & Tellegen, A.
(1990). Sources of human psychological differences: The Minnesota study of twins
reared apart. Science, 250 (4978), 223–228.
Bouchard, T. J., Jr., McGue, M., Lykken, D., & Tellegen, A. (1999). Intrinsic and
extrinsic religiousness: genetic and environmental influences and personality correlates.
Twin Res, 2 (2), 88–98.
Bowles, S. (2006). Group competition, reproductive leveling, and the evolution of
human altruism. Science, 314 (5805), 1569–1572.
Bowles, S. (2008). Being human: Conflict: Altruism’s midwife. Nature, 456
(7220), 326–327.
Bowles, S. (2009). Did warfare among ancestral hunter-gatherers affect the
evolution of human social behaviors? Science, 324 (5932), 1293–1298.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion explained: The evolutionary origins of religious
thought. New York: Basic Books.
Boyer, P. (2003). Religious thought and behaviour as by-products of brain
function. Trends Cogn Sci, 7 (3), 119–124.
Bransford, J. D., & McCarrell, N. S. (1977). A sketch of a cognitive approach to
comprehension: Some thoughts about understanding what it means to comprehend. In P.
N. Johnson-Laird & P. C. Wason (Eds.), Thinking (pp. 377–399). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Brefczynski-Lewis, J. A., Lutz, A., Schaefer, H. S., Levinson, D. B., & Davidson,
R. J. (2007). Neural correlates of attentional expertise in long-term meditation
practitioners. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 104 (27), 11483–11488.
Broad, W. J. (2002, October, 9). Lie-detector tests found too flawed to discover
spies. New York Times.
Broks, P. (2004). Into the silent land: Travels in neuropsychology. New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press.
Brooks, M. (2009). Born believers: How your brain creates God. New Scientist
(2694) Feb. 4, 30–33.
Brosnan, S. F. (2008). How primates (including us!) respond to inequity. Adv
Health Econ Health Serv Res, 20, 99–124.
Brosnan, S. F., Schiff, H. C., & de Waal, F. B. (2005). Tolerance for inequity may
increase with social closeness in chimpanzees. Proc Biol Sci, 272 (1560), 253–258.
Buckholtz, J. W., Treadway, M. T., Cowan, R. L., Woodward, N. D., Benning, S.
D., Li, R., et al. (2010). Mesolimbic dopamine reward system hypersensitivity in
individuals with psychopathic traits. Nat Neurosei, 13 (4), 419–421.

Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). The brain’s
default network: Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann NY Acad Sci, 1124, 1–
38.
Buehner, M. J., & Cheng, P. W. (2005). Causal learning. In K. J. Holyoak & R.
G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 143–168).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bunge, S. A., Ochsner, K. N., Desmond, J. E., Glover, G. H., & Gabrieli, J. D.
(2001). Prefrontal regions involved in keeping information in and out of mind. Brain, 124
(Pt. 10), 2074–2086.
Burgess, P. W., & McNeil, J. E. (1999). Content-specific confabulation. Cortex,
35 (2), 163–182.
Burns, K., & Bechara, A. (2007). Decision making and free will: a neuroscience
perspective. Behav Sci Law, 25 (2), 263–280.
Burton, H., Snyder, A. Z., & Raichle, M. E. (2004). Default brain functionality in
blind people. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 101 (43), 15500–15505.
Burton, R. A. (2008). On being certain: Believing you are right even when you’re
not (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Buss, D. (2002). Sex, marriage, and religion: What adaptive problems do religious
phenomena solve? Psychological Inquiry, 13 (3), 201–203.
Butt, H. (2007, July 2). I was a fanatic … I know their thinking, says former
radical Islamist. Daily Mail.
Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manes, F., Antoun, N., & Young, A. W. (2000). Impaired
recognition and experience of disgust following brain injury. Nat Neurosci, 3 (11), 1077–
1078.
Caldwell, C. (2009). Reflections on the revolution in Europe: Immigration, Islam,
and the West. New York: Doubleday.
Camerer, C. F. (2003). Psychology and economics. Strategizing in the brain.
Science, 300 (5626), 1673–1675.
Canessa, N., Gorini, A., Cappa, S. F., Piattelli-Palmarini, M., Danna, M., Fazio,
F., et al. (2005). The effect of social content on deductive reasoning: An fMRI study.
Hum Brain Mapp, 26 (1), 30–43.
Canli, T., Brandon, S., Casebeer, W., Crowley, P. J., Du Rousseau, D., Greely, H.
T., et al. (2007a). Neuroethics and national security. Am J Bioeth, 7 (5), 3–13.
Canli, T., Brandon, S., Casebeer, W., Crowley, P. J., Durousseau, D., Greely, H.
T., et al. (2007b). Response to open peer commentaries on “Neuroethics and national
security.” Am J Bioeth, 7 (5), W1–3.
Canli, T., Sivers, H., Whitfield, S. L., Gotlib, I. H., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2002).
Amygdala response to happy faces as a function of extraversion. Science, 296 (5576),
2191.
Carroll, S. (2010). Science and morality: You can’t derive “ought” from “is.”
NPR: 13.7 Cosmos and Culture,
www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=126504492.
Carroll, S. (2010a). The moral equivalent of the parallel postulate. Cosmic
Variance, (March 24)
http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2010/03/24/the-moral-equivalent-ofthe-parallel-postulate/.

Carson, A. J., MacHale, S., Allen, K., Lawrie, S. M., Dennis, M., House, A., et al.
(2000). Depression after stroke and lesion location: a systematic review. Lancet, 356
(9224), 122–126.
Carter, C. S., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Botvinick, M. M., Noll, D., & Cohen, J.
D. (1998). Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection, and the online monitoring of
performance. Science, 280 (5364), 747–749.
Casebeer, W. D. (2003). Natural ethical facts: Evolution, connectionism, and
moral cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (1995). The puzzle of conscious experience. Sci Am, 273 (6), 80–
86.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The conscious mind: In search of a fundamental theory.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (1997). Moving forward on the problem of consciousness.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4 (1), 3–46.
Choi, J. K., & Bowles, S. (2007). The coevolution of parochial altruism and war.
Science, 318 (5850), 636–640.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & Schooler, J. W. (2009).
Experience sampling during fMRI reveals default network and executive system
contributions to mind wandering. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA (May 26) 106 (21), 8719–24.
Church, R. M. (1959). Emotional reactions of rats to the pain of others. J Comp
Physiol Psychol, 52 (2), 132–134.
Churchland, P. M. (1979). Scientific realism and the plasticity of mind.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1988). Matter and consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1995). The engine of reason, the seat of the soul: A
philosophical journey into the brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1997). Knowing qualia: A reply to Jackson. In N. Block, O.
Flanagan, & G. Güzeldere (Eds.), The nature of consciousness: Philosophical debates
(pp. 571–578). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. S. (2008b). Morality & the social brain. Unpublished manuscript.
Churchland, P. S. (2009). Inference to the best decision. In J. Bickle (Ed.), Oxford
Handbook of philosophy and neuroscience. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 419–430.
Cleckley, H. M. ([1941] 1982). The mask of sanity (Rev. ed.). New York: New
American Library.
Coghill, R. C., McHaffie, J. G., & Yen, Y. F. (2003). Neural correlates of interindividual differences in the subjective experience of pain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 100
(14), 8538–8542.
Cohen, J. D., & Blum, K. I. (2002). Reward and decision. Neuron, 36 (2), 193–
198.
Cohen, J. D., & Tong, F. (2001). Neuroscience. The face of controversy. Science,
293 (5539), 2405–2407.
Cohen, M. (1996). Functional MRI: a phrenology for the 1990’s? J Magn Reson
Imaging, 6 (2), 273–274.
Cohen, M. S. (1999). Echo-planar imaging and functional MRI. In C. Moonen &
P. Bandettini (Eds.), Functional MRI (pp. 137–148). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Cohen, M. S. (2001). Practical aspects in the design of mind reading instruments.
American Journal of Neuroradiology.
Cohen, M. S. (2001). Real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging. Methods,
25 (2), 201–220.
Collins, F. S. (2006). The language of God: A scientist presents evidence for
belief. New York: Free Press.
Comings, D. E., Gonzales, N., Saucier, G., Johnson, J. P., & MacMurray, J. P.
(2000). The DRD4 gene and the spiritual transcendence scale of the character
temperament index. Psychiatr Genet, 10 (4), 185–189.
Cooney, J. W., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (2003). Neurological disorders and the
structure of human consciousness. Trends Cogn Sci, 7 (4), 161–165.
Corballis, M. C. (1998). Sperry and the age of Aquarius: Science, values and the
split brain. Neuropsychologia, 36 (10), 1083–1087.
Cox, D. D., & Savoy, R. L. (2003). Functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) “brain reading”: Detecting and classifying distributed patterns of fMRI activity in
human visual cortex. Neuroimage, 19 (2 Pt. 1), 261–270.
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the
physiological condition of the body. Nat Rev Neurosci, 3 (8), 655–666.
Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel—now? The anterior insula and human
awareness. Nat Rev Neurosci, 10 (1), 59–70.
Craig, M. C., Catani, M., Deeley, Q., Latham, R., Daly, E., Kanaan, R., et al.
(2009). Altered connections on the road to psychopathy. Mol Psychiatry, 14 (10), 946–
953.
Craik, K. (1943). Hypothesis on the nature of thought. The nature of explanation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Crick, F. (1994). The astonishing hypothesis: The scientific search for the soul.
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (1998). Consciousness and neuroscience. Cereb. Cortex, 8,
97–107.
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (1999). The unconscious homunculus. In T. Metzinger
(Ed.), The neural correlates of consciousness (pp. 103–110). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness. Nat Neurosci, 6
(2), 119–126.
Culotta, E. (2009). Origins. On the origin of religion. Science, 326 (5954), 784–
787.
D’Argembeau, A., Feyers, D., Majerus, S., Collette, F., Van der Linden, M.,
Maquet, P., et al. (2008). Self-reflection across time: Cortical midline structures
differentiate between present and past selves. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci, 3 (3), 244–252.
D’Onofrio, B. M., Eaves, L. J., Murrelle, L., Maes, H. H., & Spilka, B. (1999).
Understanding biological and social influences on religious affiliation, attitudes, and
behaviors: A behavior genetic perspective. J Pers, 67 (6), 953–984.
Damasio, A. (1999). The feeling of what happens: Body and emotion in the
making of consciousness. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Damasio, A. R. (1999). Thinking about belief: Concluding remarks. In D. L.
Schacter & E. Scarry (Eds.), Memory, brain, and belief (pp. 325–333). Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press.
Davidson, D. (1987). Knowing one’s own mind. Proceedings and addresses of
the American Philosophical Association, 61, 441–458.
Dawkins, R. (1994). Burying the vehicle. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 17 (4),
616–617.
Dawkins, R. (1996). Climbing mount improbable. New York: Norton.
Dawkins, R. (2006). The God delusion. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Dawkins, R. ([1976] 2006). The selfish gene. Oxford, UK: New York: Oxford
University Press.
Dawkins, R. (2010a, March 28). Ratzinger is the perfect pope. Washington Post:
On Faith.
Dawkins, R. (2010b, April 13). The pope should stand trial. The Guardian.
De Grey, A. D. N. J., & Rae, M. (2007). Ending aging: The rejuvenation
breakthroughs that could reverse human aging in our lifetime. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
De Neys, W., Vartanian, O., & Goel, V. (2008). Smarter than we think: When our
brains detect that we are biased. Psychol Sci, 19 (5), 483–489.
de Oliveira-Souza, R., Hare, R. D., Bramati, I. E., Garrido, G. J., Azevedo
Ignacio, F., Tovar-Moll, F., et al. (2008). Psychopathy as a disorder of the moral brain:
Fronto-temporo-limbic grey matter reductions demonstrated by voxel-based
morphometry. Neuroimage, 40 (3), 1202–1213.
Deaner, R. O., Isler, K., Burkart, J., & van Schaik, C. (2007). Overall brain size,
and not encephalization quotient, best predicts cognitive ability across non-human
primates. Brain Behav Evol, 70 (2), 115–124.
Delacour, J. (1995). An introduction to the biology of consciousness.
Neuropsychologia, 33 (9), 1061–1074.
Delgado, M. R., Frank, R. H., & Phelps, E. A. (2005). Perceptions of moral
character modulate the neural systems of reward during the trust game. Nat Neurosci, 8
(11), 1611–1618.
Dennett, D. (1990). Quining qualia. In W. Lycan (Ed.), Mind and cognition: A
reader (pp. 519–547). Oxford: Blackwell.
Dennett, D. (1994). E pluribus unum? Commentary on Wilson & Sober: Group
selection. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 17 (4), 617–618.
Dennett, D. (1996). Facing backwards on the problem of consciousness. Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 3 (1), 4–6.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained (1st Ed.). Boston: Little, Brown
& Co.
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution and the meanings of
life (1st ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster.
Dennett, D. C. (2003). Freedom evolves. New York: Viking.
Dennett, D. C. (2006). Breaking the spell: Religion as a natural phenomenon.
London: Allen Lane.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual
attention. Annu Rev Neurosci, 18, 193–222.
Diamond, J. (2008, April 21). Vengeance is ours. New Yorker, 74–87.

Diamond, J. M. (1997). Guns, germs, and steel: The fates of human societies (1st
ed.). New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Diamond, J. M. (2005). Collapse: How societies choose to fail or succeed. New
York: Viking.
Diana, R. A., Yonelinas, A. P., & Ranganath, C. (2007). Imaging recollection and
familiarity in the medial temporal lobe: a three-component model. Trends Cogn Sci, 11
(9), 379–386.
Diener, E., Oishi, S., & Lucas, R. E. (2003). Personality, culture, and subjective
well-being: Emotional and cognitive evaluations of life. Annu Rev Psychol, 54, 403–425.
Ding, Y. C., Chi, H. C., Grady, D. L., Morishima, A., Kidd, J. R., Kidd, K. K., et
al. (2002). Evidence of positive selection acting at the human dopamine receptor D4 gene
locus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 99 (1), 309–314.
Dolan, M., & Fullam, R. (2004). Theory of mind and mentalizing ability in
antisocial personality disorders with and without psychopathy. Psychol Med, 34 (6),
1093–1102.
Dolan, M., & Fullam, R. (2006). Face affect recognition deficits in personalitydisordered offenders: Association with psychopathy. Psychol Med, 36 (11), 1563–1569.
Donadio, R. (2010a, March 26). Pope may be at crossroads on abuse, forced to
reconcile policy and words. New York Times.
Donadio, R. (2010b, April 29). In abuse crisis, a church is pitted against society
and itself. New York Times.
Doty, R. W. (1998). The five mysteries of the mind, and their consequences.
Neuropsychologia, 36 (10), 1069–1076.
Douglas, P. K., Harris, S., & Cohen, M. S. (2009). Naïve Bayes classification of
belief versus disbelief using event related neuroimaging data. Paper presented at the
Organization for Human Brain Mapping 2009 (July) Annual Meeting.
Douglas, R. J., & Martin, K. A. (2007). Recurrent neuronal circuits in the
neocortex. Curr Biol, 17 (13), R496–500.
Doumas, L. A. A., & Hummel, J. E. (2005). Approaches to modeling human
mental representations: What works, what doesn’t, and why. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G.
Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 73–91). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Dressing, H., Sartorius, A., & Meyer-Lindenberg, A. (2008). Implications of
fMRI and genetics for the law and the routine practice of forensic psychiatry. Neurocase,
14 (1), 7–14.
Dronkers, N. F. (1996). A new brain region for coordinating speech articulation.
Nature, 384 (6605), 159–161.
Dunbar, R. (1998). The social brain hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology, 6,
178–190.
Dunbar, R. (2003). Psychology. Evolution of the social brain. Science, 302
(5648), 1160–1161.
Dunbar, R. (2006). We believe. New Scientist, 189 (2536), 30–33.
Duncan, J., & Owen, A. M. (2000). Common regions of the human frontal lobe
recruited by diverse cognitive demands. Trends Neurosci, 23 (10), 475–483.
Durkheim, E. (2001 [1912]). The elementary forms of religious life. (C. Cosmen,
Trans.) Oxford, UK; New York: Oxford University Press.

Dyson, F. (2002). The conscience of physics. Nature, 420 (12 December), 607–
608.
Eddington, A. S. (1928). The nature of the physical world. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Edelman, G. M. (1989). The remembered present: A biological theory of
consciousness. New York: Basic Books.
Edelman, G. M. (2004). Wider than the sky: The phenomenal gift of
consciousness. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Edelman, G. M. (2006). Second nature: Brain science and human knowledge.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Edelman, G. M., & Tononi, G. (2000). A universe of consciousness: How matter
becomes imagination (1st ed.). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Edgell, P., Geteis, J., & Hartmann, D. (2006). Atheists as “other”: Moral
boundaries and cultural membership in American society. American Sociological Review,
71 (April), 211–234.
Edgerton, R. B. (1992). Sick societies: Challenging the myth of primitive
harmony. New York: Free Press.
Editorial, N. (2006a). Neuroethics needed. Nature, 441 (7096), 907.
Editorial, N. (2006b). Building bridges. Nature, 442 (7099), 110.
Editorial, N. (2007). Evolution and the brain. Nature, 447 (7146), 753.
Editorial, N. (2008). Templeton’s legacy. Nature, 454 (7202), 253–254.
Egnor, S. E. (2001). Effects of binaural decorrelation on neural and behavioral
processing of interaural level differences in the barn owl (Tyto alba). J Comp Physiol
[A], 187 (8), 589–595.
Ehrlinger, J., Johnson, K., Banner, M., Dunning, D., & Kruger, J. (2008). Why the
unskilled are unaware: Further explorations of (absent) self-insight among the
incompetent. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process, 105 (1), 98–121.
Ehrman, B. D. (2005). Misquoting Jesus: The Story Behind Who Changed the
Bible and Why (1st ed.). New York: HarperSanFrancisco.
Ehrsson, H. H., Spence, C., & Passingham, R. E. (2004). That’s my hand!
Activity in premotor cortex reflects feeling of ownership of a limb. Science, 305 (5685),
875–877.
Einstein, A. (1954). Ideas and opinions. Based on Mein Weltbild. New York:
Crown Publishers.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Satpute, A. B. (2005). Personality from a
controlled processing perspective: An fMRI study of neuroticism, extraversion, and selfconsciousness. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci, 5 (2), 169–181.
Elliott, R., Frith, C. D., & Dolan, R. J. (1997). Differential neural response to
positive and negative feedback in planning and guessing tasks. Neuropsychologia, 35
(10), 1395–1404.
Enard, W., Gehre, S., Hammerschmidt, K., Holter, S. M., Blass, T., Somel, M., et
al. (2009). A humanized version of FOXP2, affects cortico-basal ganglia circuits in mice.
Cell, 137 (5), 961–971.
Enard, W., Przeworski, M., Fisher, S. E., Lai, C. S., Wiebe, V., Kitano, T., et al.
(2002). Molecular evolution of FOXP2, a gene involved in speech and language. Nature,
418 (6900), 869–872.

Esposito, J. L. (2008). Who speaks for Islam?: What a billion Muslims really
think. New York, NY: Gallup Press.
Evans, E. M. (2001). Cognitive and contextual factors in the emergence of diverse
belief systems: Creation versus evolution. Cogn Psychol, 42 (3), 217–266.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2005). Deductive reasoning. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G.
Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 169–184).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Evans, P. D., Gilbert, S. L., Mekel-Bobrov, N., Vallender, E. J., Anderson, J. R.,
Vaez-Azizi, L. M., et al. (2005). Microcephalin, a gene regulating brain size, continues to
evolve adaptively in humans. Science, 309 (5741), 1717–1720.
Evers, K. (2005). Neuroethics: A philosophical challenge. Am J Bioeth, 5 (2), 31–
33; discussion W33–34.
Faison, S. (1996, December 20). The death of the last emperor’s last eunuch. New
York Times.
Farah, M. J. (2005). Neuroethics: the practical and the philosophical. Trends Cogn
Sci, 9 (1), 34–40.
Farah, M. J. (2007). Social, legal, and ethical implications of cognitive
neuroscience: “Neuroethics” for short. J Cogn Neurosci, 19 (3), 363–364.
Farah, M. J., Illes, J., Cook-Deegan, R., Gardner, H., Kandel, E., King, P., et al.
(2004). Neurocognitive enhancement: What can we do and what should we do? Nat Rev
Neurosci, 5 (5), 421–425.
Farah, M. J., & Murphy, N. (2009). Neuroscience and the soul. Science, 323
(5918), 1168.
Farrer, C., & Frith, C. D. (2002). Experiencing oneself vs. another person as being
the cause of an action: the neural correlates of the experience of agency. Neuroimage, 15
(3), 596–603.
Farwell, L. A., & Donchin, E. (1991). The truth will out: Interrogative polygraphy
(“lie detection”) with event-related brain potentials. Psychophysiology, 28 (5), 531–547.
Faurion, A., Cerf, B., Le Bihan, D., & Pillias, A. M. (1998). fMRI study of taste
cortical areas in humans. Ann NY Acad Sci, 855, 535–545.
Feigl, H. (1967). The “mental” and the “physical”: The essay and a postcript.
Minneapolis, MN.: University of Minnesota Press.
Festinger, L., Riecken, H. W., & Schachter, S. ([1956] 2008). When prophecy
fails. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Filkins, D. (2010, February 7). On Afghan road, scenes of beauty and death. New
York Times.
Fincher, C. L., Thornhill, R., Murray, D. R., & Schaller, M. (2008). Pathogen
prevalence predicts human cross-cultural variability in individualism/collectivism. Proc
Biol Sci, 275 (1640), 1279–1285.
Finkbeiner, M., & Forster, K. I. (2008). Attention, intention and domain-specific
processing. Trends Cogn Sci, 12 (2), 59–64.
Finke, R., & Stark, R. (1998). Religious choice and competition. American
Sociological Review, 63 (5), 761–766.
Fins, J. J., & Shapiro, Z. E. (2007). Neuroimaging and neuroethics: Clinical and
policy considerations. Curr Opin Neurol, 20 (6), 650–654.
Fisher, C. M. (2001). If there were no free will. Med Hypotheses, 56 (3), 364–366.

Fitch, W. T., Hauser, M. D., & Chomsky, N. (2005). The evolution of the
language faculty: Clarifications and implications. Cognition, 97 (2), 179–210; discussion
211–225.
Flanagan, O. J. (2002). The problem of the soul: Two visions of mind and how to
reconcile them. New York: Basic Books.
Flanagan, O. J. (2007). The really hard problem: Meaning in a material world.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fletcher, P. C., Happé, F., Frith, U., Baker, S. C., Dolan, R. J., Frackowiak, R. S.,
et al. (1995). Other minds in the brain: A functional imaging study of “theory of mind” in
story comprehension. Cognition, 57 (2), 109–128.
Fodor, J. (2000). The mind doesn’t work that way. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (2007, October 18). Why pigs don’t have wings. London Review of
Books.
Fong, G. T., Krantz, D. H., & Nisbett, R. E. (1986/07). The effects of statistical
training on thinking about everyday problems. Cognitive Psychology, 18 (3), 253–292.
Foot, P. (1967). The problem of abortion and the doctrine of double effect. Oxford
Review, 5, 5–15.
Foster, K. R., & Kokko, H. (2009). The evolution of superstitious and
superstition-like behavior. Proc Biol Sci276(1654), 31–37 .
Frank, M. J., D’Lauro, C., & Curran, T. (2007). Cross-task individual differences
in error processing: Neural, electrophysiological, and genetic components. Cogn Affect
Behav Neurosci, 7 (4), 297–308.
Frederico Marques, J., Canessa, N., & Cappa, S. (2009). Neural differences in the
processing of true and false sentences: Insights into the nature of ‘truth’ in language
comprehension. Cortex, 45(6), 759–68.
Freeman, W. J. (1997). Three centuries of category errors in studies of the neural
basis of consciousness and intentionality. Neural Networks, 10 (7), 1175–1183.
Freud, S. ([1930] 2005). Civilization and its discontents. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Freud, S., & Strachey, J. ([1927] 1975). The future of an illusion. New York:
Norton.
Friedman, T. L. (2007, September 5). Letter from Baghdad. New York Times.
Fries, A. B., Ziegler, T. E., Kurian, J. R., Jacoris, S., & Pollak, S. D. (2005). Early
experience in humans is associated with changes in neuropeptides critical for regulating
social behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 102 (47), 17237–17240.
Friston, K. J., Price, C. J., Fletcher, P., Moore, C., Frackowiak, R. S., & Dolan, R.
J. (1996). The trouble with cognitive subtraction. Neuroimage, 4 (2), 97–104.
Frith, C. (2008). No one really uses reason. New Scientist, (2666) (July 26), 45.
Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2006). The neural basis of mentalizing. Neuron, 50 (4),
531–534.
Frith, U., Morton, J., & Leslie, A. M. (1991). The cognitive basis of a biological
disorder: Autism. Trends Neurosci, 14 (10), 433–438.
Fromm, E. (1973). The anatomy of human destructiveness (1st ed.). New York:
Holt.
Fuchs, T. (2006). Ethical issues in neuroscience. Curr Opin Psychiatry, 19 (6),
600–607.

Fuster, J. M. (2003). Cortex and mind: Unifying cognition. Oxford, UK: New
York: Oxford University Press.
Gallea, C., Graaf, J. B., Pailhous, J., & Bonnard, M. (2008). Error processing
during online motor control depends on the response accuracy. Behav Brain Res, 193(1),
117–125.
Garavan, H., Ross, T. J., Murphy, K., Roche, R. A., & Stein, E. A. (2002).
Dissociable executive functions in the dynamic control of behavior: Inhibition, error
detection, and correction. Neuroimage, 17 (4), 1820–1829.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1998). The split brain revisited. Sci Am, 279 (1), 50–55.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2005). Forty-five years of split-brain research and still going
strong. Nat Rev Neurosci, 6 (8), 653–659.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2005). The ethical brain. New York: Dana Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2008). Human: The science behind what makes us unique. New
York: Ecco.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Bogen, J. E., & Sperry, R. W. (1962). Some functional effects
of sectioning the cerebral commissures in man. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 48, 1765–1769.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Bogen, J. E., & Sperry, R. W. (1965). Observations on visual
perception after disconnexion of the cerebral hemispheres in man. Brain, 88 (2), 221–
236.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Ivry, R. B. and Mangun, G. R. (1998). Cognitive neuroscience:
The biology of the mind. New York: W. W. Norton.
Gehring, W. J., & Fencsik, D. E. (2001). Functions of the medial frontal cortex in
the processing of conflict and errors. J Neurosci, 21 (23), 9430–9437.
Geschwind, D. H., Iacoboni, M., Mega, M. S., Zaidel, D. W., Cloughesy, T., &
Zaidel, E. (1995). Alien hand syndrome: Interhemispheric motor disconnection due to a
lesion in the midbody of the corpus callosum. Neurology, 45 (4), 802–808.
Gettleman, J. (2008, June 8). Albinos, long shunned, face threat in Tanzania. New
York Times.
Ghazanfar, A. A. (2008). Language evolution: Neural differences that make a
difference. Nat Neurosci, 11 (4), 382–384.
Gilbert, D. T. (1991). How mental systems believe. American Psychologist, 46
(2), 107–119.
Gilbert, D. T. (2006). Stumbling on happiness (1st ed.). New York: A. A. Knopf.
Gilbert, D. T., Brown, R. P., Pinel, E. C., & Wilson, T. D. (2000). The illusion of
external agency. J Pers Soc Psychol, 79 (5), 690–700.
Gilbert, D. T., Lieberman, M. D., Morewedge, C. K., & Wilson, T. D. (2004). The
peculiar longevity of things not so bad. Psychol Sci, 15 (1), 14–19.
Gilbert, D. T., Morewedge, C. K., Risen, J. L., & Wilson, T. D. (2004). Looking
forward to looking backward: The misprediction of regret. Psychol Sci, 15 (5), 346–350.
Gilbert, D. T., Krull, D. S., Malone, S. (1990). Unbelieving the unbelievable:
Some problems in the rejection of false information. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59 (4), 601–613.
Glannon, W. (2006). Neuroethics. Bioethics, 20 (1), 37–52.
Glenn, A. L., Raine, A., & Schug, R. A. (2009). The neural correlates of moral
decision-making in psychopathy. Mol Psychiatry, 14 (1), 5–6.
Glenn, A. L., Raine, A., Schug, R. A., Young, L., & Hauser, M. (2009). Increased

DLPFC activity during moral decision-making in psychopathy. Mol Psychiatry, 14 (10),
909–911.
Glimcher, P. (2002). Decisions, decisions, decisions: Choosing a biological
science of choice. Neuron, 36 (2), 323–332.
Goel, V., & Dolan, R. J. (2003a). Explaining modulation of reasoning by belief.
Cognition, 87 (1), B11–22.
Goel, V., & Dolan, R. J. (2003b). Reciprocal neural response within lateral and
ventral medial prefrontal cortex during hot and cold reasoning. Neuroimage, 20 (4),
2314–2321.
Goel, V., Gold, B., Kapur, S., & Houle, S. (1997). The seats of reason? An
imaging study of deductive and inductive reasoning. Neuroreport, 8 (5), 1305–1310.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays on face-to-face behavior. New
York: Pantheon Books.
Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2000). Representation of a perceptual decision in
developing oculomotor commands. Nature, 404 (6776), 390–394.
Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2002). Banburismus and the brain: Decoding the
relationship between sensory stimuli, decisions, and reward. Neuron, 36 (2), 299–308.
Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2007). The neural basis of decision making. Annu
Rev Neurosci, 30, 535–574.
Goldberg, E. (2001). The executive brain: Frontal lobes and the civilized mind.
Oxford, UK; New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldberg, I., Ullman, S., & Malach, R. (2008). Neuronal correlates of “free will”
are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network.
Conscious Cogn, 17 (3), 587–601.
Gomes, G. (2007). Free will, the self, and the brain. Behav Sci Law, 25 (2), 221–
234.
Goodstein, L. (2010a, March 24). Vatican declined to defrock U.S. priest who
abused boys. New York Times.
Goodstein, L. (2010b, April 21). Invitation to cardinal is withdrawn. New York
Times.
Goodstein, L., & Callender, D. (2010, March 26). For years, deaf boys tried to tell
of priest’s abuse. New York Times.
Gould, S. J. (1997). Nonoverlapping magisteria. Natural History, 106 (March),
16–22.
Graham Holm, N. (2010, January 4). Prejudiced Danes provoke fanaticism. The
Guardian.
Grann, D. (2009, September 7). Trial by Fire. New Yorker.
Gray, J. M., Young, A. W., Barker, W. A., Curtis, A., & Gibson, D. (1997).
Impaired recognition of disgust in Huntington’s disease gene carriers. Brain, 120 (Pt. 11),
2029–2038.
Gray, J. R., Burgess, G. C., Schaefer, A., Yarkoni, T., Larsen, R. J., & Braver, T.
S. (2005). Affective personality differences in neural processing efficiency confirmed
using fMRI. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci, 5 (2), 182–190.
Greely, H. (2007). On neuroethics. Science, 318 (5850), 533.
Greene, J., & Cohen, J. (2004). For the law, neuroscience changes nothing and
everything. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 359 (1451), 1775–1785.

Greene, J. D. (2002). The terrible, horrible, no good, very bad truth about
morality and what to do about it. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.
Greene, J. D. (2007). Why are VMPFC patients more utilitarian? A dual-process
theory of moral judgment explains. Trends Cogn Sci, 11 (8), 322–323; author reply 323–
324.
Greene, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Engell, A. D., Darley, J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2004).
The neural bases of cognitive conflict and control in moral judgment. Neuron, 44 (2),
389–400.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J. M., & Cohen, J. D.
(2001). An fMRI investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293
(5537), 2105–2108.
Gregory, R. L. (1987). The Oxford companion to the mind. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Grim, P. (2007). Free will in context: A contemporary philosophical perspective.
Behav Sci Law, 25 (2), 183–201.
Gross, P. R. (1991). On the “gendering” of science. Academic Questions, 5 (2),
10–23.
Gross, P. R., & Levitt, N. (1994). Higher superstition: The academic left and its
quarrels with science. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gusnard, D. A., Akbudak, E., Shulman, G. L., & Raichle, M. E. (2001). Medial
prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: Relation to a default mode of brain
function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 98 (7), 4259–4264.
Gutchess, A. H., Welsh, R. C., Boduroglu, A., & Park, D. C. (2006). Cultural
differences in neural function associated with object processing. Cogn Affect Behav
Neurosci, 6 (2), 102–109.
Guttenplan, S. (1994). A companion to the philosophy of mind. Oxford, UK:
Blackwell.
Haber, S. N., Kunishio, K., Mizobuchi, M., & Lynd-Balta, E. (1995). The orbital
and medial prefrontal circuit through the primate basal ganglia. J Neurosci, 15 (7 Pt. 1),
4851–4867.
Haggard, P. (2001). The psychology of action. Br J Psychol, 92 (Pt. 1), 113–128.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary action and conscious
awareness. Nat Neurosci, 5 (4), 382–385.
Haggard, P., & Eimer, M. (1999). On the relation between brain potentials and the
awareness of voluntary movements. Exp Brain Res, 126 (1), 128–133.
Haggard, P., & Magno, E. (1999). Localising awareness of action with
transcranial magnetic stimulation. Exp Brain Res, 127 (1), 102–107.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist
approach to moral judgment. Psychol Rev, 108 (4), 814–834.
Haidt, J. (2003). The emotional dog does learn new tricks: A reply to Pizarro and
Bloom (2003). Psychol Rev, 110 (1), 197–198.
Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology. Science, 316 (5827),
998–1002.
Haidt, J. (2008). What makes people vote Republican? Retrieved from
www.edge.org/3rd_culture/haidt08/haidt08_index.html.
Haidt, J. (2009). Faster evolution means more ethnic differences. The Edge

Annual Question 2009. Retrieved from www.edge.org/q2009/q09_4.html#haidt.
Hajcak, G., & Simons, R. F. (2008). Oops!… I did it again: An ERP and
behavioral study of double-errors. Brain Cogn, 68 (1), 15–21.
Hall, D. L., Matz, D. C., & Wood, W. (2010). Why don’t we practice what we
preach? A meta-analytic review of religious racism. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 14 (1), 126–139.
Halligan, P. W. (1998). Inability to recognise disgust in Huntington’s disease.
Lancet, 351 (9101), 464.
Hameroff, S., Kaszniak, A. W., and Scott, A. C. (1996). Toward a science of
consciousness: The first Tucson discussions and debates. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hamilton, W. D. (1964a). The genetical evolution of social behaviour. Pt. I. J
Theor Biol, 7 (1), 1–16.
Hamilton, W. D. (1964b). The genetical evolution of social behaviour. Pt. II. J
Theor Biol, 7 (1), 17–52.
Han, S., Mao, L., Gu, X., Zhu, Y., Ge, J., & Ma, Y. (2008). Neural consequences
of religious belief on self-referential processing. Soc Neurosci, 3 (1), 1–15.
Hanson, S. J., Matsuka, T., & Haxby, J. V. (2004). Combinatorial codes in ventral
temporal lobe for object recognition: Haxby (2001) revisited: Is there a “face” area?
Neuroimage, 23 (1), 156–166.
Happé, F. (2003). Theory of mind and the self. Ann NY Acad Sci, 1001, 134–144.
Hardcastle, V. G. (1993). The naturalists versus the skeptics: The debate over a
scientific understanding of consciousness. J Mind Behav, 14 (1), 27–50.
Hardcastle, V. G., & Flanagan, O. (1999). Multiplex vs. multiple selves:
Distinguishing dissociative disorders. The Monist, 82 (4), 645–657.
Harding, S. (2001). Gender, democracy, and philosophy of science. Paper
presented at the Science, Engineering and Global Responsibility lectures, Stockholm
(June 14–18, 2000).
Hare, R. D. (1999). Without conscience: The disturbing world of the psychopaths
among us. New York: Guilford Press.
Hare, T. A., Tottenham, N., Galvan, A., Voss, H. U., Glover, G. H., & Casey, B.
J. (2008). Biological substrates of emotional reactivity and regulation in adolescence
during an emotional go-nogo task. Biol Psychiatry, 63 (10), 927–934.
Harris, D., & Karamehmedovic, A. (2009, March 2). Child witches: Accused in
the name of Jesus. Nightline: ABC News.
Harris, S. (2004). The end of faith: Religion, terror, and the future of reason (1st
ed.). New York: W. W. Norton.
Harris, S. (2006a). Letter to a Christian nation. New York: Knopf.
Harris, S. (2006b). Science must destroy religion. In J. Brockman (Ed.), What is
your dangerous idea? New York: Simon & Schuster.
Harris, S. (2006c). Reply to Scott Atran. An Edge discussion of BEYOND
BELIEF: Science, religion, reason and survival, from www.edge.org/discourse/bb.html.
Harris, S. (2006d). Do we really need bad reasons to be good? Boston Globe, Oct.
22.
Harris, S. (2007b). Response to Jonathan Haidt. Edge.org, from
www.edge.org/discourse/moral_religion.html.
Harris, S. (2007a). Scientists should unite against threat from religion. Nature,

448 (7156), 864.
Harris, S. (2009, July 27). Science is in the details. New York Times.
Harris, S., & Ball, P. (2009, June 26). What should science do? Sam Harris v.
Philip Ball, from www.projectreason.org/archive/item/what_should_science_dosam_harris_v_philip_ball/.
Harris, S., Kaplan, J. T., Curiel, A., Bookheimer, S. Y., Iacoboni, M., & Cohen,
M. S. (2009). The neural correlates of religious and nonreligious belief. PLoS ONE, 4
(10), e7272.
Harris, S., Sheth, S. A., & Cohen, M. S. (2008). Functional neuroimaging of
belief, disbelief, and uncertainty. Ann Neurol, 63 (2), 141–147.
Hauser, M. D. (2000). Wild minds: What animals really think (1st ed.). New
York: Henry Holt.
Hauser, M. D. (2006). Moral minds: How nature designed our universal sense of
right and wrong (1st ed.). New York: Ecco.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The faculty of language:
What is it, who has it, and how did it evolve? Science, 298 (5598), 1569–1579.
Hayes, C. J., Stevenson, R. J., & Coltheart, M. (2007). Disgust and Huntington’s
disease. Neuropsychologia, 45 (6), 1135–1151.
Haynes, J. D. (2009). Decoding visual consciousness from human brain signals.
Trends Cogn Sci, 13(5), 194–202.
Haynes, J. D., & Rees, G. (2006). Decoding mental states from brain activity in
humans. Nat Rev Neurosci, 7 (7), 523–534.
Heisenberg, M. (2009). Is free will an illusion? Nature, 459 (7244), 164–165.
Heisenberg, W. (1958). The representation of Nature in contemporary physics.
Daedalus, 87 (Summer), 95–108.
Henley, S. M., Wild, E. J., Hobbs, N. Z., Warren, J. D., Frost, C., Scahill, R. I., et
al. (2008). Defective emotion recognition in early HD is neuropsychologically and
anatomically generic. Neuropsychologia, 46 (8), 2152–2160.
Hennenlotter, A., Schroeder, U., Erhard, P., Haslinger, B., Stahl, R., Weindl, A.,
et al. (2004). Neural correlates associated with impaired disgust processing in presymptomatic Huntington’s disease. Brain, 127 (Pt. 6), 1446–1453.
Henson, R. (2005). What can functional neuroimaging tell the experimental
psychologist? Q J Exp Psychol A, 58 (2), 193–233.
Hirsi Ali, A. (2006). The caged virgin: An emancipation proclamation for women
and Islam (1st Free Press ed.). New York: Free Press.
Hirsi Ali, A. (2007). Infidel. New York: Free Press.
Hirsi Ali, A. (2010). Nomad. New York: Free Press.
Hitchens, C. (2007). God is not great: How religion poisons everything. New
York: Twelve.
Hitchens, C. (2010, March 15). The great Catholic cover-up. Slate.
Hitchens, C. (2010, March 22). Tear down that wall. Slate.
Hitchens, C. (2010, March 29). The pope is not above the law. Slate.
Hitchens, C. (2010, May 3). Bring the pope to justice. Newsweek.
Holden, C. (2001). Polygraph screening. Panel seeks truth in lie detector debate.
Science, 291 (5506), 967.
Holyoak, K. J. (2005). Analogy. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The

Cambridge handbook of thinking of reasoning (pp. 117–142). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Holyoak, K. J., & Morrison, R. G. (2005). The Cambridge handbook of thinking
and reasoning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hood, B. M. (2009). Supersense: Why we believe in the unbelievable. New York:
HarperOne.
Hornak, J., O’Doherty, J., Bramham, J., Rolls, E. T., Morris, R. G., Bullock, P.
R., et al. (2004). Reward-related reversal learning after surgical excisions in orbitofrontal or dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in humans. J Cogn Neurosci, 16 (3), 463–478.
Houreld, K. (2009, October 20). Church burns “witchcraft” children. Daily
Telegraph.
Hsu, M., Bhatt, M., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., & Camerer, C. F. (2005). Neural
systems responding to degrees of uncertainty in human decision-making. Science, 310
(5754), 1680–1683.
Hume, D. (1996). The philosophical works of David Hume. Bristol, U.K.:
Thoemmes Press.
Hunte-Grubbe, C. (2007, October 14). The elementary DNA of Dr. Watson.
Sunday Times.
Hutchison, W. D., Davis, K. D., Lozano, A. M., Tasker, R. R., & Dostrovsky, J.
O. (1999). Pain-related neurons in the human cingulate cortex. Nat Neurosci, 2 (5), 403–
405.
Iacoboni, M. (2008). Mirroring people: The new science of how we connect with
others (1st ed.). New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Iacoboni, M., & Dapretto, M. (2006). The mirror neuron system and the
consequences of its dysfunction. Nat Rev Neurosci, 7 (12), 942–951.
Iacoboni, M., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2007). Mirror neuron system: Basic findings
and clinical applications. Ann Neurol, 62 (3), 213–218.
Iacoboni, M., Rayman, J., & Zaidel, E. (1996). Left brain says yes, right brain
says no: Normative duality in the split brain. In S. Hameroff, A. W. Kaszniak, & A. C.
Scott (Eds.), Toward a science of consciousness: The first Tucson discussions and
debates (pp. 197–202). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ibrahim, R. (Ed.)(2007). The Al Qaeda reader (1st pbk. ed.). New York:
Broadway Books.
Illes, J. (2003). Neuroethics in a new era of neuroimaging. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol, 24 (9), 1739–1741.
Illes, J. (2004). Medical imaging: A hub for the new field of neuroethics. Acad
Radiol, 11 (7), 721–723.
Illes, J. (2007). Empirical neuroethics. Can brain imaging visualize human
thought? Why is neuroethics interested in such a possibility? EMBO Rep. 8 Spec No.
S57–60.
Illes, J., & Bird, S. J. (2006). Neuroethics: A modern context for ethics in
neuroscience. Trends Neurosci, 29 (9), 511–517.
Illes, J., Blakemore, C., Hansson, M. G., Hensch, T. K., Leshner, A., Maestre, G.,
et al. (2005). International perspectives on engaging the public in neuroethics. Nat Rev
Neurosci, 6 (12), 977–982.
Illes, J., Kirschen, M. P., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2003). From neuroimaging to

neuroethics. Nat Neurosci, 6 (3), 205.
Illes, J., & Racine, E. (2005). Imaging or imagining? A neuroethics challenge
informed by genetics. Am J Bioeth, 5 (2), 5–18.
Illes, J., & Raffin, T. A. (2002). Neuroethics: An emerging new discipline in the
study of brain and cognition. Brain Cogn, 50 (3), 341–344.
Inbar, Y., Pizarro, D. A., Knobe, J., & Bloom, P. (2009). Disgust sensitivity
predicts intuitive disapproval of gays. Emotion, 9 (3), 435–439.
Inglehart, R., Foa, R., Peterson, C., & Welzel, C. (2008). Development, freedom,
and rising happiness. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3 (4), 264–285.
Inzlicht, M., McGregor, I., Hirsh, J. B., & Nash, K. (2009). Neural markers of
religious conviction. Psychol Sci, 20 (3), 385–392.
Izuma, K., Saito, D. N., & Sadato, N. (2008). Processing of social and monetary
rewards in the human striatum. Neuron, 58 (2), 284–294.
James, W. ([1890] 1950). The principles of psychology (Authorized ed.). Mineola,
NY: Dover Publications.
James, W. ([1912] 1996). Essays in radical empiricism. Lincoln, NE: University
of Nebraska Press.
Jeannerod, M. (1999). The 25th Bartlett Lecture. To act or not to act: Perspectives
on the representation of actions. Q J Exp Psychol A, 52 (1), 1–29.
Jeannerod, M. (2001). Neural simulation of action: A unifying mechanism for
motor cognition. Neuroimage, 14 (1 Pt. 2), S103–109.
Jeannerod, M. (2003). The mechanism of self-recognition in humans. Behav
Brain Res, 142 (1–2), 1–15.
Jeans, J. (1930). The mysterious universe. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Jedlicka, P. (2005). Neuroethics, reductionism and dualism. Trends Cogn Sci, 9
(4), 172; author reply, 173.
Jenkinson, M., Bannister, P., Brady, M., & Smith, S. (2002). Improved
optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain
images. Neuroimage, 17 (2), 825–841.
Jenkinson, M., & Smith, S. (2001). A global optimisation method for robust affine
registration of brain images. Med Image Anal, 5 (2), 143–156.
Jensen, K., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Chimpanzees are rational
maximizers in an ultimatum game. Science, 318 (5847), 107–109.
Jensen, K., Hare, B., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2006). What’s in it for me? Selfregard precludes altruism and spite in chimpanzees. Proc Biol Sci, 273 (1589), 1013–
1021.
Johnson, S. A., Stout, J. C., Solomon, A. C., Langbehn, D. R., Aylward, E. H.,
Cruce, C. B., et al. (2007). Beyond disgust: Impaired recognition of negative emotions
prior to diagnosis in Huntington’s disease. Brain, 130 (Pt. 7), 1732–1744.
Jones, D. (2008). Human behaviour: killer instincts. Nature, 451 (7178), 512–515.
Joseph, O. (2009). Horror of Kenya’s “witch,” lynchings. Retrieved June 27,
2009, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8119201.stm.
Joseph, R. (1999). Frontal lobe psychopathology: Mania, depression,
confabulation, catatonia, perseveration, obsessive compulsions, and schizophrenia.
Psychiatry, 62 (2), 138–172.

Jost, J. T., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A. W., & Sulloway, F. J. (2003). Political
conservatism as motivated social cognition. Psychol Bull, 129 (3), 339–375.
Joyce, R. (2006). Metaethics and the empirical sciences. Philosophical
Explorations, 9 (Special issue: Empirical research and the nature of moral judgment),
133–148.
Judson, O. (2008, December 2). Back to reality. New York Times.
Justo, L., & Erazun, F. (2007). Neuroethics and human rights. Am J Bioeth, 7 (5),
16–18.
Kahane, G., & Shackel, N. (2008). Do abnormal responses show utilitarian bias?
Nature, 452 (7185), E5; author reply E5–6.
Kahneman, D. (2003a). Experiences of collaborative research. Am Psychol, 58
(9), 723–730.
Kahneman, D. (2003b). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded
rationality. Am Psychol, 58 (9), 697–720.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2005). A model of heuristic judgment. In K. J.
Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning
(pp. 267–293). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., Krueger, A. B., Schkade, D., Schwarz, N., & Stone, A. A. (2006).
Would you be happier if you were richer? A focusing illusion. Science, 312 (5782),
1908–1910.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk. Econometrica, 47 (2), 263–292.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1996). On the reality of cognitive illusions.
Psychol Rev, 103 (3), 582–591; discussion 592–586.
Kandel, E. R. (2008). Interview with Eric R. Kandel: From memory, free will, and
the problem with Freud to fortunate decisions. J Vis Exp (15), April 24, p. 762.
Kant, I. ([1785] 1995). Ethical philosophy: Grounding for the metaphysics of
morals and metaphysical principles of virtue (J. W. Ellington, Trans.). Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett Publishing.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. (1997). The fusiform face area: A
module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. J Neurosci, 17 (11),
4302–4311.
Kaplan, J. T., Freedman, J., & Iacoboni, M. (2007). Us versus them: Political
attitudes and party affiliation influence neural response to faces of presidential
candidates. Neuropsychologia, 45 (1), 55–64.
Kaplan, J. T., & Iacoboni, M. (2006). Getting a grip on other minds: Mirror
neurons, intention understanding, and cognitive empathy. Soc Neurosci, 1 (3–4), 175–
183.
Kapogiannis, D., Barbey, A. K., Su, M., Zamboni, G., Krueger, F., & Grafman, J.
(2009). Cognitive and neural foundations of religious belief. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,
106 (12), 4876–4881.
Karczmar, A. G. (2001). Sir John Eccles, 1903–1997. Pt. 2. The brain as a
machine or as a site of free will? Perspect Biol Med, 44 (2), 250–262.
Keane, M. M., Gabrieli, J. D., Monti, L. A., Fleischman, D. A., Cantor, J. M., &

Noland, J. S. (1997). Intact and impaired conceptual memory processes in amnesia.
Neuropsychology, 11 (1), 59–69.
Kelley, W. M., Macrae, C. N., Wyland, C. L., Caglar, S., Inati, S., & Heatherton,
T. F. (2002). Finding the self? An event-related fMRI study. J Cogn Neurosci, 14 (5),
785–794.
Kennedy, D. (2004). Neuroscience and neuroethics. Science, 306 (5695), 373.
Kertesz, A. (2000). Alien hand, free will and Arnold Pick. Can J Neurol Sci, 27
(3), 183.
Keverne, E. B., & Curley, J. P. (2004). Vasopressin, oxytocin and social
behaviour. Curr Opin Neurobiol, 14 (6), 777–783.
Kiehl, K. A. (2006). A cognitive neuroscience perspective on psychopathy:
Evidence for paralimbic system dysfunction. Psychiatry Res, 142 (2–3), 107–128.
Kiehl, K. A., Smith, A. M., Hare, R. D., Mendrek, A., Forster, B. B., Brink, J., et
al. (2001). Limbic abnormalities in affective processing by criminal psychopaths as
revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Biol Psychiatry, 50 (9), 677–684.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (1996). Unconscious processes in social interaction. In S.
Hameroff, A. W. Kaszniak, & A. C. Scott (Eds.), Toward a science of consciousness: The
first Tucson discussions and debates (pp. 93–104). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kim, J. ([1984] 1991). Epiphenomenal and supervenient causation. In D.
Rosenthal (Ed.), The nature of mind (pp. 257–265). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kim, J. (1993). The myth of nonreductive materialism. In Supervenience and
mind (pp. 265–283). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
King-Casas, B., Tomlin, D., Anen, C., Camerer, C. F., Quartz, S. R., &
Montague, P. R. (2005). Getting to know you: Reputation and trust in a two-person
economic exchange. Science, 308 (5718), 78–83.
Kipps, C. M., Duggins, A. J., McCusker, E. A., & Calder, A. J. (2007). Disgust
and happiness recognition correlate with anteroventral insula and amygdala volume
respectively in preclinical Huntington’s disease. J Cogn Neurosci, 19 (7), 1206–1217.
Kircher, T. T., Senior, C., Phillips, M. L., Benson, P. J., Bullmore, E. T.,
Brammer, M., et al. (2000). Towards a functional neuroanatomy of self processing:
Effects of faces and words. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res, 10 (1–2), 133–144.
Kircher, T. T., Senior, C., Phillips, M. L., Rabe-Hesketh, S., Benson, P. J.,
Bullmore, E. T., et al. (2001). Recognizing one’s own face. Cognition, 78 (1), B1–B15.
Kirsch, I. (2000). Are drug and placebo effects in depression additive? Biol
Psychiatry, 47 (8), 733–735.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y. W. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation, and information
in hypothesis testing. Psychological Review, 94 (2), 211–228.
Koenig, L. B., McGue, M., Krueger, R. F., & Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (2005). Genetic
and environmental influences on religiousness: Findings for retrospective and current
religiousness ratings. J Pers, 73 (2), 471–488.
Koenig, L. B., McGue, M., Krueger, R. F., & Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (2007).
Religiousness, antisocial behavior, and altruism: Genetic and environmental mediation. J
Pers, 75 (2), 265–290.
Koenigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., et al.
(2007). Damage to the prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian moral judgements. Nature,
446 (7138), 908–911.

Kolb, B., & Whishaw, I. Q. (2008). Fundamentals of human neuropsychology
(6th ed.). New York: Worth Publishers.
Kosik, K. S. (2006). Neuroscience gears up for duel on the issue of brain versus
deity. Nature, 439 (7073), 138.
Krause, J., Lalueza-Fox, C., Orlando, L., Enard, W., Green, R. E., Burbano, H.
A., et al. (2007). The derived FOXP2 variant of modern humans was shared with
Neandertals. Curr Biol, 17 (21), 1908–1912.
Kripke, S. ([1970] 1991). From naming and necessity. In D. Rosenthal (Ed.), The
nature of mind (pp. 236–246). UK: Oxford University Press.
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties
in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. J Pers Soc
Psychol, 77 (6), 1121–1134.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1999). Motivation, cognition, and reality: Three memos for
the next generation of research. Psychological Inquiry, 10 (1), pp. 54–58.
Kuhnen, C. M., & Knutson, B. (2005). The neural basis of financial risk taking.
Neuron, 47 (5), 763–770.
LaBoeuf, R. A., & Shafir, E. B. (2005). Decision making. In K. J. Holyoak & R.
G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 243–266).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
LaFraniere, S. (2007, November 15). African crucible: Cast as witches, then cast
out. New York Times.
Lahav, R. (1997). The conscious and the non-conscious: Philosophical
implications of neuropsychology. In M. Carrier & P. K. Machamer (Eds.), Mindscapes:
Philosophy, science, and the mind. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Lai, C. S., Fisher, S. E., Hurst, J. A., Vargha-Khadem, F., & Monaco, A. P.
(2001). A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder.
Nature, 413 (6855), 519–523.
Langford, D. J., Crager, S. E., Shehzad, Z., Smith, S. B., Sotocinal, S. G.,
Levenstadt, J. S., et al. (2006). Social modulation of pain as evidence for empathy in
mice. Science, 312 (5782), 1967–1970.
Langleben, D. D., Loughead, J. W., Bilker, W. B., Ruparel, K., Childress, A. R.,
Busch, S. I., et al. (2005). Telling truth from lie in individual subjects with fast eventrelated fMRI. Hum Brain Mapp, 26 (4), 262–272.
Langleben, D. D., Schroeder, L., Maldjian, J. A., Gur, R. C., McDonald, S.,
Ragland, J. D., et al. (2002). Brain activity during simulated deception: An event-related
functional magnetic resonance study. Neuroimage, 15 (3), 727–732.
Larson, E. J., & Witham, L. (1998). Leading scientists still reject God. Nature,
394 (6691), 313.
LeDoux, J. E. (2002). Synaptic self: How our brains become who we are. New
York: Viking.
Lee, T. M., Liu, H. L., Chan, C. C., Ng, Y. B., Fox, P. T., & Gao, J. H. (2005).
Neural correlates of feigned memory impairment. Neuroimage, 28 (2), 305–313.
Leher, J. (2010, February 28). Depression’s upside. New York Times Magazine.
Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly, 64, 354–361.
Levine, J. (1997). On leaving out what it’s like. In N. Block, O. Flanagan, & G.

Güzeldere (Eds.), The nature of consciousness: Philosophical debates (pp. 543–555).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levy, N. (2007). Rethinking neuroethics in the light of the extended mind thesis.
Am J Bioeth, 7 (9), 3–11.
Levy, N. (2007). Neuroethics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Libet, B. (1999). Do we have free will? Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6 (8–
9), 47–57.
Libet, B. (2001). Consciousness, free action and the brain: Commentary on John
Searle’s article. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8 (8), 59–65.
Libet, B. (2003). Can conscious experience affect brain activity? Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 10 (12), 24–28.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K. (1983). Time of
conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity (readiness-potential).
The unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary act. Brain, 106 (Pt. 3), 623–642.
Lieberman, M. D., Jarcho, J. M., Berman, S., Naliboff, B. D., Suyenobu, B. Y.,
Mandelkern, M., et al. (2004). The neural correlates of placebo effects: a disruption
account. Neuroimage, 22 (1), 447–455.
Litman, L., & Reber, A. S. (2005). Implicit cognition and thought. In K. J.
Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning
(pp. 431–453). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Livingston, K. R. (2005). Religious practice, brain, and belief. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 5 (1–2), 75–117.
Llinás, R. (2001). I of the vortex: From neurons to self. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Llinás, R., Ribary, U., Contreras, D., & Pedroarena, C. (1998). The neuronal basis
for consciousness. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 353 (1377), 1841–1849.
Logothetis, N. K. (1999). Vision: A window on consciousness. Sci Am, 281 (5),
69–75.
Logothetis, N. K. (2008). What we can do and what we cannot do with fMRI.
Nature, 453 (7197), 869–878.
Logothetis, N. K., Pauls, J., Augath, M., Trinath, T., & Oeltermann, A. (2001).
Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the fMRI signal. Nature, 412 (6843),
150–157.
Logothetis, N. K., & Pfeuffer, J. (2004). On the nature of the BOLD fMRI
contrast mechanism. Magn Reson Imaging, 22 (10), 1517–1531.
Lou, H. C., Luber, B., Crupain, M., Keenan, J. P., Nowak, M., Kjaer, T. W., et al.
(2004). Parietal cortex and representation of the mental self. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,
101 (17), 6827–6832.
Lou, H. C., Nowak, M., & Kjaer, T. W. (2005). The mental self. Prog Brain Res,
150, 197–204.
Lugo, L. D. (2008). U.S. Religious Landscape Survey, Pew Research Center.
Lutz, A., Brefczynski-Lewis, J., Johnstone, T., & Davidson, R. J. (2008).
Regulation of the neural circuitry of emotion by compassion meditation: effects of
meditative expertise. PLoS ONE, 3 (3), e1897.
Lutz, A., Greischar, L. L., Rawlings, N. B., Ricard, M., & Davidson, R. J. (2004).
Long-term meditators self-induce high-amplitude gamma synchrony during mental

practice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 101 (46), 16369–16373.
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J. (2008). Attention
regulation and monitoring in meditation. Trends Cogn Sci, 12 (4), 163–169.
Lykken, D. T., & Tellegen, A. (1996). Happiness is a stochastic phenomenon.
Psychological Science, 7 (3), 186–189.
Mackie, J. L. (1977). Ethics: Inventing right and wrong. London: Penguin.
Macrae, C. N., Moran, J. M., Heatherton, T. F., Banfield, J. F., & Kelley, W. M.
(2004). Medial prefrontal activity predicts memory for self. Cereb Cortex, 14 (6), 647–
654.
Maddox, J. (1981). A book for burning? Nature, 293 (September 24), 245–246.
Maddox, J. (1995). The prevalent distrust of science. Nature, 378 (6556), 435–
437.
Maguire, E. A., Frith, C. D., & Morris, R. G. (1999). The functional
neuroanatomy of comprehension and memory: The importance of prior knowledge.
Brain, 122 (Pt. 10), 1839–1850.
Mark, V. (1996). Conflicting communicative behavior in a split-brain patient:
Support for dual consciousness. In S. Hameroff, A. W. Kaszniak, & A. C. Scott (Eds.),
Toward a science of consciousness: The first Tucson discussions and debates (pp. 189–
196). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marks, C. E. (1980). Commissurotomy, consciousness, and the unity of mind.
Montgomery, VT: Bradford Books.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational investigation into the human
representation and processing of visual information. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Marx, K. ([1843] 1971). Critique of Hegel’s philosophy of right (A. J. O’Malley,
Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M., Grafton, S. T., &
Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering minds: The default network and stimulus-independent
thought. Science, 315 (5810), 393–395.
Masserman, J. H., Wechkin, S., & Terris, W. (1964). “Altruistic” behavior in
rhesus monkeys. Am J Psychiatry, 121, 584–585.
Matsumoto, K., & Tanaka, K. (2004). The role of the medial prefrontal cortex in
achieving goals. Curr Opin Neurobiol, 14 (2), 178–185.
McCloskey, M. S., Phan, K. L., & Coccaro, E. F. (2005). Neuroimaging and
personality disorders. Curr Psychiatry Rep, 7 (1), 65–72.
McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin, D., Cypert, K. S., Montague, L. M., & Montague,
P. R. (2004). Neural correlates of behavioral preference for culturally familiar drinks.
Neuron, 44 (2), 379–387.
McCrone, J. (2003). Free will. Lancet Neurol, 2 (1), 66.
McElreath, R., & Boyd, R. (2007). Mathematical models of social evolution: A
guide for the perplexed. Chicago; London: University of Chicago Press.
McGinn, C. (1989). Can we solve the mind-body problem? Mind, 98, 349–366.
McGinn, C. (1999). The mysterious flame: Conscious minds in a material world.
New York: Basic Books.
McGuire, P. K., Bench, C. J., Frith, C. D., Marks, I. M., Frackowiak, R. S., &
Dolan, R. J. (1994). Functional anatomy of obsessive-compulsive phenomena. Br J
Psychiatry, 164 (4), 459–468.

McKiernan, K. A., Kaufman, J. N., Kucera-Thompson, J., & Binder, J. R. (2003).
A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional
neuroimaging. J Cogn Neurosci, 15 (3), 394–408.
McNeil, B. J., Pauker, S. G., Sox, H. C., Jr., & Tversky, A. (1982). On the
elicitation of preferences for alternative therapies. N Engl J Med, 306 (21), 1259–1262.
Mekel-Bobrov, N., Gilbert, S. L., Evans, P. D., Vallender, E. J., Anderson, J. R.,
Hudson, R. R., et al. (2005). Ongoing adaptive evolution of ASPM, a brain size
determinant in Homo sapiens. Science, 309 (5741), 1720–1722.
Meriau, K., Wartenburger, I., Kazzer, P., Prehn, K., Lammers, C. H., van der
Meer, E., et al. (2006). A neural network reflecting individual differences in cognitive
processing of emotions during perceptual decision making. Neuroimage, 33 (3), 1016–
1027.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). The primacy of perception, and other essays on
phenomenological psychology, the philosophy of art, history, and politics. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press.
Mesoudi, A., Whiten, A., & Dunbar, R. (2006). A bias for social information in
human cultural transmission. Br J Psychol, 97 (Pt. 3), 405–423.
Mill, J. S. (1863). Utilitarianism. London: Parker, Son, and Bourn.
Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex
function. Annu Rev Neurosci, 24, 167–202.
Miller, G. (2008). Investigating the psychopathic mind. Science, 321 (5894),
1284–1286.
Miller, G. (2008). Neuroimaging. Growing pains for fMRI. Science, 320 (5882),
1412–1414.
Miller, G. F. (2007). Sexual selection for moral virtues. Q Rev Biol, 82 (2), 97–
125.
Miller, K. R. (1999). Finding Darwin’s God: A scientist’s search for common
ground between God and evolution (1st ed.). New York: Cliff Street Books.
Miller, W. I. (1993). Humiliation: And other essays on honor, social discomfort,
and violence. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Miller, W. I. (1997). The anatomy of disgust. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Miller, W. I. (2003). Faking it. Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Miller, W. I. (2006). Eye for an eye. Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Mink, J. W. (1996). The basal ganglia: focused selection and inhibition of
competing motor programs. Prog Neurobiol, 50 (4), 381–425.
Mitchell, I. J., Heims, H., Neville, E. A., & Rickards, H. (2005). Huntington’s
disease patients show impaired perception of disgust in the gustatory and olfactory
modalities. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci, 17 (1), 119–121.
Mitchell, J. P., Dodson, C. S., & Schacter, D. L. (2005). fMRI evidence for the
role of recollection in suppressing misattribution errors: The illusory truth effect. J Cogn
Neurosci, 17 (5), 800–810.
Mitchell, J. P., Macrae, C. N., & Banaji, M. R. (2006). Dissociable medial
prefrontal contributions to judgments of similar and dissimilar others. Neuron, 50 (4),

655–663.
Mlodinow, L. (2008). The drunkard’s walk: How randomness rules our lives.
New York: Pantheon.
Moll, J., & de Oliveira-Souza, R. (2007). Moral judgments, emotions and the
utilitarian brain. Trends Cogn Sci, 11 (8), 319–321.
Moll, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Garrido, G. J., Bramati, I. E., Caparelli-Daquer, E.
M., Paiva, M. L., et al. (2007). The self as a moral agent: Linking the neural bases of
social agency and moral sensitivity. Soc Neurosci, 2 (3–4), 336–352.
Moll, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Moll, F. T., Ignacio, F. A., Bramati, I. E.,
Caparelli-Daquer, E. M., et al. (2005). The moral affiliations of disgust: A functional
MRI study. Cogn Behav Neurol, 18 (1), 68–78.
Moll, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., & Zahn, R. (2008). The neural basis of moral
cognition: sentiments, concepts, and values. Ann NY Acad Sci, 1124, 161–180.
Moll, J., Zahn, R., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Krueger, F., & Grafman, J. (2005).
Opinion: The neural basis of human moral cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci, 6 (10), 799–809.
Monchi, O., Petrides, M., Strafella, A. P., Worsley, K. J., & Doyon, J. (2006).
Functional role of the basal ganglia in the planning and execution of actions. Ann Neurol,
59 (2), 257–264.
Mooney, C. (2005). The Republican war on science. New York: Basic Books.
Mooney, C., & Kirshenbaum, S. (2009). Unscientific America: How scientific
illiteracy threatens our future. New York: Basic Books.
Moore, G. E. ([1903] 2004). Principia ethica. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
Moran, J. M., Macrae, C. N., Heatherton, T. F., Wyland, C. L., & Kelley, W. M.
(2006). Neuroanatomical evidence for distinct cognitive and affective components of self.
J Cogn Neurosci, 18 (9), 1586–1594.
Moreno, J. D. (2003). Neuroethics: An agenda for neuroscience and society. Nat
Rev Neurosci, 4 (2), 149–153.
Morse, D. (2009, March 31). Plea deal includes resurrection clause. Washington
Post, B02.
Mortimer, M., & Toader, A. (2005). Blood feuds blight Albanian lives. September
23. Retrieved July 7, 2009, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/4273020.stm.
Muller, J. L., Ganssbauer, S., Sommer, M., Dohnel, K., Weber, T., SchmidtWilcke, T., et al. (2008). Gray matter changes in right superior temporal gyrus in criminal
psychopaths. Evidence from voxel-based morphometry. Psychiatry Res, 163 (3), 213–
222.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review, 83, 435–456.
Nagel, T. (1979). Brain bisection and the unity of consciousness. In Mortal
questions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 147–164.
Nagel, T. (1979). Mortal/Questions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Nagel, T. (1986). The view from nowhere. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Nagel, T. (1995). Other minds. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Nagel, T. (1997). The last word. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Nagel, T. (1998). Conceiving the impossible and the mind body problem.
Philosophy, 73 (285), 337–352.
Narayan, V. M., Narr, K. L., Kumari, V., Woods, R. P., Thompson, P. M., Toga,

A. W., et al. (2007). Regional cortical thinning in subjects with violent antisocial
personality disorder or schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry, 164 (9), 1418–1427.
National Academy of Sciences (U.S.). Working Group on Teaching Evolution.
(1998). Teaching about evolution and the nature of science. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
National Academy of Sciences (U.S.) & Institute of Medicine (U.S.) (2008).
Science, evolution, and creationism. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Newberg, A., Alavi, A., Baime, M., Pourdehnad, M., Santanna, J., & d’Aquili, E.
(2001). The measurement of regional cerebral blood flow during the complex cognitive
task of meditation: A preliminary SPECT study. Psychiatry Res, 106 (2), 113–122.
Newberg, A., Pourdehnad, M., Alavi, A., & d’Aquili, E. G. (2003). Cerebral
blood flow during meditative prayer: Preliminary findings and methodological issues.
Percept Mot Skills, 97 (2), 625–630.
Newberg, A. B., Wintering, N. A., Morgan, D., & Waldman, M. R. (2006). The
measurement of regional cerebral blood flow during glossolalia: A preliminary SPECT
study. Psychiatry Res, 148 (1), 67–71.
Ng, F. (2007). The interface between religion and psychosis. Australas
Psychiatry, 15 (1), 62–66.
Nørretranders, T. (1998). The user illusion: Cutting consciousness down to size.
New York: Viking.
Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2004). Sacred and secular: Religion and politics
worldwide. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., Bermpohl, F., Niese, R., Pfennig, A., Pascual-Leone,
A., et al. (2004). Reciprocal modulation and attenuation in the prefrontal cortex: An
fMRI study on emotional-cognitive interaction. Hum Brain Mapp, 21 (3), 202–212.
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greck, M., Bermpohl, F., Dobrowolny, H., &
Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential processing in our brain—a meta-analysis of imaging
studies on the self. Neuroimage, 31 (1), 440–457.
Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. (2005). Evolution of indirect reciprocity. Nature,
437 (7063), 1291–1298.
Nozick, R. (1974). Anarchy, state, and utopia. New York: Basic Books.
Nunez, J. M., Casey, B. J., Egner, T., Hare, T., & Hirsch, J. (2005). Intentional
false responding shares neural substrates with response conflict and cognitive control.
Neuroimage, 25 (1), 267–277.
O’Doherty, J., Critchley, H., Deichmann, R., & Dolan, R. J. (2003). Dissociating
valence of outcome from behavioral control in human orbital and ventral prefrontal
cortices. J Neurosci, 23 (21), 7931–7939.
O’Doherty, J., Kringelbach, M. L., Rolls, E. T., Hornak, J., & Andrews, C.
(2001). Abstract reward and punishment representations in the human orbitofrontal
cortex. Nat Neurosci, 4 (1), 95–102.
O’Doherty, J., Rolls, E. T., Francis, S., Bowtell, R., & McGlone, F. (2001).
Representation of pleasant and aversive taste in the human brain. J Neurophysiol, 85 (3),
1315–1321.
O’Doherty, J., Winston, J., Critchley, H., Perrett, D., Burt, D. M., & Dolan, R. J.
(2003). Beauty in a smile: The role of medial orbitofrontal cortex in facial attractiveness.
Neuropsychologia, 41 (2), 147–155.

Oliver, A. M., & Steinberg, P. F. (2005). The road to martyrs’ square: A journey
into the world of the suicide bomber. New York: Oxford University Press.
Olsson, A., Ebert, J. P., Banaji, M. R., & Phelps, E. A. (2005). The role of social
groups in the persistence of learned fear. Science, 309 (5735), 785–787.
Osherson, D., Perani, D., Cappa, S., Schnur, T., Grassi, F., & Fazio, F. (1998).
Distinct brain loci in deductive versus probabilistic reasoning. Neuropsychologia, 36 (4),
369–376.
Parens, E., & Johnston, J. (2007). Does it make sense to speak of neuroethics?
Three problems with keying ethics to hot new science and technology. EMBO Rep, 8
Spec No, S61–64.
Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and persons. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where do you know what you
know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nat Rev Neurosci,
8 (12), 976–987.
Patterson, N., Richter, D. J., Gnerre, S., Lander, E. S., & Reich, D. (2006).
Genetic evidence for complex speciation of humans and chimpanzees. Nature, 441
(7097), 1103–1108.
Patterson, N., Richter, D. J., Gnerre, S., Lander, E. S., & Reich, D. (2008).
Patterson et al. reply. Nature, 452 (7184), E4.
Paul, G. (2009). The chronic dependence of popular religiosity upon
dysfunctional psychosociological conditions. Evolutionary Psychology, 7 (3), 398–441.
Pauli, W., Enz, C. P., & Meyenn, K. von ([1955] 1994). Writings on physics and
philosophy. Berlin; New York: Springer-Verlag.
Paulson, S. (2006). The believer. Retrieved July 24, 2009, from
www.salon.com/books/int/2006/08/07/collins/index.html.
Paulus, M. P., Rogalsky, C., Simmons, A., Feinstein, J. S., & Stein, M. B. (2003).
Increased activation in the right insula during risk-taking decision making is related to
harm avoidance and neuroticism. Neuroimage, 19 (4), 1439–1448.
Pavlidis, I., Eberhardt, N. L., & Levine, J. A. (2002). Seeing through the face of
deception. Nature, 415 (6867), 35.
Pedersen, C. A., Ascher, J. A., Monroe, Y. L., & Prange, A. J., Jr. (1982).
Oxytocin induces maternal behavior in virgin female rats. Science, 216 (4546), 648–650.
Pennisi, E. (1999). Are our primate cousins “conscious”? Science, 284 (5423),
2073–2076.
Penrose, R. (1994). Shadows of the mind. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Perry, J. (2001). Knowledge, possibility, and consciousness. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Persinger, M. A., & Fisher, S. D. (1990). Elevated, specific temporal lobe signs in
a population engaged in psychic studies. Percept Mot Skills, 71 (3 Pt. 1), 817–818.
Pessiglione, M., Schmidt, L., Draganski, B., Kalisch, R., Lau, H., Dolan, R. J., et
al. (2007). How the brain translates money into force: A neuroimaging study of
subliminal motivation. Science, 316 (5826), 904–906.
Pierre, J. M. (2001). Faith or delusion? At the crossroads of religion and
psychosis. J Psychiatr Pract, 7 (3), 163–172.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New York: Norton.
Pinker, S. (2002). The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature. New

York: Viking.
Pinker, S. (2007, March 19). A history of violence. The New Republic.
Pinker, S. (2008). The stupidity of dignity. The New Republic (May 28).
Pinker, S. (2008, January 13). The moral instinct. New York Times Magazine.
Pinker, S., & Jackendoff, R. (2005). The faculty of language: What’s special
about it? Cognition, 95 (2), 201–236.
Pizarro, D. A., & Bloom, P. (2003). The intelligence of the moral intuitions:
comment on Haidt (2001). Psychol Rev, 110 (1), 193–196; discussion 197–198.
Pizarro, D. A., & Uhlmann, E. L. (2008). The motivated use of moral principles.
(Unpublished manuscript.)
Planck, M., & Murphy, J. V. (1932). Where is science going? New York: W. W.
Norton.
Poldrack, R. A. (2006). Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging
data? Trends Cogn Sci, 10 (2), 59–63.
Polkinghorne, J. C. (2003). Belief in God in an age of science. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Polkinghorne, J. C., & Beale, N. (2009). Questions of truth: Fifty-one responses
to questions about God, science, and belief (1st ed.). Louisville, KY: Westminster John
Knox Press.
Pollard Sacks, D. (2009). State actors beating children: A call for judicial relief.
U.C. Davis Law Review, 42, 1165–1229.
Popper, K. R. (2002). The open society and its enemies (5th ed.). London; New
York: Routledge.
Popper, K. R., & Eccles, J. C. ([1977] 1993). The self and its brain. London:
Routledge.
Prabhakaran, V., Rypma, B., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2001). Neural substrates of
mathematical reasoning: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of neocortical
activation during performance of the necessary arithmetic operations test.
Neuropsychology, 15 (1), 115–127.
Prado, J., Noveck, I. A., & Van Der Henst, J. B. (2009). Overlapping and distinct
neural representations of numbers and verbal transitive series. Cereb Cortex, 20(3), 720–
729.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Chimpanzee problem-solving: A test for
comprehension. Science, 202 (4367), 532–535.
Previc, F. H. (2006). The role of the extrapersonal brain systems in religious
activity. Conscious Cogn, 15 (3), 500–539.
Prinz, J. (2001). Functionalism, dualism and consciousness. In W. Bechtel, P.
Mandik, J. Mundale, & R. Stufflebeam (Eds.), Philosophy and the neurosciences.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 278–294.
Pryse-Phillips, W. (2003). The Oxford companion to clinical neurology. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Puccetti, R. (1981). The case for mental duality: Evidence from split-brain data
and other considerations. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, (1981) (4), 93–123.
Puccetti, R. (1993). Dennett on the split-brain. Psycoloquy, 4 (52).
Putnam, H. (2007). The fact/value dichotomy and its critics. Paper presented at
the UCD Ulysses Medal Lecture. Retrieved from

www.youtube.com/watch?v=gTWKSb8ajXc&feature=player_embedded.
Pyysiäinen, I., & Hauser, M. (2010). The origins of religion: Evolved adaptation
or by-product? Trends Cogn Sci, 14 (3), 104–109.
Quiroga, R. Q., Reddy, L., Kreiman, G., Koch, C., & Fried, I. (2005). Invariant
visual representation by single neurons in the human brain. Nature, 435 (7045), 1102–
1107.
Racine, E. (2007). Identifying challenges and conditions for the use of
neuroscience in bioethics. Am J Bioeth, 7 (1), 74–76; discussion W71–74.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., Gusnard, D. A., &
Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 98
(2), 676–682.
Raine, A., & Yaling, Y. (2006). The neuroanatomical bases of psychopathy: A
review of brain imaging findings. In C. J. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp.
278–295). New York: Guilford Press.
Ramachandran, V. S. (1995). Anosognosia in parietal lobe syndrome. Conscious
Cogn, 4 (1), 22–51.
Ramachandran, V. S. (2007). The neurology of self-awareness, retrieved
December 5, 2008, from
www.edge.org/3rd_culture/ramachandran07/ramachandran07_index.html.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Blakeslee, S. (1998). Phantoms in the brain. New York:
William Morrow and Company.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hirstein, W. (1997). Three laws of qualia: What
neurology tells us about the biological functions of consciousness. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 4 (5/6), 429–457.
Range, F., Horn, L., Viranyi, Z., & Huber, L. (2009). The absence of reward
induces inequity aversion in dogs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 106 (1), 340–345.
Raskin, R., & Terry, H. (1988). A principal-components analysis of the
Narcissistic Personality Inventory and further evidence of its construct validity. J Pers
Soc Psychol, 54 (5), 890–902.
Rauch, S. L., Kim, H., Makris, N., Cosgrove, G. R., Cassem, E. H., Savage, C. R.,
et al. (2000). Volume reduction in the caudate nucleus following stereotactic placement
of lesions in the anterior cingulate cortex in humans: A morphometric magnetic
resonance imaging study. J Neurosurg, 93 (6), 1019–1025.
Rauch, S. L., Makris, N., Cosgrove, G. R., Kim, H., Cassem, E. H., Price, B. H.,
et al. (2001). A magnetic resonance imaging study of regional cortical volumes following
stereotactic anterior cingulotomy. CNS Spectr, 6 (3), 214–222.
Rawls, J. ([1971] 1999). A theory of justice (Rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA.: Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press.
Rawls, J., & Kelly, E. (2001). Justice as fairness: A restatement. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Redelmeier, D. A., Katz, J., & Kahneman, D. (2003). Memories of colonoscopy:
A randomized trial. Pain, 104 (1–2), 187–194.
Resnik, D. B. (2007). Neuroethics, national security and secrecy. Am J Bioeth, 7
(5), 14–15.
Richell, R. A., Mitchell, D. G., Newman, C., Leonard, A., Baron-Cohen, S., &
Blair, R. J. (2003). Theory of mind and psychopathy: Can psychopathic individuals read

the “language of the eyes”? Neuropsychologia, 41 (5), 523–526.
Ridderinkhof, K. R., Ullsperger, M., Crone, E. A., & Nieuwenhuis, S. (2004). The
role of the medial frontal cortex in cognitive control. Science, 306 (5695), 443–447.
Rilling, J., Gutman, D., Zeh, T., Pagnoni, G., Berns, G., & Kilts, C. (2002). A
neural basis for social cooperation. Neuron, 35 (2), 395–405.
Rodriguez-Moreno, D., & Hirsch, J. (2009). The dynamics of deductive
reasoning: An fMRI investigation. Neuropsychologia, 47 (4), 949–961.
Rolls, E. T., Grabenhorst, F., & Parris, B. A. (2008). Warm pleasant feelings in
the brain. Neuroimage, 41 (4), 1504–1513.
Rosenblatt, A., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Pyszczynski, T., & Lyon, D. (1989).
Evidence for terror management theory: I. The effects of mortality salience on reactions
to those who violate or uphold cultural values. J Pers Soc Psychol, 57 (4), 681–690.
Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179 (70), 250–
258.
Rosenthal, D. (1991). The nature of mind. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Roskies, A. (2002). Neuroethics for the new millennium. Neuron, 35 (1), 21–23.
Roskies, A. (2006). Neuroscientific challenges to free will and responsibility.
Trends Cogn Sci, 10 (9), 419–423.
Royet, J. P., Plailly, J., Delon-Martin, C., Kareken, D. A., & Segebarth, C. (2003).
fMRI of emotional responses to odors: Influence of hedonic valence and judgment,
handedness, and gender. Neuroimage, 20 (2), 713–728.
Rubin, A. J. (2009, August 12). How Baida wanted to die. New York Times,
MM38.
Rule, R. R., Shimamura, A. P., & Knight, R. T. (2002). Orbitofrontal cortex and
dynamic filtering of emotional stimuli. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci, 2 (3), 264–270.
Rumelhart, D. E. (1980). Schemata: The building blocks of cognition. In R. J.
Spiro, B. C. Bruce, & W. F. Brewer (Eds.), Theoretical issues in reading comprehension
(pp. 33–58). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ryle, G. ([1949] 1984). The concept of mind. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Sagan, C. (1995). The demon-haunted world: Science as a candle in the dark (1st
ed.). New York: Random House.
Salter, A. C. (2003). Predators: Pedophiles, rapists, and other sex offenders: Who
they are, how they operate, and how we can protect ourselves and our children. New
York: Basic Books.
Sarmiento, E. E., Sawyer, G. J., Milner, R., Deak, V., & Tattersall, I. (2007). The
last human: A guide to twenty-two species of extinct humans. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Sartre, J. P. ([1956] 1994). Being and nothingness (H. Barnes, Trans.). New York:
Gramercy Books.
Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about thinking people: The
role of the temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind.” Neuroimage, 19 (4), 1835–
1842.
Schacter, D. L. (1987). Implicit expressions of memory in organic amnesia:
learning of new facts and associations. Hum Neurobiol, 6 (2), 107–118.
Schacter, D. L., & Scarry, E. (1999). Memory, brain, and belief. Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press.
Schall, J. D., Stuphorn, V., & Brown, J. W. (2002). Monitoring and control of
action by the frontal lobes. Neuron, 36 (2), 309–322.
Schiff, N. D., Giacino, J. T., Kalmar, K., Victor, J. D., Baker, K., Gerber, M., et
al. (2007). Behavioural improvements with thalamic stimulation after severe traumatic
brain injury. Nature, 448 (7153), 600–603.
Schiffer, F., Zaidel, E., Bogen, J., & Chasan-Taber, S. (1998). Different
psychological status in the two hemispheres of two split-brain patients. Neuropsychiatry
Neuropsychol Behav Neurol, 11 (3), 151–156.
Schjoedt, U., Stodkilde-Jorgensen, H., Geertz, A. W., & Roepstorff, A. (2008).
Rewarding prayers. Neurosci Lett, 443 (3), 165–168.
Schjoedt, U., Stodkilde-Jorgensen, H., Geertz, A. W., & Roepstorff, A. (2009).
Highly religious participants recruit areas of social cognition in personal prayer. Soc
Cogn Affect Neurosci, 4 (2), 199–207.
Schmitt, J. J., Hartje, W., & Willmes, K. (1997). Hemispheric asymmetry in the
recognition of emotional attitude conveyed by facial expression, prosody and
propositional speech. Cortex, 33 (1), 65–81.
Schneider, F., Bermpohl, F., Heinzel, A., Rotte, M., Walter, M., Tempelmann, C.,
et al. (2008). The resting brain and our self: Self-relatedness modulates resting state
neural activity in cortical midline structures. Neuroscience, 157 (1), 120–131.
Schnider, A. (2001). Spontaneous confabulation, reality monitoring, and the
limbic system—a review. Brain Res Brain Res Rev, 36 (2–3), 150–160.
Schreiber, C. A., & Kahneman, D. (2000). Determinants of the remembered
utility of aversive sounds. J Exp Psychol Gen, 129 (1), 27–42.
Schrödinger, E. (1964). My view of the world (C. Hastings, Trans.). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schwartz, B. (2004). The paradox of choice: Why more is less. New York: Ecco.
Seabrook, J. (2008, November 10). Suffering souls. New Yorker, 64–73.
Searle, J. (1964). How to derive “ought” from “is”. Philosophical Review 73 (1),
43–58.
Searle, J. (2001). Free will as a problem in neurobiology. Philosophy, 76, 491–
514.
Searle, J. R. (1992). The rediscovery of the mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Searle, J. R. (1995). The construction of social reality. New York: The Free Press.
Searle, J. R. (1997). Consciousness and the philosophers. New York Review of
Books, XLIV (4).
Searle, J. R. (1998). How to study consciousness scientifically. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 353 (1377), 1935–1942.
Searle, J. R. (2000). Consciousness. Annu Rev Neurosci, 23, 557–578.
Searle, J. R. (2001). Further reply to Libet. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8
(8), 63–65.
Searle, J. R. (2007). Dualism revisited. J Physiol Paris, 101 (4–6), 169–178.
Searle, J. R., Dennett, D. C., & Chalmers, D. J. (1997). The mystery of
consciousness (1st ed.). New York: New York Review of Books.
Seeley, W. W., Carlin, D. A., Allman, J. M., Macedo, M. N., Bush, C., Miller, B.
L., et al. (2006). Early frontotemporal dementia targets neurons unique to apes and

humans. Ann Neurol, 60 (6), 660–667.
Sergent, J., Ohta, S., & MacDonald, B. (1992). Functional neuroanatomy of face
and object processing: A positron emission tomography study. Brain, 115 Pt. 1, 15–36.
Seybold, K. S. (2007). Physiological mechanisms involved in
religiosity/spirituality and health. J Behav Med, 30 (4), 303–309.
Shadlen, M. N., & Kiani, R. (2007). Neurology: An awakening. Nature, 448
(7153), 539–540.
Shadlen, M. N., & Movshon, J. A. (1999). Synchrony unbound: A critical
evaluation of the temporal binding hypothesis. Neuron, 24 (1), 67–77, 111–125.
Shadlen, M. N., & Newsome, W. T. (2001). Neural basis of a perceptual decision
in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol, 86 (4), 1916–
1936.
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Tibi-Elhanany, Y., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2007). The greeneyed monster and malicious joy: The neuroanatomical bases of envy and gloating
(schadenfreude). Brain, 130 (Pt. 6), 1663–1678.
Sheldrake, R. (1981). A new science of life: The hypothesis of formative
causation. London: Blond & Briggs.
Sheline, Y. I., Barch, D. M., Price, J. L., Rundle, M. M., Vaishnavi, S. N., Snyder,
A. Z., et al. (2009). The default mode network and self-referential processes in
depression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 106 (6), 1942–1947.
Shoebat, W. (2007). Why we want to kill you: The jihadist mindset and how to
defeat it. [United States]: Top Executive Media.
Shweder, R. A. (2006, November 27). Atheists agonistes. New York Times.
Siebert, C. (2009, July 12). Watching whales watching us. New York Times.
Siefe, C. (2000). Cold numbers unmake the quantum mind. Science, 287 (5454),
791.
Silk, J. B., Brosnan, S. F., Vonk, J., Henrich, J., Povinelli, D. J., Richardson, A.
S., et al. (2005). Chimpanzees are indifferent to the welfare of unrelated group members.
Nature, 437 (7063), 1357–1359.
Silver, L. M. (2006). Challenging nature: The clash of science and spirituality at
the new frontiers of life. New York: Ecco.
Simons, D. J., Chabris, C. F., Schnur, T., & Levin, D. T. (2002). Evidence for
preserved representations in change blindness. Conscious Cogn, 11 (1), 78–97.
Simonton, D. K. (1994). Greatness: Who makes history and why. New York:
Guilford.
Singer, P. (2009). The life you can save: Acting now to end world poverty. New
York: Random House.
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D.
(2004). Empathy for pain involves the affective but not sensory components of pain.
Science, 303 (5661), 1157–1162.
Singer, W. (1999). Striving for coherence. Nature, 397 (4 February), 391–393.
Singer, W. (1999). Neuronal synchrony: A versatile code for the definition of
relations? Neuron, 24 (1), 49–65, 111–125.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. (2006). Consequentialism. The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. Retrieved from http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consequentialism/.
Sirigu, A., Daprati, E., Ciancia, S., Giraux, P., Nighoghossian, N., Posada, A., et

al. (2004). Altered awareness of voluntary action after damage to the parietal cortex. Nat
Neurosci, 7 (1), 80–84.
Sirotin, Y. B., & Das, A. (2009). Anticipatory haemodynamic signals in sensory
cortex not predicted by local neuronal activity. Nature, 457 (7228), 475–479.
Sloman, S. A., & Lagnado, D. A. (2005). The problem of Induction. In K. J.
Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning
(pp. 95–116). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Slovic, P. (2007). “If I look at the mass I will never act”: Psychic numbing and
genocide. Judgment and Decision Making, 2 (2), 79–95.
Smeltzer, M. D., Curtis, J. T., Aragona, B. J., & Wang, Z. (2006). Dopamine,
oxytocin, and vasopressin receptor binding in the medial prefrontal cortex of
monogamous and promiscuous voles. Neurosci Lett, 394 (2), 146–151.
Smith, A., & Stewart, D. ([1759] 1853). The theory of moral sentiments (New
ed.). London: H. G. Bohn.
Snowden, J. S., Austin, N. A., Sembi, S., Thompson, J. C., Craufurd, D., &
Neary, D. (2008). Emotion recognition in Huntington’s disease and frontotemporal
dementia. Neuropsychologia, 46 (11), 2638–2649.
Snyder, S. H. (2008). Seeking God in the brain—efforts to localize higher brain
functions. N Engl J Med, 358 (1), 6–7.
Sokal, A. (1996). Transgressing the boundaries: Toward a transformative
hermeneutics of quantum gravity. Social Text (46/47), 217–252.
Sommer, M., Dohnel, K., Sodian, B., Meinhardt, J., Thoermer, C., & Hajak, G.
(2007). Neural correlates of true and false belief reasoning. Neuroimage, 35 (3), 1378–
1384.
Soon, C. S., Brass, M., Heinze, H. J., & Haynes, J. D. (2008). Unconscious
determinants of free decisions in the human brain. Nat Neurosci, 11 (5), 543–545.
Sowell, E. R., Thompson, P. M., Holmes, C. J., Jernigan, T. L., & Toga, A. W.
(1999). In vivo evidence for post-adolescent brain maturation in frontal and striatal
regions. Nat Neurosci, 2 (10), 859–861.
Spence, S. A., Farrow, T. F., Herford, A. E., Wilkinson, I. D., Zheng, Y., &
Woodruff, P. W. (2001). Behavioural and functional anatomical correlates of deception
in humans. Neuroreport, 12 (13), 2849–2853.
Spence, S. A., Kaylor-Hughes, C., Farrow, T. F., & Wilkinson, I. D. (2008).
Speaking of secrets and lies: The contribution of ventrolateral prefrontal cortex to vocal
deception. Neuroimage, 40 (3), 1411–1418.
Sperry, R. W. (1961). Cerebral organization and behavior: The split brain behaves
in many respects like two separate brains, providing new research possibilities. Science,
133 (3466), 1749–1757.
Sperry, R. W. (1968). Hemisphere deconnection and unity in conscious
awareness. Am Psychol, 23 (10), 723–733.
Sperry, R. W. (1976). Changing concepts of consciousness and free will. Perspect
Biol Med, 20 (1), 9–19.
Sperry, R. W. (1982). Some effects of disconnecting the cerebral hemispheres.
Nobel Lecture, 8 December 1981. Biosci Rep, 2 (5), 265–276.
Sperry, R. W., Zaidel, E., & Zaidel, D. (1979). Self recognition and social
awareness in the deconnected minor hemisphere. Neuropsychologia, 17 (2), 153–166.

Spinoza, B. S. F., Ed. (S. Shirley, Trans.). ([1677] 1982). The ethics and selected
letters. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
Spitzer, M., Fischbacher, U., Herrnberger, B., Gron, G., & Fehr, E. (2007). The
neural signature of social norm compliance. Neuron, 56 (1), 185–196.
Sprengelmeyer, R., Schroeder, U., Young, A. W., & Epplen, J. T. (2006). Disgust
in pre-clinical Huntington’s disease: A longitudinal study. Neuropsychologia, 44 (4),
518–533.
Squire, L. R., & McKee, R. (1992). Influence of prior events on cognitive
judgments in amnesia. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 18 (1), 106–115.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences in reasoning:
Implications for the rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–726.
Stark, R. (2001). One true God: Historical consequences of monotheism.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Steele, J. D., & Lawrie, S. M. (2004). Segregation of cognitive and emotional
function in the prefrontal cortex: A stereotactic meta-analysis. Neuroimage, 21 (3), 868–
875.
Stenger, V. A. (2009). The new atheism: Taking a stand for science and reason.
New York: Prometheus Books.
Stewart, P. (2008, May 29). Vatican says it will excommunicate women priests.
Reuters.
Stoller, S. E., & Wolpe, P. R. (2007). Emerging neurotechnologies for lie
detection and the Fifth Amendment. American Journal of Law & Medicine, 33, 359–375.
Stone, M. H. (2009). The anatomy of evil. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Strange, B. A., Henson, R. N., Friston, K. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2001). Anterior
prefrontal cortex mediates rule learning in humans. Cereb Cortex, 11 (11), 1040–1046.
Swick, D., & Turken, A. U. (2002). Dissociation between conflict detection and
error monitoring in the human anterior cingulate cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 99
(25), 16354–16359.
Tabibnia, G., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2008). The sunny side of
fairness: Preference for fairness activates reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness
activates self-control circuitry). Psychol Sci, 19 (4), 339–347.
Takahashi, H., Kato, M., Matsuura, M., Mobbs, D., Suhara, T., & Okubo, Y.
(2009). When your gain is my pain and your pain is my gain: Neural correlates of envy
and schadenfreude. Science, 323 (5916), 937–939.
Tarski, A. (1969). Truth and proof. Sci Am., 220 (6), 63–77.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., & Shafto, P. (2007). Theory-based Bayesian models
of inductive reasoning. In A. Feeney & E. Heit (Eds.), Inductive reasoning:
Experimental, developmental, and computational approaches (pp. 167–204). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Teresi, D. (1990). The lone ranger of quantum mechanics. New York Times.
Thompson, J. J. (1976). Letting die, and the trolley problem. The Monist, 59 (2),
204–217.
Tiihonen, J., Rossi, R., Laakso, M. P., Hodgins, S., Testa, C., Perez, J., et al.
(2008). Brain anatomy of persistent violent offenders: More rather than less. Psychiatry
Res, 163 (3), 201–212.
Tom, S. M., Fox, C. R., Trepel, C., & Poldrack, R. A. (2007). The neural basis of

loss aversion in decision-making under risk. Science, 315 (5811), 515–518.
Tomasello, M. (2007, January 13). For human eyes only. New York Times.
Tomlin, D., Kayali, M. A., King-Casas, B., Anen, C., Camerer, C. F., Quartz, S.
R., et al. (2006). Agent-specific responses in the cingulate cortex during economic
exchanges. Science, 312 (5776), 1047–1050.
Tononi, G., & Edelman, G. M. (1998). Consciousness and complexity. Science,
282 (5395), 1846–1851.
Trinkaus, E. (2007). Human evolution: Neandertal gene speaks out. Curr Biol, 17
(21), R917–919.
Trivers, R. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of
Biology, 46 (Mar.), 35–57.
Trivers, R. (2002). Natural selection and social theory: Selected papers of Robert
L. Trivers. New York: Oxford University Press.
Turk, D. J., Heatherton, T. F., Kelley, W. M., Funnell, M. G., Gazzaniga, M. S.,
& Macrae, C. N. (2002). Mike or me? Self-recognition in a split-brain patient. Nat
Neurosci, 5 (9), 841–842.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases. Science, 185 (4157), 1124–1131.
Ullsperger, M., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2003). Error monitoring using external
feedback: Specific roles of the habenular complex, the reward system, and the cingulate
motor area revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci, 23 (10),
4308–4314.
Valdesolo, P., & DeSteno, D. (2006). Manipulations of emotional context shape
moral judgment. Psychol Sci, 17 (6), 476–477.
Van Biema, D. (2006, July 10). Reconciling God and science. Time.
van Leijenhorst, L., Crone, E. A., & Bunge, S. A. (2006). Neural correlates of
developmental differences in risk estimation and feedback processing. Neuropsychologia,
44 (11), 2158–2170.
van Veen, V., Holroyd, C. B., Cohen, J. D., Stenger, V. A., & Carter, C. S.
(2004). Errors without conflict: Implications for performance monitoring theories of
anterior cingulate cortex. Brain Cogn, 56 (2), 267–276.
Viding, E., Jones, A. P., Frick, P. J., Moffitt, T. E., & Plomin, R. (2008).
Heritability of antisocial behaviour at 9: Do callous-unemotional traits matter? Dev Sci,
11 (1), 17–22.
Vocat, R., Pourtois, G., & Vuilleumier, P. (2008). Unavoidable errors: A
spatiotemporal analysis of time-course and neural sources of evoked potentials associated
with error processing in a speeded task. Neuropsychologia, 46 (10), 2545–2555.
Vogel, G. (2004). Behavioral evolution. The evolution of the golden rule. Science,
303 (5661), 1128–1131.
Vogeley, K., Bussfeld, P., Newen, A., Herrmann, S., Happé, F., Falkai, P., et al.
(2001). Mind reading: Neural mechanisms of theory of mind and self-perspective.
Neuroimage, 14 (1 Pt. 1), 170–181.
Vogeley, K., May, M., Ritzl, A., Falkai, P., Zilles, K., & Fink, G. R. (2004).
Neural correlates of first-person perspective as one constituent of human selfconsciousness. J Cogn Neurosci, 16 (5), 817–827.
Voight, B. F., Kudaravalli, S., Wen, X., & Pritchard, J. K. (2006). A map of

recent positive selection in the human genome. PLoS Biol, 4 (3), e72.
Wade, N. (2006). Before the dawn: Recovering the lost history of our ancestors.
New York: Penguin.
Wade, N. (2010, March 1). Human culture, an evolutionary force. New York
Times.
Wager, T. D., & Nichols, T. E. (2003). Optimization of experimental design in
fMRI: A general framework using a genetic algorithm. Neuroimage, 18 (2), 293–309.
Wager, T. D., Rilling, J. K., Smith, E. E., Sokolik, A., Casey, K. L., Davidson, R.
J., et al. (2004). Placebo-induced changes in fMRI in the anticipation and experience of
pain. Science, 303 (5661), 1162–1167.
Wain, O., & Spinella, M. (2007). Executive functions in morality, religion, and
paranormal beliefs. Int J Neurosci, 117 (1), 135–146.
Wakin, D. J., & McKinley Jr., J. C. (2010, May 2). Abuse case offers a view of
the Vatican’s politics. New York Times.
Waldmann, M. R., & Dieterich, J. H. (2007). Throwing a bomb on a person
versus throwing a person on a bomb: Intervention myopia in moral intuitions. Psychol
Sci, 18 (3), 247–253.
Waldmann, M. R., Hagmayer, Y., & Blaisdell, A. P. (2006). Beyond the
information given: Causal models in learning and reasoning. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 15 (6), 307–311.
Waters, E. (2010, January 8). The Americanization of mental illness. New York
Times Magazine.
Watson, G. (1982). Free will. Oxford, UK; New York: Oxford University Press.
Weber, M. ([1922] 1993). The sociology of religion. Boston: Beacon Press.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The illusion of conscious will. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Wegner, D. M. (2004). Precis of the illusion of conscious will. Behav Brain Sci,
27 (5), 649–659; discussion 659–692.
Weinberg, S. (2001). Facing up: Science and its cultural adversaries. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Westbury, C., & Dennett, D. C. (1999). Mining the past to construct the future:
Memory and belief as forms of knowledge. In D. L. Schacter & E. Scarry (Eds.),
Memory, brain, and belief (pp. 11–32). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Westen, D., Blagov, P. S., Harenski, K., Kilts, C., & Hamann, S. (2006). Neural
bases of motivated reasoning: An fMRI study of emotional constraints on partisan
political judgment in the 2004 U.S. presidential election. J Cogn Neurosci, 18 (11),
1947–1958.
Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G.
(2003). Both of us disgusted in my insula: The common neural basis of seeing and feeling
disgust. Neuron, 40 (3), 655–664.
Wicker, B., Ruby, P., Royet, J. P., & Fonlupt, P. (2003). A relation between rest
and the self in the brain? Brain Res Rev, 43 (2), 224–230.
Wigner, E. (1960). The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural
sciences. Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics, 13 (1).
Williams, B. A. O. (1985). Ethics and the limits of philosophy. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Wilson, D. S. (2002). Darwin’s cathedral: Evolution, religion, and the nature of
society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, D. S., & Wilson, E. O. (2007). Rethinking the theoretical foundation of
sociobiology. Q Rev Biol, 82 (4), 327–348.
Wilson, E. O. (1998). Consilience: The unity of knowledge (1st ed.). New York:
Knopf.
Wilson, E. O. (2005). Kin selection as the key to altruism: Its rise and fall. Social
Research, 72 (1), 159–166.
Wilson, E. O., & Holldobler, B. (2005). Eusociality: Origin and consequences.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 102 (38), 13367–13371.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). Philosophical grammar (A. Kenny, Trans.). Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Woolrich, M. W., Ripley, B. D., Brady, M., & Smith, S. M. (2001). Temporal
autocorrelation in univariate linear modeling of fMRI data. Neuroimage, 14 (6), 1370–
1386.
Wright, N. T. (2003). The resurrection of the Son of God. London: SPCK.
Wright, N. T. (2008). Surprised by hope: Rethinking heaven, the resurrection,
and the mission of the church (1st ed.). New York: HarperOne.
Yang, T., & Shadlen, M. N. (2007). Probabilistic reasoning by neurons. Nature,
447 (7148), 1075–1080.
Yang, Y., Glenn, A. L., & Raine, A. (2008). Brain abnormalities in antisocial
individuals: Implications for the law. Behav Sci Law, 26 (1), 65–83.
Yang, Y., Raine, A., Colletti, P., Toga, A. W., & Narr, K. L. (2009). Abnormal
temporal and prefrontal cortical gray matter thinning in psychopaths. Mol Psychiatry, 14
(6), 561–562.
Ye’or, B. (2005). Eurabia: The Euro-Arab Axis. Madison, NJ: Fairleigh
Dickinson University Press.
Yong, E. (2008). The evolutionary story of the “language gene.” New Scientist
(2669) Aug. 13, pp. 38–41.
Young, L. J., Lim, M. M., Gingrich, B., & Insel, T. R. (2001). Cellular
mechanisms of social attachment. Horm Behav, 40 (2), 133–138.
Young, L. J., & Wang, Z. (2004). The neurobiology of pair bonding. Nat
Neurosci, 7 (10), 1048–1054.
Yu, A. J., & Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention.
Neuron, 46 (4), 681–692.
Zaidel, E., Iacoboni, M., Zaidel, D., & Bogen, J. E. (2003). The callosal
syndromes. In Clinical Neuropsychology (pp. 347–403). Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Zaidel, E., Zaidel, D. W., & Bogen, J. (undated). The split brain. Retrieved from
www.its.caltech.edu/~jbogen/text/ref130.htm.
Zak, P. J., Kurzban, R., & Matzner, W. T. (2005). Oxytocin is associated with
human trustworthiness. Horm Behav, 48 (5), 522–527.
Zak, P. J., Stanton, A. A., & Ahmadi, S. (2007). Oxytocin increases generosity in
humans. PLoS ONE, 2 (11), e1128.
Zhang, J. X., Leung, H. C., & Johnson, M. K. (2003). Frontal activations
associated with accessing and evaluating information in working memory: An fMRI

study. Neuroimage, 20 (3), 1531–1539.
Zhu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, J., & Han, S. (2007). Neural basis of cultural influence
on self-representation. Neuroimage, 34 (3), 1310–1316.
Zuckerman, P. (2008). Society without God. New York: New York University
Press.

INDEX

The letter n after a page number means “note”; the number following an n is the
note’s number; a double nn precedes a range of note numbers.
abortion, 5, 35, 146
acetylcholine, 226n35
Adam and Eve, 40–41
adultery, 74, 91, 97
affective forecasting, 183–84
Afghanistan, 122, 196n9 , 207n17
Africa, 129, 145, 156–57
aggression, 100–101, 213n78 , 215n90 . See also violence
AIDS, 179, 200n14
Ainslie, George, 211n51
Albania, 1
albinos, 156–57
alien hand syndrome, 105, 216n104
altruism, 56, 57, 92, 101–2, 170
altruistic punishment, 92
ambiguity, 226n35
American Anthropological Association, 205n28
American Psychiatric Association, 157
Amodio, D. M., 227n40
animals:
aggression in chimps, 100
brain size of primates, 218–19n5
caudate in, 225n35
common ancestor of chimps and humans, 114, 159
communicative behavior of, 114, 218n1 , 218n5
differential rewards for, 229n61
fairness and chimps, 170, 237n90
as food source, 210–11n50
foraging behavior of, 229n61
head movements of chimps, 57
monkeys’ aversion from producing suffering in other monkeys, 170, 214n88
moral sense and, 169–70
reward system in, 9
suffering of, 171, 199n8 , 210–11n50 , 214n88
visual-decision task with monkeys, 228n61
well-being of, 41–42, 198–99n8 , 210–11n50

answers in practice versus answers in principle, 3, 30–31, 60, 191
anthropology, 19–20, 45, 145, 147, 151, 197n25 , 205–6n28 . See also specific
anthropologists
anticipated memories, 185
antidepressants, 110, 182, 230n66
antisocial behavior, 99, 213n76 , 214–15n89 . See also psychopathy
antisocial personality disorder (ASPD), 213n76
anxiety, 97–98
aphasia, 159
Aristotle, 195n9
Asian Disease Problem, 140–41
ASPD. See antisocial personality disorder (ASPD)
atheism, 234–35n64 . See also New Atheists; secular liberals
Atran, Scott, 155–56, 205n28
“autonomous hand,” 216n104
aversive sounds, 77
Babiak, P., 214n87
Bad Life versus Good Life, 15–21, 38–42
Ball, Philip, 137–39
Barrett, Justin, 151
Bechara, A., 228n61
beehive approach to morality, 89
belief:
adoption of, for feeling better, 137–39
bias and, 122–26, 137, 226n36
brain science on, 11, 14, 116–22, 197n22
definitions of, 117
different categories of, 139–40
ethical beliefs, 14
extraneous information and/or context as influence on, 140–42
factual beliefs, 14
freedom of, 136–44
inseparability of reasoning and emotion, 126–31
internet’s influence on, 123
as intrinsically epistemic, 138
knowledge as, 115, 196–97n22
lie detection and, 133–36
meaning of, 115–18, 219–20n15
memory and, 116
mental properties of, 136–40
motivation for, 126
reasoning and, 122, 131–33
religious belief, 137–38, 148–54
science and, 144
wrong beliefs, 21
Benedict, Pope, 200n14

Benedict, Ruth, 20, 60–62
Bentham, Jeremy, 207n12
bias:
adaptive fitness versus, 226–27n38
belief and, 122–26, 137, 226n36
decisional conflict, 231n75
definition of, 132
endowment effect and, 75
factors causing, 226n36
internet’s influence on, 123
knowledge and, 123–24
of liberals, 125–26
loss aversion, 75–77, 209n35
medical decisions and, 143, 231n75
of parents, 73
of political conservatives, 124–25
in reasoning, 132, 142–43
of science, 47
sins of commission versus sins of omission, 77
truth bias, 120, 223n26
unconscious and, 122–23
Bible, 3, 34, 38, 150, 166, 236–37n82
Biblical Creationism, 34, 37, 151, 202n19
Bin Laden, Osama, 5
Bingham, Roger, 5–6, 23
BioLogos Foundation, 169
birth control. See contraception
birthday wishes, 30–31
Blackford, Russell, 204n24
Blair, James, 99, 214n87 , 214n88
Bloom, Paul, 151
Boas, Franz, 20
Bohr, Niels, 179
Bowles, Samuel, 101
Boyer, Pascal, 150–51
brain science:
Bad Life versus Good Life, 17–18
on belief, 11, 14, 116–22, 197n22
on change, 8
on cooperation, 55–56, 59, 61–62
on cultural norms, 9–10
on depression, 30
on disgust, 153, 212n64 , 224–25n34 , 233n48
early childhood experience and, 9–10
emotional circuitry of, and moral intuitions, 89, 212n71
on envy, 222n18

evolution of, 13
on facial recognition, 223n22
fears about progress in, 110
feedback and, 225–26n35
fundamental processes of, as self-generated, 103–4
illusion of free will and, 102–5, 110
and influences on well-being, 64
information processing and, 102–3, 117–18
interconnectivity and, 119–20, 222n19
on loss aversion, 75, 209n35
maximization of well-being of self and others, 83–85
on memory and language processing, 212n58 , 212n71
mind as product of physical brain, 110
modularity in brain organization, 220–22n18
on moral cognition, 91–95
on moral responsibility, 216–17n109
on motivated reasoning, 227n44
multiple functions of brain regions, 119–20, 212n64 , 212n71 , 220–22n18 , 224–
26nn34–35
on neuroethics, 206n37
on psychopaths, 97–98, 204n24 , 213n78 , 214–15 nn 89–90
on reasoning, 228n61
religion and, 152–54, 233nn48–49, 234n54
reward system, 92–93, 98, 153, 212n63
on schadenfreude, 222n18
split-brain research, 212n58 See also brain structures; neuroimaging research
brain structures:
amygdala, 128
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 154, 222n18 , 225–26n35 , 227n40
anterior insula, 153, 224–25n34 , 233n48
anterior temporal lobe, 234n54
basal ganglia, 225–26n35
caudate nucleus in, 225–26n35
dorsal striatum, 226
frontal lobes of, 93, 118–19, 213n78 , 223n22
fusiform gyrus in, 222–23n22
“grandmother cells,” 222n20
gray matter, 214–15n89
hippocampus, 234n54
insula, 119, 233n48
lateral prefrontal cortex, 228n61
limbic system, 103, 217n109
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), 93–94, 107, 108, 120–22, 153, 222n18 , 223–
24nn27–28
medial temporal lobes, 223n22 , 234n54
motor regions, 103

nucleus accumbens, 98, 212n63
parahippocampal gyrus, 234n54
paralimbic system, 215n90
posterior medial cortex, 234n54
prefrontal cortex (PFC), 91–93, 103, 107, 120, 214–15n89 , 223n23 , 228n61 ,
230n66
retrosplenial cortex, 234n54
temporal lobes, 91–92, 223n22 , 234n54
ventral striatum, 153
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, 228n61
white matter, 214n89 , 223n23 See also brain
Brown, Andrew, 173
Bundy, Ted, 205n24
Burton, Robert, 127–29
Bush, George W., 88, 197n28
cancer, 87, 101, 143, 202n17
capital punishment, 128, 136
Carroll, Sean, 203n20
Casebeer, William, 195–96n9
categorical imperative, 81–82, 199n10
Catholic Church, 34–35, 146, 149, 179, 199–202nn14–15, 237n82 . See also
religion
children:
callousness/unemotional trait in, 99, 213n78
care about other people’s children, 40
corporal punishment of, 3, 214n88
decision to have children, 187–88
disgust felt by, 224n34
early experience of, 9–10
hospital care of, 76–77
infants’ ability to follow a person’s gaze, 57
infants’ perception of aggressors, 206n35
in Israeli kibbutzim, 73
kindness for, 38
murder of infant by religious conservatives, 158
neglect and abuse of, 9, 35, 95–96, 107–8, 199–201n14
in orphanages, 9, 200n14
parents’ attachment to, 73
religion and, 151
self-regulation of, 223n23
sexual abuse scandal in Catholic Church, 35, 199–201n14
China, 67
Christianity. See religion
Churchland, Patricia, 68, 101–2, 196n18 , 210n49
cingulotomy, 226n35
Cleckley, H. M., 214n87

Clinton, Bill, 133
cognitive bias. See bias
Cohen, Jonathan, 217–18n111
Cohen, Mark, 152, 229n62 , 232n19
Collins, Francis, 160–74, 235n69 , 236n77
colonoscopies, 77, 184
common sense dualists, 151
communication. See language
compatibilism, 217n111
computational theory, 220n17
conduct disorder, 213n76
confirmation bias, 223n26
consciousness, 32–33, 41–42, 62, 108–9, 158–59, 221–22n18 , 235n66
consensus, 31–32, 34, 198, 198n6
consequentialism, 62, 67–73, 207n12 , 208n20 , 210–11n50
conservatives. See political conservatives; religious conservatives
“consilience” in science, 8
conspiracy theories, 88–89, 212n57
contraception, 35, 48, 63, 179
contractual approach to morality, 89
contractualism, 78–79
cooperation, 55–62, 92, 99–100, 189, 207n7
corporal punishment, 3, 214n88
Cotard’s delusion, 127
Cox, D. D., 229n62
Coyne, Jerry, 232n19
Creationist “science,” 34, 37, 151, 202n19 , 237n97
Crick, Francis, 47
criminal justice system, 106, 109, 110–11, 135–36. See also murder; prisons
cultural norms, 9–10
cultural relativism, 20–21, 45–46
“culture wars.” See religious conservatives; secular liberals
Dahmer, Jeffrey, 18–19, 34
Damasio, Antonio, 126
Danish cartoon controversy, 74–75, 179
Darwin, Charles, 13, 56
Dawkins, Richard, 23, 174
De Grey, Aubrey, 12
De Oliveira-Souza, Ricardo, 91–92, 213n78
death, 35, 125, 143. See also murder
deception, 133–36, 229n62 , 229–30n66
decision making, 228–29n61
decisional conflict, 231n75
deduction, 131–32
Delgado, M. R., 226n35
delusions, 157

Dennett, Daniel, 48, 68, 105, 174, 217n111
depression, 22, 30, 182
determinism, 105, 217–18n111
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), 157
Diamond, Jared, 100–101, 110–11
disbelief, 120–22, 225–26n35 , 229n62 , 233n48 . See also belief; uncertainty
disgust, 153, 181, 212n64 , 224–25n34 , 233n48
diversity, bewildered by, 85–91
Dobu islanders, 60–62
dogmatism, 22–23, 53, 124–25. See also religion
dopamine, 128, 152, 227n51
Douglas, Pamela, 229n62
DSM-IV, 157
Edelman, G. M., 196n16
Edgerton, Robert, 20, 197n25
Einstein, Albert, 179, 202n18 , 236n77
Elliot, R., 228n61
embryonic stem-cell research, 5, 23, 171–73
emotions, 89, 126–31, 210n49 . See also specific emotions, such as happiness
empathy, 99, 177
endowment effect, 75
envy, 222n18
ethics. See morality; values; and headings beginning with moral
Europe, 5, 145–46
Evans, Margaret, 151
evil, 27, 64–66, 100–102, 108, 109, 189–90. See also psychopathy
evolution, 11, 13–14, 36, 48–53, 56–57, 147–52, 161, 175, 207–8n19 , 216n101 ,
237–38n99
experiencing self, 184–87
extension neglect, 208n25
facts, 4, 5–6, 10–14, 24–25, 122, 143–44. See also knowledge; science
fairness, 77–82, 89–90, 170, 209n42 , 209n45 , 237n90
faith. See belief; religion
fatalism versus determinism, 105
feedback, 225–26n35
feminist epistemology, 47–48
fetus in fetu, 171–72
Fifth Amendment, 135
Flanagan, Owen, 195–96n9
fMRI. See neuroimaging research
Fodor, Jerry, 11
food, 7–8, 82–83, 113–14, 197n25 , 210–11n50
Foot, P., 212n67
Fox, C. R., 209n35
Franklin, Rosalind, 47
Frederick, S., 208n25

free will, 102–6, 110–12, 206n37 , 215n97 , 216n102 , 217–18n111
freedom of belief, 136–44
Freud, Sigmund, 145
Friedman, Thomas, 202n19
Frith, Chris, 127, 128
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). See neuroimaging research
gay marriage, 5, 53, 86, 191
Gazzaniga, Michael, 216–17n109
Geertz, Clifford, 205n28
genital mutilation of females, 27, 42, 46
genocide, 133, 191, 219n7
genocide neglect, 69
Gilbert, Daniel, 183
God. See religion
Gold, J. I., 228n61
good/goodness:
Bad Life versus Good Life, 15–21, 38–42, 195–96n9
bewildered by diversity and, 85–91
cooperation and, 55–62, 92, 99–100, 189, 207n7
definition of, 12
difficulty of being good, 82–85
fairness and hierarchy, 77–82, 209n42
Greene on, 64–66, 208n20
Kahneman on, 75
Moore on open question argument, 10, 12
moral brain and, 91–95
moral paradox and, 67–77
moral responsibility and, 106–12, 216–17n109
Plato on, 30
pleasure and, 196n20
Rawls on, 210n46
of suffering, 21–22 See also happiness; well-being; and headings beginning with
moral
Gould, Stephen J., 6
Greene, Joshua, 64–66, 86, 94, 208n20 , 212n71 , 217–18n111
Haidt, Jonathan, 50, 85–91, 180–81, 238n3
Haiti earthquake, 68
Haldane, J. B. S., 56
Hamilton, William, 56
happiness:
Bad Life versus Good Life, 15–21, 38–42
care about others’ happiness, 57–59
difficulties in study of, 182–83
future of, 177–91
inaccurate intuitions about, 183
kindness versus cruelty for, 8, 80

maximization of, for self and others, 83–85
of parents, 73, 187–88
positive psychology on, 181–84
religion’s contribution to, 231–32n15
in secular societies, 231–32n15 See also good/goodness; well-being
Harding, Sandra, 47
Hare, Robert, 97, 214n87
harm, 89–90, 181, 238n3 . See also evil; psychopathy
Hawking, Stephen, 236n77
health, 7–8, 11–12, 21, 22, 35–37, 47, 143, 195n3 , 197n25 , 202n17 , 231n75 .
See also medications; medicine
Heisenberg, Martin, 103–4
Hirsi Ali, Ayaan, 46, 207n17
Hitchens, Christopher, 174
homelessness, 70–71
homosexuality, 63, 74, 179, 233n48 , 235n64 . See also gay marriage
Hood, Bruce, 151
human ancestors, 114, 159, 190, 218–19n5
Human Genome Project, 160, 164–65, 235n69
Hume, David, 10, 38, 42, 196n13 , 196n16 , 203n20 , 237n82
hypocrisy, 90
identifiable victim effect, 69, 208n25
illness. See health
illusory-truth effect, 223n26
in-group versus out-group, 90, 101–2
Inbar, Y., 233n48
indirect reciprocity, 206–7n7
induction, 131–32, 227n57
inequality. See race and racism; socioeconomic inequality
information processing, 102–3, 117–18, 220n17
instrumental aggression, 213n78 , 215n90
intelligent design. See Creationist “science”
internet, 123, 187
intolerance, 138–39, 173–74
involuntary actions, 105–6
Inzlicht, M., 227n40
Iraq, 122, 202–3n19
is/ought distinction, 38, 42, 196n13 , 203–4nn21–22
Islam:
British Muslims, 90, 212n60
and Danish cartoon controversy, 74–75, 179
liberal view of threat of, 90
martyrdom and jihad in, 23, 63, 74, 155–56
punishment of apostates and, 74–75, 90
Qur’an and, 78, 89
socioeconomic status of radicals, 231n8

war against radical Islam, 5, 202–3n19 See also religion
Israeli kibbutzim, 73
jealousy, 50–53
Jeffries, Jim, 178
Johnson, Jack, 178
Jost, John, 124–25
Joyce, Richard, 207–8n19
Judaism. See religion
justice, 78–80, 106, 109, 110–11, 135–36, 209n42 . See also criminal justice
system
Kahneman, Daniel, 75, 184–87, 208n25
Kant, Immanuel, 81–82, 199n10 , 204n24 , 210n45 , 210n49
Kaplan, Jonas T., 153
Kapogiannis, D., 233n48
Kiehl, Kent, 215n90
kin selection, 56, 57
kindness, 8, 38, 80
Kirshenbaum, Sheril, 174–76
knowledge, 11, 31, 115, 116, 123–24, 127–31, 196–97n22 , 203n19 . See also
facts
Konner, Mel, 205n28
Kroto, Harold, 23
Ku Klux Klan, 41, 178. See also race and racism
language, 114–15, 131, 151, 159, 212n58 , 218n1 , 218n5 , 219nn7–8
The Language of God (Collins), 160–73
legal system. See criminal justice system; justice
Lewis, C. S., 162–63
liberals. See secular liberals
libertarianism, 217n111
Libet, Benjamin, 103, 215n97
lie detection, 44, 133–36, 206n37 , 229–30n66 , 230–31n69
loss aversion, 75–77, 209n35
Mackie, J. L., 198n4
Manson, Charles, 162
Mao Zedong, 23
Marr, David, 220n17
martyrdom, 23, 63, 74, 155
Marx, Karl, 145
mathematics, 235–36n76
McGonigal, Jane, 208n27
Mead, Margaret, 20
medications, 83, 84, 110, 230n66
medicine, 36, 37, 47, 77, 143, 184, 202n17 , 231n75 . See also health
memes, 20–21
memory, 116, 212n71 , 234n54
Mill, John Stuart, 5, 199n10 , 207n12

Miller, Geoffrey, 56
Miller, Kenneth, 173, 237n97
Miller, William Ian, 215n93
mind, 83–85, 110, 119, 158–59, 180. See also brain science; brain structures;
theory of mind
misogyny, 43, 196n9
Moll, Jorge, 91–92, 212n64 , 213n78
Monty Hall Problem, 86, 211–12n54
Mooney, Chris, 174–76
Moore, G. E., 10, 12, 196n16
moral brain, 91–95
moral experts, 36, 198n6 , 202n17
moral landscape:
Bad Life and Good Life in, 15–21, 38–42
facts and values in, 10–14
flawed conceptions of morality and, 53
importance of belief and, 14
meaning of, 7–10
moral progress and, 177–79, 188, 191
problem of religion and, 2, 22–25
suffering and, 21–22 See also morality; values; and headings beginning with
moral
moral law, 33, 38, 161, 169–70
moral paradox, 67–77
moral persuasion, 49–50
moral philosophy, 81–82, 197–98n1 , 199n10 , 225n35 . See also specific
philosophers
moral realism, 62, 64–67
moral relativism, 27, 36, 45–46, 191, 204n21 , 205n28
moral responsibility, 106–12, 216–17n109
moral science, 46–53
moral truth:
answers in practice and answers in principle for, 3, 30–31, 60, 191
consensus and, 31–32, 34
difficulties in discussion of, 27–38
disagreements concerning, 35–37
Hume’s is/ought distinction, 38, 42, 196n13
moral blindness in name of tolerance, 42–46
moral controversy and nullification of possibility of, 85–86
objectivity versus subjectivity and, 29–31, 198n4
religion and, 2, 33, 46, 62–63, 78, 146, 191
scientific context for, 1–4, 28, 46–53
scientists’ reluctance to take stand on, 6–7, 10–11, 22–25, 191
well-being related to, 1–4, 6, 28, 32–37, 87, 203–4n21
and worst possible misery for everyone, 38–42, 204n22
morality:

brain regions affecting moral cognition, 91–95
chess compared with, 8, 207n17
contractual versus beehive approaches to, 89
evil and, 100–102
evolutionary origins of, 50–53
Greene on, 64–66, 208n20
Haidt on, 85–91, 180–81
illusion of free will and, 102–6, 110–12, 215n97 , 216n102 , 216–17n102
inaccuracy of intuitive morality, 36
interchangeability of perspective and, 80–81
intractability of disagreements on, 87–88
liberal notions of, 86–87
loss aversion and, 75–77, 209n35
motivation for, 91–92
norms of, 80–82
peak/end rule and, 77
personal versus impersonal moral dilemmas, 93–95, 213–14n79
principles versus universal conception of, 8
recent development of, 59
religion and, 2, 33, 46, 62–63, 78, 146, 191
right and wrong answers about well-being, 64–67
scientific context for, 1–4, 11, 28, 46–53, 80
universal foundation of, 190–91
well-being and moral hierarchy across human societies, 60–62
well-being related to, 1–4, 6, 28, 32–37, 87, 203–4n21 See also evil;
good/goodness; moral landscape; moral truth; values; and headings beginning with moral
motivation, 91–92, 126, 227n44
MRI. See neuroimaging research
multicultural epistemology, 47–48
murder, 1, 18–19, 34, 107–8, 108, 110–11, 133, 135–36, 158, 177–78, 205n24 .
See also violence
Muslims. See Islam
Nash, John, 205n24
National Academy of Sciences, 6, 134, 157–58, 238n99
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 6, 153, 160–62, 173, 237n96
National Research Council, 134
natural selection, 13–14, 48–49, 147–48, 149. See also evolution
naturalistic fallacy, 10
Nature (journal), 6, 137, 163–64, 168–69, 237–38n99
Nazism, 23, 35, 47, 81
Neanderthals, 114, 218–19n5
neuroeconomics, 229n61
neuroethics, 206n37
neuroimaging research:
on awareness of conscious decisions, 103
on belief, disbelief, and uncertainty, 120–22, 126, 133, 152–54, 225–26n35 ,

229n62 , 233nn48–49
on cooperation, 92, 189
on deception, 229–30n66
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 75, 103, 120–22, 126, 127, 153,
215n90 , 220–21n18 , 229n62
lie detection and, 44, 135, 230–31n69
limitations of, 220–21n18 , 222n22 , 230–31n69
on loss aversion, 75
on morality, 64
multivariate approach to, 229n62
neuroeconomics and, 229n61
neuroethics of, 206n37
on placebo effect, 230n66
on psychopathy, 97–98, 215n90
on reasoning, 132, 228–29n61
on religion, 152–54, 233nn48–49
reverse inference problem in, 212n71 , 224n34
violence and medial prefrontal cortex tumor, 107
See also brain science; brain structures
neuroscience. See brain science; brain structures
New Atheists, 174–75
New Guinea, 110–11
NIH. See National Institutes of Health (NIH)
non-cognitivism, 225n35
norepinephrine, 226n35
Nozick, Robert, 210–11n50
nutrition. See food
Obama, Barack, 43, 160, 172
objectivity, 11, 29–31, 30–31, 47, 48, 198n4
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 127, 152, 226n35
open question argument, 10, 12
ought, 38, 42, 196n13 , 203nn21–22
out-group versus in-group, 90, 101–2
oxytocin, 9, 44, 205n26
paradox. See moral paradox
Parfit, Derek, 71–72, 208n29 , 208–9n30
Paul, Gregory, 146, 147
PCL-R. See Psychopathy Checklist—Revised (PCL-R)
peak/end rule, 77, 184
permanent defection orientation, 99–100
philosophy, 62, 179–81. See also moral philosophy; and specific philosophers
physicalism, 179–80
physics, 36, 48, 53, 87, 130, 179
Pinker, Steven, 13, 46, 197n28 , 215n93
Pizarro, D. A., 209n36
Platonic Form of the Good, 30

Poldrack, R. A., 209n35 , 212n71
political conservatives, 124–25
Polkinghorne, John, 166
polygraphy, 134. See also lie detection
Popper, Karl, 10
Popular Religiosity Versus Secularism Scale, 146
population ethics, 68–71
pornography, 90, 95–96
positive psychology, 181–84
positive test strategy, 223n26
prayer. See religion
preference reversal, 211n51
President’s Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues, 43
President’s Council on Bioethics, 23, 197n28
prisons, 109, 212–13n75
propositional knowledge, 116, 196–97n22
psychiatric hospitals, 141–42
psychology, 77, 82, 140–42, 145, 147, 151, 181–84. See also specific
psychologists
psychopathy, 18–19, 95–100, 108, 204–5n24 , 212–14nn75–79, 214n87 , 214–
15nn89–90
Psychopathy Checklist—Revised (PCL-R), 97
punishment:
in afterlife, 18
altruistic punishment, 92
of apostates in Islam, 74–75, 90
capital punishment, 128, 136
corporal punishment, 3, 214n88
retributive justice and, 1, 106, 109, 110–11
Putnam, Hilary, 202n16
quantum mechanics, 124, 179, 215–16n101
race and racism, 45, 47, 53, 79, 146, 177–79, 235n69
randomness, 130–31
rape, 35, 43, 95–96, 199–201n14 , 232n19
rational materialism, 128
rationality. See reasoning
Rawls, John, 77, 78–81, 208n29 , 209n42 , 210n46
reactive aggression, 213n78 , 215n90
reasoning:
analogical reasoning, 227n57
belief and, 122, 131–33
biases in, 132, 142–43
emotion and, 126–31
induction versus deduction, 131–32, 227n57
motivated reasoning, 227n44
neuroimaging research on, 132, 228–29n61

religious faith versus, 158–76
syllogistic reasoning, 228n61
systematic errors in, 123
reciprocal altruism, 56, 57, 92
relativism. See cultural relativism; moral relativism
religion:
afterlife and, 18, 33
belief in God’s existence, 6–7, 25, 158, 159, 165–66
belief in Jesus, 137–38
brain science and, 128, 152–54, 232n37 , 233nn48–49, 234n54
Burton on, 129
children and, 151
cognitive templates for, 150–51
corporal punishment in schools and, 3
Einstein on, 202n18 , 236n77
in Europe, 145–46
evolution and, 147–52
God as Creator, 164
Golden Rule and, 78, 209n45
happiness from, 231–32n15
industrialization and, 145
Jesus as Son of God, 162–63, 167–68
of Judaism, 33, 38
miracles and, 167–68, 237n82
moral law and, 33, 38, 161, 169–70
morality and, 2, 33, 46, 62–63, 78, 146, 191
mysticism and, 128, 235n76
prayer and, 148, 152, 168
problems of, 6, 22–25, 157, 203n19 , 227n45
prophecies and, 154–55
reason versus, 158–76
religious practices, 148–49
resurrection of the dead, 166–67
revelation and, 78
science versus, 6, 24–25
scientists’ belief in, 159–76, 237–38n99
scriptures of, 78, 89, 150, 236–37n82
sexual abuse scandal in Catholic Church, 35, 199–201n14
significance of, 154–58, 199n9
social health of least religious countries, 146–47
societal insecurity and, 146–47
soul and, 110, 158–59, 171, 179, 235n66
states of mind at core of, 165
in United States, 145–47, 149–50, 158, 234–35n64
witchcraft compared with, 129–30 See also Catholic Church; Islam
religious conservatives, 5–6, 46, 53, 86, 89, 90, 158, 180–81

remembering self, 184–87
Repugnant Conclusion argument, 71
responsibility. See moral responsibility
retributive justice, 1, 106, 109, 110–11
reverse inference problem, 212n71 , 224n34
right and wrong. See evil; good/goodness; morality; values
risk and risk tolerance, 128, 143, 226n35
Rosenhan, David L., 141–42
Ruse, Michael, 48
Rushdie, Salman, 46
Russell, Bertrand, 78
Sai Baba, Sathya, 167–68
Salk Institute, 23–24
sanity, legal definition of, 98
Savoy, R. L., 229n62
schadenfreude, 113, 222n18
schizophrenia, 127, 142, 152, 162, 195n3 , 205n24
Schrödinger, Erwin, 213n77
science:
belief and, 144
bias of, 47–48
concessions made to religious dogmatism by, 5–6, 22–23
consensus versus controversy in, 31, 198n6
“consilience” in, 8
definition of, 37
doubts about authority of, 47–48
Einstein on religion and, 202n18 , 236n77
epistemic values of, 202n16
funding for, 24
growth of scientific knowledge, 124
hostility against, by general public and governments, 24
humility of scientists, 124
hypothesis testing in, 116
moral truth and, 1–4, 28, 46–53
narrow definition of, 29
objectivity and, 29–30, 47, 48
philosophy and, 179–81
religion versus, 6, 24–25
religious beliefs of scientists, 159–76, 237–38n99
reluctance of, to take stand on moral issues, 6–7, 10–11, 22–25, 191
tools of, 29
validity in, 143–44
values and, 1–4, 11, 28, 49–53, 143–44, 189–91, 202n16 See also brain science;
brain structures; facts; neuroimaging research; and specific scientists
scientism, 46–47
SCNT. See somatic-cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)

Scripps Survey Research Center, 88
Searle, John, 29
secular liberals, 5–6, 46, 86–87, 89, 90, 125–26, 180–81
self-defeating behaviors, 82–85, 211n51
selfishness, 56, 57–59, 82, 83, 91–92, 97
sensory discrimination, 228–29n61
serotonin, 152, 232n37
sexism. See women
sexual abuse scandal in Catholic Church, 35, 199–201n14
sexual selection, 56, 57
Shadlen, M. N., 228n61
Sheldrake, Rupert, 169
Shweder, Richard A., 205n28
sins, 77, 106. See also evil
slavery, 87
Slovic, Paul, 69, 208n25
Smith, Adam, 57–59
social-intuitionist model, 85–88
socially constructed phenomena, 198
socioeconomic inequality, 24–25, 146, 231n8
sociopathy, 95, 213n78 . See also psychopathy
Sokal, Alan, 167, 236n81
somatic-cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), 172–73
soul, 110, 158–59, 171, 179, 235n66
speech. See language
Spence, S. A., 229n66
Spinoza, B. S. F., 120
Stanovich, K. E., 227n38
Stark, Rodney, 148
subjective well-being (SWB), 231–32n15 . See also well-being
subjectivity, 29–31, 77, 112, 159
Successful Societies Scale, 146
suffering:
of animals, 63, 171, 198–99n8 , 210–11n50 , 214n88
goodness of, 21–22
of homeless, 70–71
identifiable victim effect and, 69
injustice and, 80
lack of concern for, 63, 69–70, 208nn25–26
from misunderstanding emphasis on human well-being, 199n11
reduction of memory of, 77
See also psychopathy
suicide, 182. See also martyrdom
supersense, 151
Supreme Court, 106, 135
SWB. See subjective well-being (SWB)

Symons, Donald, 46
synesthete, 131
Taliban, 36–37, 42, 43
Tanzania, 156–57
TED conference, 197n1 , 204n24
Temperament and Character Inventory, 232n37
Templeton Foundation, 24, 169
teratoma, 172
terrorism, 23, 88–89, 133. See also Islam
theft prevention, 206n1
theory of mind, 98–99
Thompson, J. J., 212n67
Three Mile Island Effect, 68
tit for tat orientation, 99
tolerance of moral difference, 42–46
Tom, S. M., 209n35
Tomasello, Michael, 57
Trepel, C., 209n35
Trivers, Robert, 56
truth. See belief; facts; lie detection; moral truth
truth bias, 120, 223n26
“Twinkie defense,” 217n109
Uhlmann, E. L., 209n36
uncertainty, 120–22, 127, 154, 225–26n35
unconscious, 122–23, 128–29
unpleasant surprise principle, 81
Unscientific America (Mooney and Kirshenbaum), 174–76
utility theory, 211n51
values:
beliefs about, 14
consciousness and, 32–33, 41–42, 62
definition of, 12
evolutionary account of, 13
facts and, 4, 10–14, 24, 122, 143–44
knowledge and, 31
Mackie on objective values, 198n4
personal versus collective well-being, 42, 187–88
possibility of wrong values, 21
religious conservatives versus secular liberals on, 5–6
science and, 1–4, 11, 28, 49–53, 143–44, 189–91, 202n16
tolerance and, 42–46
well-being related to, 1–4, 6, 28, 32–37 See also evil; good/goodness; moral
landscape; moral truth; morality
vasopressin, 9
vengeance, 1, 110–11, 215n93
violence, 100–101, 107–8, 177–78, 213n75 . See also aggression; murder

voluntary actions, 105–6
Warren, Rick, 198n2
wars, 101, 122, 177, 202–3n19 , 215n93 , 219n7 , 227n38
Watson, James D., 47, 235n69
Weber, Max, 145
Weinberg, Steven, 23, 48
well-being:
affective forecasting and, 183–84
of animals, 41–42, 198–99n8 , 210–11n50
Aristotle on, 195n9
Bad Life versus Good Life, 15–21, 38–42, 195–96n9
caring about others’ well-being, 40, 57–59, 82, 83
change in, and natural laws, 12–13
consciousness and, 32–33, 41–42, 62
definition of, 11–12, 12, 39
disagreements concerning, 35–37
early childhood experience and, 9–10
and equal value of all human lives, 199n8
evolution and, 13
experiencing self and remembering self, 184–87
fairness and, 77–82, 209n42
future of happiness, 177–91
of individuals and global humanity, 33–34
justice and, 78–79
kindness and, 8, 38, 80
knowledge and, 203n19
maximization of, for self and others, 82–85
mental states and capacities influencing, 64
misunderstanding of emphasis of, 199n11
moral hierarchy of, across human societies, 60–62
morality and values related to, 1–4, 6, 28, 32–37, 87, 203–4n21
personal versus collective well-being, 42, 187–88
positive psychology on, 181–84
problems with concept of, 38–39
questions on, 34
rational understanding and scientific study of, 6, 7, 11, 41–42
religion and, 199n9
right and wrong answers about, 64–67
subjective well-being (SWB), 231–32n15
trade-offs regarding and exceptions to, 199n12
worst possible misery for everyone versus, 38–42, 204n22 See also
good/goodness; moral landscape; morality; values
West, R. F., 227n38
Westen, Drew, 227n44
Westergaard, Kurt, 74
Willingham, Cameron Todd, 136

Wilson, E. O., 48
witchcraft, 129–30
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 131
women:
antisocial behavior and, 215n89
bride burning, 42
burqas for and veiling of, 27, 42, 42–45, 65, 74, 196n9 , 207n17
forced marriage of, 42, 43
genital mutilation of females, 27, 42, 46
health issues of, 47
as priests, 34–35
as property of men, 50, 207n17
Taliban’s goals regarding, 37
See also rape
World Values Survey, 231–32n15
worst possible misery for everyone, 38–42, 204n22
Wright, N. T., 166
Zaidel, E., 216n104

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Sam Harris is the author of the New York Times bestsellers The End of Faith and
Letter to a Christian Nation. The End of Faith won the 2005 PEN Award for Nonfiction.
His writing has been published in over fifteen languages. He and his work have been
discussed in Newsweek, TIME, The New York Times, Scientific American, Nature, Rolling
Stone, and many other publications. His writing has appeared in Newsweek, The New
York Times, the Los Angeles Times, The Times (London), the Boston Globe, The Atlantic,
Annals of Neurology, and elsewhere. Dr. Harris is cofounder and CEO of Project Reason,
a nonprofit foundation devoted to spreading scientific knowledge and secular values in
society. He received a degree in philosophy from Stanford University and a PhD in
neuroscience from UCLA. His website is www.samharris.org.

