The Tim Ferriss Show Transcripts
Episode 25, 26, 27: Kevin Kelly
Show notes and links at tim.blog/podcast
Tim Ferriss:

Hello ladies and gentlemen, this is Tim Ferriss, and welcome to
another episode of The Tim Ferriss Show. And to start off, as I
often do, with a quote. This is from one of my favorite writers
of all-time, Kurt Vonnegut, and it goes as follows: "Here is a
lesson in creative writing. First rule, do not use semicolons.
They are transvestite hermaphrodites representing absolutely
nothing. All they do is show that you've been to college." I have
the habit of using dashes in the same way, so I like to read this
to remind me not to use that crutch. Also "pretty", the adverb, I
overuse that. In any case, Kurt Vonnegut, lots of lessons, lots of
amazing books. If you need one to start with, go with Cat's
Cradle.
Today's guest is Kevin Kelly. Kevin Kelly is one of the most
interesting human beings I have ever met. He's a dear friend. As
for the bio, Kevin Kelly is senior maverick at Wired Magazine
which he co-founded in 1993. He also co-founded the All
Species Foundation, a non-profit aimed at cataloging and
identifying every living species on Earth. In all his spare time,
he writes best-selling books, he co-founded the Rosetta Project,
which is building an archive of all documented human
languages, and he serves on the board of the Long Now
Foundation, which I've been honored to join as a speaker on
one occasion. As part of the Long Now Foundation, he's
looking into, among other things, how to revive and restore
endangered or extinct species, including the woolly mammoth.
I'm not making this stuff up, Kevin is amazing.
This is going to be a multi-part episode, so there'll be a number
of different podcast episodes, because we went quite long. I
hope you enjoy it. You can find all links, show notes, and so on,
once we complete the entire series, at
fourhourworkweek.com/podcast. You can also find all previous

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

episodes I've done in this podcast.
Fourhourworkweek.com/podcast, all spelled out. Without
further ado, please enjoy, and thank you for listening.
Kevin, thank you so much for being on the show.
Kevin Kelly:

It's my honor.

Tim Ferriss:

I am endlessly fascinated by all of the varied projects that you
constantly have going on. But that leads me to the first
question, which is, when you meet someone who is not familiar
with your background and they ask you the age-old "what do
you do?" question, how do you even begin to answer that?
What is your stock answer to that?

Kevin Kelly:

These days, my stock answer is that I package ideas into books
and magazines and websites, and I make ideas interesting and
pretty.

Tim Ferriss:

Ooh, I like the "pretty". We'll come back to the aesthetic aspect,
I think that's a really neglected piece of the entire puzzle.
You do have, of course, a background ... a lot of people are
familiar with your background with Wired, but perhaps you
could give folks a bit of background on yourself. Is it true that
you dropped out of college after one year?

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah, I'm a college drop-out. Actually, my one regret in life is
that one year that I came. (laughs)

Tim Ferriss:

Oh, no kidding?

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah, I wish I had just even skipped that. But I do understand
how college can be useful to people. My own children have
gone through ... But for me, it was just not the right thing, and I
went to Asia instead. I like to tell myself that I gave my own
self a PhD in East Asian studies, by traveling around and
photographing very remote parts of Asia at a time when it was
in a transition from the ancient world to the modern world. I did
many other things as well, and for me, it was a very formative

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

time, because I did enough things that when I finally got my
first real job at the age of 35 ...
Tim Ferriss:

(laughs) Wow. Which job was that?

Kevin Kelly:

I worked for a non-profit at 10 dollars an hour, which was the
Whole Earth Catalog. Which had been a life-long dream. I said
if I'm going to have a job, that was the job I want. It took me a
long time to get it. But in between that, I did many things,
including starting businesses and selling businesses, and doing
other kinds of things, more adventures. And I highly
recommend it. I got involved in starting Wired and running
Wired for a while, and hired a lot of people who were coming
right out of college. They were internists and they would do the
intern thing, and then they were good and we would hire them.
Which meant that, basically, after 10 years, whatever it was ...
this was their first and only job, and I kept telling them, "Why
are you here? What are you doing? You should be fooling
around, wasting time, trying something crazy. Why are you
working a real job? I don't understand it." I just really
recommend slack. I'm a big believer in this thing of kind of
doing something that's not productive. Productive is for your
middle ages. When you're young, you want to be prolific and
make and do things, but you don't want to measure them in
terms of productivity. You want to measure them in terms of
extreme performance, you want to measure them in extreme
satisfaction. It's a time to try stuff, and I think ...

Tim Ferriss:

Explore the extremes.

Kevin Kelly:

Exactly. Explore the possibilities, and there are so many
possibilities, and there's more every day. You don't want- it's
called "premature optimization". You really want to use this
time to continue to do things. And by the way, premature
optimization is a problem of success, too. It's not just the
problem of the young, it's the problem of the successful more
than even of the young. But we'll get to that. That's a long
answer, too. (laughs)

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

That might turn into a therapy session for me at this precise
moment in time, in fact.

Kevin Kelly:

(laughs) Yes, exactly.

Tim Ferriss:

But when you are exploring that slack, I would imagine many
people feel pressure, whether it's internal pressure or societal,
familial pressure, to get a real job, to support themselves. A lot
of the decisions are made out of fear. They worry about being
out on the streets, or it's a nebulous, terror, anxiety. How did
you support yourself, for instance, while you were traveling
through Asia when you left school?

Kevin Kelly:

I totally understand this anxiety and fear and stuff. But here's
the thing, I think one of the many life skills that you want to
actually learn at a fairly young age is the skill of being, like,
ultra-thrifty, minimal, kind of this little wisp that's traveling
through time ... in the sense of learning how little you actually
need to live, not just in a survival mode, but in a contented
mode. I learned that pretty early, by backpacking and doing
other things, especially in Asia ... was I could be very happy
with very, very little. You can go onto websites and stuff, and
look at the minimum amount of stuff- food, say, that you need
to live, your basic protein, carbohydrates, and vitamins, and
actually, if you bought them in bulk, how much it would cost. I
mean, you build your own house, live in a shelter, a tiny house.
You don't need very much.
I think trying that out, building your house on the pond, like
Thoreau, who was a hero of mine in high school, is not just a
simple exercise, it's a profound exercise, because it allows you
to get over the anxiety. Even if you aren't living like that, you
know that if the worse came to worst, you could keep going at a
very low rate and be content. That gives you the confidence to
take a risk, because you say, "What's the worst that can happen?
Well, the worst that can happen is that I'd have a backpack and
a sleeping bag, and I'd be eating oatmeal. And I'd be fine." I
think if you do that once or twice ... you don't necessarily have
to live like that, but knowing that you can be content is
tremendously empowering.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

Definitely.

Kevin Kelly:

That's what I did, that's basically what I did. Was living in Asia
where the people around me had less than I did and they were
pretty content. You realize, "Oh my gosh, I don't really need
very much to be happy."

Tim Ferriss:

Did you save up money beforehand with odd jobs, or did you
do odd jobs while on the road? A bit of both?

Kevin Kelly:

I did odd jobs before I left. I was traveling in Asia at a time
when the price differential was so great, that it actually made
sense for me to fly back on a charter flight to the US, and work
for four or five months. I worked, basically, odd jobs. I worked
from working at a warehouse packaging athletic shoes, working
in a technical sense of a ... it's really just hard to describe, but it
was a photography-related job where we're reducing printed
circuit boards down to little sizes to be shipped off to be printed
... and driving cars, to whatever else I could find. That, at that
time, made more money- I could live off of- I could live
probably two years from those couple months of work.
I didn't really work while I was traveling until I got to Iran in
the late '70s, and there was a very high-paying job which was
teaching English to the Iranian pilots who worked for the Shah.
But I had sworn I was never going to teach English, so I
actually got a job in Bell Helicopter, who was teaching English
to the pilots. But my job was running a little newsletter for the
American community there. I worked there until I was thrown
out by the coup. That was another story.

Tim Ferriss:

Now, just a couple of comments. Number one, for those people
listening who are saying to themselves, already perhaps
creating reasons why they can't do what you did now, due to
different economic climate or whatnot ... it is entirely possible
to replicate what you did. You just have to choose your
locations wisely, for that type of …

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah, absolutely.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

I should also just mention to people that part of the reason I'm
so attracted to stoic philosophy, whether that be Seneca or
Marcus Aurelius, is exactly because of the practice of poverty.
Not because you want to be poor, but so that you recognize not
only that you can subsist, but then you can potentially be
content or even, in some cases, be more content with a bare
minimum. For people who are more interested in that, I highly
recommend a lot of the stoic writings, and you can search for
those on my blog and elsewhere. But-

Kevin Kelly:

Let me just add to that. There's actually a new-age version of
that that was sort of popular a generation ago, and the search
term there is "volunteer simplicity".

Tim Ferriss:

"Volunteer simplicity"?

Kevin Kelly:

Right. The idea is, poverty is terrible when it's mandatory, when
you have no choice, but the voluntary version of that is very,
very powerful. I think attaching names sometimes to things
makes it more legitimate, but imagine yourself practicing
voluntary simplicity. That, I think, is part of that stoic
philosophy, but there's a whole movement ... a lot of the hippie
drop-outs were kind of practicing a similar thing, and there was
a whole "best practices" that resolved around that. You can
make up your own. But I think it's, to me, an essential life skill
that people should acquire. I mean, when you go backpacking
and stuff like that, that's part of it. That's the beginnings of
trying to understand what it is that you need to live as a being,
and you can fill that out in any way you want, but that's a good
way to experiment.

Tim Ferriss:

Now, you have become certainly a world-class packager of
ideas, but also at synthesizing and expressing these ideas. I love
your writing, I've consumed vast quantities of it. (laughs) In
fact, I'm here right now on Long Island where I grew up, and I
used to sneak into my parent's shed to read old editions of the
Whole Earth Catalog for inspiration. It was, I suppose, the
equivalent of my internet at the time. (laughs) And from that,
all the way to 1000 True Fans, which of course you know I
shout from the rooftops for people to read. How did you

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

develop that skill of writing and communicating? A lot of
people associate that with schooling, but it doesn't appear to be
the source for you.
Kevin Kelly:

Yeah. In high school, I would call myself a very late bloomer. I
don't recall myself having a lot of ideas. There were a lot of
other people and kids in my high school that I was very
impressed with, because they seemed to know what they
thought and were very glib and articulate, and I wasn't. I was a
little bit more visual in that sense. I was trying to decide
whether to go to art school or to MIT, because I was really
interested in science.
I set off to Asia as a photographer, so it was basically no words
at all, it was just images. And as I was traveling and seeing
these amazing things ... I mean, again, I want to emphasize that
this was sort of a ... for me, I grew up in New Jersey, I had
never left New Jersey, we never took vacations. It's hard to
describe how parochial New Jersey was back in the 1960s. I
never ate Chinese food, I never had ... I mean, I never saw
Chinese. It was a different world. And then I was thrown into
Asia and it was like, "Oh my gosh," everything I knew was
wrong. So that education was extremely, extremely powerful. I
think that that gave me something to say, and I started writing
letters home, trying to describe what I was seeing. I had a
reason to try to communicate. That was the beginning of it, but
even then, I don't think I really had much to say.
It wasn't really until the internet came along, and I had a chance
to go onto one of the first online communities in the early '80s,
and for some reason ...

Tim Ferriss:

The early '80s? That is definitely ... early days.

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah, it was in 1981. These were private, it wasn't the wideopen internet. These were little experiment- in fact, it was New
Jersey Institute of Technology in Rutgers that had this
experimental online community that I got invited on ... We can
talk about how that happened, but it was just luck and a friend.
And I found that there was something about the direct attempt

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

to just communicate with someone else in real time, just
sending them a message or something, that crystallized my
thinking. What it turned out, isTim Ferriss:

How did it crystallize your thinking? Not to interrupt, but was it
the immediate feedback loop?

Kevin Kelly:

It was the idea that ... teachers have since done a lot of studies
where they had kids write an essay on something, an
assignment, and then they would also be instructed to write
some e-mail to a friend or something. Then they would grade
both of the compositions, and they would find that, inevitably,
the e-mail that the kids were writing was much better writing.
Because when you're trying to write a composition, we have all
these attitudes, or expectations, or there's kind of this "writer-ly
sense". There's all this other garbage and luggage and baggage
on top of that. But when we're just trying to send an e-mail,
we're just directly trying to communicate something. We're not
fooling around, we're not trying to make it ...

Tim Ferriss:

Literary.

Kevin Kelly:

Literary, all that. Just direct stuff. So the writing there was
always much more direct and concrete. That's the usual thing
that happens when you're trying to write, is you're not concrete
enough. But when you e-mail, it's all concrete.
So it was getting out of the whole writer-ly stuff and just pure,
concrete communication, that really made it for me. What I
discovered, which is what many writers discover, is that I write
in order to think. It was like, "I think I have an idea," but when I
begin to write it, I realize, "I have no idea," and I don't actually
know what I think until I try and write it. Writing is a way for
me to find out what I think. It's like, I don't have any ideas, it's
true, but when I write, I get the ideas. That was the revelation.
So by being forced to communicate online, there was none of
this expectation. It was just like, "OK, just write an e-mail. I
can do that. I don't have to write an essay, I don't have to write
something nice. I'm just going to write 140 characters. I can do
that." But while I was doing that, I had an idea that I didn't have

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

before. It was like, "Oh my gosh, this is an idea-generation
machine, it's by writing. It's not that I have these ideas and I'm
going to write them down. No, no. I don't even have them until
I write them."
Tim Ferriss:

I'm so glad you brought that up, because I was just recently- a
few things related to that. I was reading an interview with Kurt
Vonnegut, who's one of my favorite authors. For people who
aren't familiar, check out Cat's Cradle perhaps, as a starting
point. Hilarious guy, and he, at various points in his career,
taught writing to make ends meet. And he would, number one,
not look for good writers, he would look for people who are
passionate about specific things.

Kevin Kelly:

Yep, right.

Tim Ferriss:

That's something I want to reiterate to people who don't feel
"writer-ly", is that ... go out and have the experiences and find
the subjects, the things that excite you. As long as you're true to
your voice, which is related to the e-mail point ... I threw out
my first two drafts of, I'd say, a third of the four-hour work
week, because they were either too pompous and ivy-leaguesounding ...

Kevin Kelly:

(laughs)

Tim Ferriss:

Way, way, way too much. I mean, horrible. Or too slapstick,
because I felt like I had to go to the other extreme. And then I
sat down and I wrote as if I were composing an e-mail to a
friend after two glasses of wine, and that's how I found my
"voice" so to speak.
As a side note, why - and I think this might be related - but why
did you promise yourself not to teach English? I'm so curious.
Because that can be very lucrative, it's readily available ... when
you were traveling, why did you commit to yourself not to
teach English?

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah, it's a good question, because there was lots of
opportunities all around the world. By the way, I recommend it
as a way for people to travel cheaply, if you want to support

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

yourself, because it is a very desirable "skill", we call it, for the
moment.
I think the reason why was I felt that ... I didn't feel like I was a
very good teacher, and I also felt that it was maybe a little easy?
But I think the main reason was that I was having trouble
imagining myself enjoying it. I just felt that I would rather try
to find something else. Now, I think I did, one time in Taiwan which as you know, has a whole cram school system - I think I
substituted for a friend once. And I think that maybe confirmed
my idea (laughter), that while there was sort of ... you know, all
I have to do is just talk, I mean, there was really not much skill
involved at all. It was fun, but I didn't feel like I was ... I don't
know, I didn't feel like I was maybe adding value or something.
I came away thinking, "You know, I guess I could do this for
money, but I'm not going to be happy."
I think it was just a personality thing. I don't think of myself as
a teacher, I don't do many workshops or classes. I think a
different person might thoroughly enjoy it and I know they do
and they have a great time doing it. For me, it was just ... not
for me.
Tim Ferriss:

Mm-hmm, got it.

Kevin Kelly:

No big deal. I think this is an important thing, is that it takes a
long time to figure out what you're good for. Part of where I'm
at right now and where I got eventually, was really trying to
spend time on doing things that only I can do. Even when I can
do something well but someone else could do it, I would try and
let that go. That's a discipline that I'm still working on, which is
not just things that I'm good at, but things that only I'm good at.
That was something I was sort of trying to start early on, which
is like, "You know, a lot of other people can do this, and they're
happy doing it. So I want to go somewhere where it requires
more of me to do, and then I'll be happier and they'll be
happier."

Tim Ferriss:

I am currently having - and I seem to have these periodically - a
crisis-of-meaning phase.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Kevin Kelly:

(laughs)

Tim Ferriss:

I'm wrestling with this exact issue. Trying to figure out what to
abandon, what to say "no" to, to refine my focus, so I can really
focus on the intersection of my unique capability or
capabilities, whatever that is, and a need of some type.
How did you figure that out ... and maybe we could approach it
from a different direction. What do you feel is your skill set or
your unique skill, and how did you figure that out?

Kevin Kelly:

Well, let me tell you the story of how this realization actually
came to me in a very concrete way, was while I was editing
Wired Magazine. Part of what Wired Magazine is about is that
we would come up with ideas and make assignments to writers.
Now, some of the articles in Wired would come from the
writers themselves, they would approach us if they have an
idea. But a lot of the articles would be assigned from editors.
We'd have editorial meetings where we'd imagine this great
article, and then we'd go and try and find someone to write it.
And in that conversation of trying to persuade writers to write
an idea that I had ... it would go through a very typical
sequence, where I would have this great idea, and then I would
try to persuade, like, one writer, two writers, three writers, and
they just didn't think it was a very good idea. They didn't like it,
they didn't want to do it, whatever it was. I'd kind of forget
about it, but then, like, six months later it would come back and
I'd say, "Oh, that was such a great idea, I really think we should
do that." And I would go again for another round of trying to
persuade people, and then I'd get no takers. And then I kind of"Oh, forget about that, it must have been a bad idea." But then,
like, six months later or a year later, it might come back, "You
know, that's still a great idea. Nobody has done that." Then I
would realize, "Oh my gosh, I need to do that!" (laughter) It
was like, "I'm the only one who can see this. I've tried to give it
away, I've tried really hard to give it away, I've tried to kill it ...
"

Tim Ferriss:

(laughs) It just keeps on coming back!

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Kevin Kelly:

Keeps coming back! And then I would do it and it would be one
of my best pieces. So I became really an important proponent of
trying to give things away first. Tell everybody what you're
doing ... basically you try to give these ideas away, and people
are happy because they love great ideas. You can- "Hey, do it,
it's a great idea. You should do it." I'd try to give everything
away first, and then I'd try to kill everything, like, "No, that's a
bad idea," and then it's the ones that keep coming back that I
can't kill and I can't give away, that I think, "Hmm, maybe that's
the one I'm supposed to do." Because no one else is going to do
it. I mean, I've been actively trying to get ... and then of course,
if someone else is doing it, you see someone else competing or
trying to do it, it was like, "Oh yeah, go ahead, do it. I'm not
going to race against you. That's crazy because there's two of
us. No, you do it." So that generosity is actually part of this
thing-

Tim Ferriss:

Your vetting process.

Kevin Kelly:

Exactly. That's when I kind of realized it.
But that doesn't answer the question of, "Well, how do you find
out what it is?" All I can say is ... and I don't want to fib, but all
I can say is, it's going to take all your life to figure that out.
That is fact. Here's what it is - figuring out is what your life is
about. (laughter) I mean, that's what life is for. Life is to figure
it out, so every part of your life, every day, is actually this
attempt to figure this out. You'll have different answers as you
go along, and sometimes there may be directions in that. But
that's basically what it is.
You were very transparent about confessing this, but I have to
tell you that even from hanging around a lot of very
accomplished people, a lot of successful people, that we would
be on the covers of magazines ... they also go through exactly
the same questioning. No matter how big of a billion-dollar
company they have, they come up to the same thing - what's my
role in all this? Why am I here, what am I useful- what am I
doing that nobody else can? It's a continuous ... In fact, as we'll
come back to, being successful makes that even more difficult.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

Why is that?

Kevin Kelly:

Because of what I call the "creator's dilemma", which is very
much the same thing as the "innovator's dilemma". It's a true
dilemma, in the sense that there's no right answer. But the
question is: is it better to optimize your strengths or to invest
into the unknown, into places where you're weak?

Tim Ferriss:

Or places you haven't explored.

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah. Any accountant in any business would tell you that it
absolutely makes more sense to take your dollar ... You'll get a
higher return by investing into what you're good at already,
whatever it is. This is pursuit of excellence, this is Tom Peters
and the whole entire movement, which is you move uphill, you
keep optimizing what you know. That, by far, is the sanest, the
most reasonable, the smartest thing to do.
But when you have a very fast-changing landscape like we live
in right now, you get stuck on a local optima, you get stuck.
The problem is, is that the only way you can get to a higher,
more fit place, is you actually have to go down. You actually
have to head into a place where you are less optimal, you have
no expertise, there's very low margins, there's low profits, you'll
look foolish, there'll be failures. And if you've been following a
line of success, that is very, very difficult to do. It's very
difficult for an organization- it's literally almost impossible for
an organization who's been excellent and successful to do, it
really is.

Tim Ferriss:

Which presents a lot of opportunity for the ... the start-ups.

Kevin Kelly:

That's why the start-ups all start there. The reason why start-ups
start is because they're operating in an environment that no
sane, big corporation would want to be in. It's a market with
low margins, low profitability, unproven, high-failure. I mean,
it's like, who wants to operate there? Nobody! The only reason
why start-ups operate is they have no choice!

Tim Ferriss:

Right. (laughs) Yeah, that's the gift of few options, right?

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Kevin Kelly:

Right, exactly. So in terms of success biting, I think you have to
be unsuccessful. Who is successful, wants to be unsuccessful?
It's very, very hard to let go of that success. That's one of the
things that works against someone really continuing on this life
journey of finding out what they're really good at it. Because
here's the thing - successful companies and successful people
generally try to solve problems with money. You buy solutions.
And we all know that money is not the full answer for
innovation. Basically, if you could purchase innovations, all the
big companies would just purchase them. It's the fact that these
innovations often have to be found out without money, through
other means. Again, that's the advantage to the start-up, and it's
a disadvantage to the successful companies because they got
money and they just want to buy solutions. But most of these
solutions you can't buy, you have to kind of engineer in this
very difficult environment of low margins, low success, low
profits, that no one really wants to be in, but the start-ups are
forced to be in.

Tim Ferriss:

That's also an advantage, I would think, for beginners or
novices compared to experts.

Kevin Kelly:

Exactly.

Tim Ferriss:

They have less vested identify, less inertia, to have to reverse.

Kevin Kelly:

And that's back to my suggestion in the beginning, of why slack
and fooling around when you're young is so important. Because
a lot of these innovations and things are found not by trying to
solve a problem that can be monetized. It's in exploring this
area without money. I mean, money is so overrated. It really ...

Tim Ferriss:

Could you elaborate on that? Because I feel like this is a
sermon I need to receive on some level.

Kevin Kelly:

(laughs) There's several things to say about. One is, obviously,
if you're struggling to pay bills and mortgages and stuff ...
there's a certain amount that's needed. But here's the thing,
accumulating enough money to do things is really a by-product
of other things. It's kind of a lubricant in a certain sense rather
than a goal.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Great wealth, extreme wealth, is definitely overrated. I've had
meals with a dozen billionaires, and they're no diff- I mean,
their lives, lifestyles are no different. You don't want to have a
billion dollars, let me put it that way. You really don't. There's
nothing that you can really do with it that you can't do with a lot
of less money. We'll set that aside.
Even just wealth itself, in this world where there is more and
more abundance ... even the money for, say, middle class is less
significant in a certain sense, in the sense that ... maybe their
status, which is really not needed, but ... The things that you
want to do, the things that will make you content, the things
that will satisfy you, the things that will bring you meaning ...
can usually- got better than having money. I mean, if you have
a lot of time or a lot of money, it's always better to have a lot of
time to do something. If you have a choice between having a lot
of friends or a lot of money, you definitely want to have a lot of
friends.
I think there's a way even in which the technological progress
that we're having is actually diminishing the role of money.
And I want to be clear that I'm talking about money beyond the
amount that you need to survive, but even that reflects back to
what we were saying earlier, which is probably less than you
think it is, to survive.
So in a certain sense, most people see money as a means to get
these other things, but there are other routes to these other
things that are deeper and more constant and more durable and
more powerful. Money is a very small, one-dimensional thing,
that if you focus on that, it kind of comes and goes. And if you
... whatever it is that you're trying to attain, you go to it more
directly through other means, you'll probably wind up with a
more powerful experience or whatever it is that you're after.
And it'll be deeper, more renewable, than coming at it with
money.
Travel is one of the great examples. Many, many people who
are working very hard, trying to save their money to retire so
they can travel. Well, I decided to flip it around and travel when
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I was really young, when I had zero money. And I had
experiences that basically even a billion dollars couldn't have
bought. And it's not an uncommon sight, let me tell you, for
young travelers who have very little money to be hanging out,
doing something, and then there'll be some very wealthy people
on their one-week organized tour, looking at these young
travelers, just saying, "I wish I had more time." (laughs)
Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, I see it almost every time I go traveling. It reminds me of
conversations I've had with Rolf Potts and also his book,
Vagabonding, which I just absolutely love. It was that book and
Walden that I took with me traveling when I had my own twoyear or so walkabout. He points out, in the beginning of
Vagabonding, that many people subscribe to the belief along
the lines of Charlie Sheen's in the movie Wall Street, when he's
asked what he's going to do when he makes his millions and he
says, "I'm going to get a motorcycle and ride across China."
(laughter) Rolf of course points out that you could clean toilets
in the US and save enough money to ride a motorcycle across
China. (laughs)

Kevin Kelly:

Exactly.

Tim Ferriss:

Let me ask you, this is maybe tangentially related, but you
mentioned earlier that your middle age ... your middle ages"middle ages" maybe sounds odd, but in your middle age, that's
when you optimize. And I find that horrifying on some level
because I am so tired ... I just turned 37 last week, and I'm
really tired of certain types of optimizing, and the incremental
slogging of making trains run slightly more efficiently on time.
Even though, like you said, from a strictly financial standpoint,
the advice that I would receive from many people and have
received when I've asked for advice is, "Here are one or two
core areas you should focus on to optimize for income." And on
the flip side, I'm tempted to approach a kind of ... not "scorched
earth" but "burned bridges" approach, where I somehow use
creative destruction to force me into another direction, to have
these new experiences that I crave so much.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

And you, just for people who aren't aware, I want to give ... I
remember going to the first ever quantified self meet-up, you're
part of the Long Now Foundation. You've experimented in so
many different arenas, and have looked so far into the future,
and thought on such grand a scale, I aspire to do more of that ...
What would be your advice to someone? I know I have dozens
of friends in the same position. They're, say, in their early- or
mid-30s, in my particular peer group, and they want to explore
but they're feeling pressured to optimize this thing that they've
suddenly found their footing with, whatever it is. Maybe they're
a venture capitalist, maybe they're in start-up, they feel they
should start a new start-up, and they want to step out of that
slipstream. What would be your advice to those people?
Kevin Kelly:

Well, first of all, I have to commend your honesty for this, and I
will repeat that it is very, very difficult to do. I mean, I think the
realization comes to people in middle age and they realize, "Oh
my gosh, there's a little bit of a routine here and I'm not really
happy with that." I think that scorched earth, that kind of, you
know, "We'll just set fire to it and we'll walk away," I actually
have ... I think we probably have a mutual friend, I won't use
his name because I don't know how public this is, but one of his
solutions was the most radical one I've ever heard, to force
himself, was that he gave up US citizenship.

Tim Ferriss:

Oh, wow. Yeah, that'll do it. (laughs)

Kevin Kelly:

He was saying, "I just feel so-" I was like, "Oh my gosh, that is
so radical." He was telling me about what is involved in that,
and it wasn't for tax purposes, because actually before you can
do it, the US actually requires that you square-up on all taxes.
But that was so radical, and I don't recommend that. (laughter)
That's all I'm saying. I mean, he's doing fine, but I'm just saying
that's unnecessary.
I think the advice is ... I'm probably taking a page from
yourself. I don't think it's necessary to ... I think you can
experiment your way through this, you can do this
incrementally. You can take small steps and do something, and
then evaluate it, test how it's going, whether you're getting what

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

you want out of it, whether it's working, and then you continue
in that direction. That's sort of the pattern of people who have
second careers or "reinvent themselves", you hear that a lot.
And you can do that in a disciplined, Tim Ferriss way. I don't
think that it requires you to walk out and leave a burning pile
behind. I think it's something that you're going to ... I'm a big
believer in doing things deliberately, and I think that you begin
by looking at those areas that you get satisfaction out of, and
those areas where ... I often find that people kind of retreat back
to the things that they did as kids and really, really miss,
whether it's art or other things. The truth is, you're not really
going to be able to escape all the other things you have going.
And that's a good thing because that is part of you and part of
what you do well. So you'll probably just bend in a certain
direction.
I think the one bit of advice is that you can't ... it's not going to
happen overnight. It took you 37 years to get where you are, it
may take you another 30 years to get where you want to go. I
don't think you should feel impatient, maybe that's the word I'm
saying, is that I don't think you should imagine that you'll have
another hat on with a new label next year.
Tim Ferriss:

Just to maybe redirect that - and this may or may not be
accurate - but in the process of researching for this
conversation, which is an odd exercise in and of itself, given
how much time we've spent together. (laughs) But I came
across, in Wikipedia, mention of your experience in Jerusalem
and deciding to live as though you only had six months left. I
want to touch on that, but one of the questions that came to my
mind when I turned 37 last week is, "If I knew I were going to
die at age 40, what would I do to have the greatest impact on
the greatest number of people?" So I find that constraint helpful
and I worry that if I aim at not being impatient in that way, that
I won't - because I could get hit by a bus - that I won't do what
I'm capable of doing. Maybe you could talk about ... and I had
no idea, I'm not sure if you would self-describe yourself as a
"devout Christian", but that's certainly written here. Maybe you
could talk a little bit about that experience.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah. One thing I would of course warn people is that, not
everything on Wikipedia is correct. (laughs)

Tim Ferriss:

No, that's why I'm bringing it up. (laughs)

Kevin Kelly:

But it is true that I got this assignment in Jerusalem, which, by
the way, if you want to hear the full version of it, listen to one
of the very first "This American Life", which Ira Glass and I
told the story for the very first time. It's a story about how I got
this assignment to live as if I was going to die in six months,
even though I was perfect healthy and I knew that it was very
improbable. But I decided to take the assignment seriously and
that's what I did.
My answer kind of surprised me, because I thought that I would
have this sort of mad, high-risk fling, do all these things, but
actually what I wanted to do was to visit my brothers and
sisters, go back to my parents, help out. My mom was not well
at the time. But that lasted for three months before I decided I
needed to do something big. So I actually road my bicycle
across the US, from San Francisco to New Jersey, where I was
going to basically die. I kept a journal of that.
And that question was something that I keep asking myself
now. I actually have a countdown clock that Matt Groening at
Futurama was inspired and they did a little episode of Futurama
about. What I did was, I took the actuarial tables for the
estimated age of my death, for someone born when I was born,
and I worked back the number of days. I have that showing on
my computer, how many days. I tell you, nothing concentrates
your time like knowing how many days you have left. Now, of
course, I'm likely, again, to live more than that. I'm in good
health, etcetera. But nonetheless, there's something that really ...
I have 6,000 something days, it's not very many days to do all
the things I want to do.
So I think your exercise is really fantastic and commendable,
and there's two questions - what would you do if you had six
months to live, and what would you do if you had a billion
dollars? And interestingly (laughs), it's the convergence of

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

those two questions. Because it turns out that you probably
don't need a billion dollars to do whatever it is that you're going
to do in six months. So I think you're asking the right question.
The way I answer it is, you want to keep asking yourself that
question every six months and really try to answer it. I try to do
that on a day-by-day basis.
I learned something from my friend, Stewart Brand, who
organized his remaining days around five-year increments. He
says any great idea that's significant, that's worth doing, for
him, will last about five years, from the time he thinks of it, to
the time he stops thinking about it. And if you think of it in
terms of five-year projects, you can count those off on a couple
hands, even if you're young. So the sense of mortality, of
understanding that it's not just old people who don't have very
many ... if you're 20 years old, you don't have that many fiveyear projects to do.

Tim Ferriss:

So I think it is ... that's maybe part of the philosophy of thinking
about our time and whether ... even if you believe in the
extension of life, longevity, living to 120, you still have to think
in these terms of, what are you going to do if you - because you
don't know if you'll live to be 120 - what are you doing to do if
you have a year, and what would you do with a billion dollars?
And what's the intersection of those two?
Does religion play a large part in your life right now?

Kevin Kelly:

In a certain sense, not in a ritualistic sense. I just wrote a book
called
What Technology Wants.

Tim Ferriss:

Excellent book, I highly recommend it.

Kevin Kelly:

It was a theory of technology and I was trying to put technology
in the context of the cosmos. I think what religion gives me is
permission to think about cosmic questions. I'm right in the
middle of finishing a Kickstarter-funded graphic novel that's
about angels and robots. The intention there was to fictionalize
the idea that robots would someday have souls, but these souls
would be coming from angels and so that there was this

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

intersection of these two possible worlds of conscious robots
who were en-souled by angels.
The reason why this was interesting was that the idea was that
the angels that in soul-less had been trained. They had been
given moral guidance, but if you don't give the spirit some kind
of moral guidance then they can wreak havoc.
It was this idea that when we make robots we're also going to
have to train them to be ethical. We just can't make a free being
and not train it. It was a way to rehearse and think about some
of the consequences of technology today.
I think my religion gives me permission to ask those questions
without embarrassment to say, "Well, what is the general
direction of the arc of evolution? Is it pointed somewhere?
How does technology fit into the greater cosmos? What does it
mean? What drives it? Why is there more of it? Is this a good
thing? I consider this and other views so I have another view.
I'm sympathetic to other world views. I don't necessarily have
to believe all the other world views, but I get the idea that if you
have another world view that can be very helpful in seeing
other worldviews.
People have a world view even though they don't know it, but I
have a world view and I know that I have a world view. Really,
everybody has a religious or a spiritual orientation; even if
they're atheists, they still have one. There are some
assumptions that are at the basis of it and I like to question
assumptions, including my own assumptions.
Tim Ferriss:

Two things I can't resist asking and we can spend as much or as
little time on this as you'd like, but recently grappling with a lot
of these issues that I've been grappling with, some of which are
existential, some of which are related to death, limited time on
the planet, I have become deeply fascinating by indigenous use
of plant medicine. I've had some very transformative
experiences that are difficult to put into words because they
make you sound like a complete crazy person. Yeah, there's a
something-ness that is very difficult to communicate without
sounding like you should be institutionalized.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

What do you think the role for people who aspire to do the
greatest good in the world, what is the role of that type of direct
experience? Is it possible to benefit from that type of, for lack
of a better descriptor "spiritual experience" without a religious
framework around it?
Kevin Kelly:

Yeah, yeah, no. It's a really good question. My little personal
story there, of course, is I was basically a hippy. I worked for
the hippy catalog, of the
Whole Earth Catalog, which was about hippies living in San
Francisco. All my friends were drug-taking hippies, but I for
some reason never did. I just had no appetite or inclination at
all for ever taking any drugs or smoking pot or anything. When
I was 50-years-old I decided that I would like to take LSD
sacramentally on of my 50th birthday and I did. I arranged
with, I had a guide and I had an appropriate setting and I had
some acid that came from a source that was extremely reliable
and it was a sacrament. It was a very profound sacrament.
I think, "Yeah, you can use the drugs recreationally and for
entertainment," and
I think that can go somewhere, but I think there's another
powerful use for it which is kind of what you're talking about in
which is to elevate one outside of yourself, to lose yourself, to
be in contact with other things beyond your ego.
I think it can be done and I think unfortunately, because of the
legal status that we've had for a long time, the rituals and the
practice around that have not had a chance to be developed or
communicated. Actually, trying to find this information was
extremely hard. There was one book that I did find eventually
from a guy who was doing LSD experiments while they were
still legal and was able to accumulate enough wisdom about it
that that would be the one place
I would point people to.
I think that it is important that the context and expectations and
the setting they call it that revolves around it is very important
and I do believe that these can be extremely profound and
powerful experiences for good. They can remain long after and

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

most people who understand this and don't abuse it understand
that in fact that experience was not in the pill, it was not in the
chemical. It was a real experience. Unfortunately, there's so
much other stuff circulating around the use of these drugs and
the misuse of them that that kind of information is often very,
very difficult to find.
But I do think maybe we're seeing a moment now in the US
where the second prohibition is being undone and at least pot
will become legal and maybe we can return to revitalizing the
traditions and the necessary settings around that. An
expectation that not just pot or LSD, but even other synthetic
drugs can be extremely powerful in removing the ordinary
guards that we have. We have an ego for our purpose. We
have all these things to keep us sane on a day-to-day functional,
exactly. If you remove it completely, you can become
dysfunctional, but if you remove it deliberately and with great
care you can be opened up.
I think it's that. I think there's an expertise there. I think there's
a lot of other things that that if we have the freedom and the
wisdom to not abuse it I think it can be extremely powerful.
Tim Ferriss:

Do you recall the title of the book?

Kevin Kelly:

This is …

Tim Ferriss:

Or how people might search for it?

Kevin Kelly:

Yes. This is one of the many resources that I recommend in my
book
Cool Tools. Cool Tools is a big catalog of the possibilities. It
has about 1500 different items. A lot of them are like hantels,
pliers and the great cordless drill, but it's much more than that.
I include things like, "What if you wanted to have a psychedelic
experience that was transformative? What do you do?" I
would recommend this book or there's lots of other things in it.
I don't actually have the book right in front of me. I should. I
think it's called … I don't remember.

Tim Ferriss:

It's OK.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Kevin Kelly:

In the show notes we will list it as the right one and there's also
a little, tiny book that came from England. It was a cartoon
guide. They gave a street, an unjudgmental view of all the
different drugs there were and what each one did and didn't and
what the plus and minuses are without recommending or
forbidding them. It was just saying, "This is what it is." That
information also believe it or not, is really in short supply. It's
like, "What do you do with this and how does it work and tell
me the facts. I don't need to hear a lecture." Either way like,
"Wow, this is great or this is terrible, but just tell me what's
going on" As you know that kind of information sometimes is
in extremely short supply.

Tim Ferriss:

It's very difficult to find information that isn't politicized,
inaccurate or like you said, so shrouded in either fear or
irrational optimism that it's almost intelligible and certainly,
generally useless. We'll put those books in the show notes for
people. I want to come back to one of the things you said far,
far earlier and that was related to the pieces that you tried to
give away that eventually wouldn't die and came back. Were
there any common threads, any patterns in those pieces that you
can pick out as being a uniquely, Kevin Kelly theme, for lack of
a better term?

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah, one of the things that I discovered in my six months of
trying to live as if
I was going to die in six months because as I was coming close
to that date, which happened to be Halloween, October 31st, it
was I kept cutting off my future. I may be like you. I tend to
live in the future much more than the past. I'm always
imagining. I'm saving this for someday when I'm going to do
this. I'm looking forward. I'm going to do this here. I was very
much in the future and then suddenly that future was being cut
down day by day. I was thinking, "Why am I taking pictures?
I'm not taking photographs because I'm not going to be here in
another two months."
There was all these things that I'm cutting out and as I was
cutting them out,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I had this realization, which was the thing I took away from this
thing, which is that I was becoming less human. That to be
fully human we have to have a future. We have to look forward
to the future. That is part of us is looking into the future. After
I came out of the, I embraced that. I'm saying, "Well, that
future forward facing that's what I do. That's what I want to do
and that's what
I write about it." In thinking about the future, one of the things
that … It's very hard because the paradox about the future is
that there are lots of impossible things that happen all the time.
If someone from 100 years from now would come back and tell
us things, there's a lot of stuff we just not going to believe. It's
just like that's crazy. Just like if we went back 100 years and
told them what was going on now they would say, "That's just
not going to happen." We could even go back 20 years. I could
go back 20 years and say, "We're going to have Google Street
Views of all the cities of the world and we're going to have
encyclopedias for free that's edited by anybody." They would
say, "There's no way." I would tell them, "Most of it's for free."
They were saying, "There is no economic model in the world
that would allow for that," and there isn't, but here it is.
The dilemma is, is that any true forecast about the future is
going to be dismissed. Any future that is believable now is
going to be wrong and so you're stuck in this thing of if people
believe it, it's wrong and if they don't believe it, where does it
get you? You're dismissed. There is this very fine line between
saying something that is right on the edge of plausibility and at
the same time, right on the edge of having a chance of being
true. What I discovered that was helpful in trying to get away
from the kind of assumptions that bind us to just extrapolate
was to think laterally, was to go sideways. One thing just take
whatever it was that everybody knew and say, "Well, what if
that wasn't true?"
Tim Ferriss:

What would be a good example of that or an example?

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Kevin Kelly:

Everyone says, "Moore's law will continue." What if Moore's
law didn't continue? What would that mean? What would
happen?

Tim Ferriss:

Maybe I could say for the audience, but I'll just say even to
remind me, Moore's law is … What is it? Every 18 months the
size and cost of technology will decrease by 50%, something
along those lines?

Kevin Kelly:

Let's say even more simply.

Tim Ferriss:

Oh no, there's speed involved as well.

Kevin Kelly:

Right. Moore law it does say that, but let's say something right
now we live in a world where every year the technology is
better and cheaper. What if that wasn't true?

Tim Ferriss:

Right, got it.

Kevin Kelly:

What if every year starting a couple years from now stuff was
better, but more expensive? That's a completely different
world. Everyone assumes that things are going to get better and
cheaper, but what if that wasn't true? You can take assumption,
again that's something that's no one's really examining like one
of the things I write about is the fact that we're going to have a
population implosion globally. That the global population will
drastically reduce in 100 years from now we'll have population,
far, far less than we have right now.

Tim Ferriss:

All right, I have to bite at that. I thought a lot about this in what
they call the Malthusian dilemmas. Is that going to be you
think pandemic-related, nuclear weapon related, all of the
above?

Kevin Kelly:

None of those.

Tim Ferriss:

None of those?

Kevin Kelly:

No.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

"AI" coming into the rise of the machines, no?

Kevin Kelly:

No. It's just pure demographics. If you look at the current
trends in fertility rates in all the developed countries
everywhere, except for the US, they are already either below
replacement level. Replacement level means that you are just
sustaining the population just replaces itself. If it's below it
means that there is getting less and less so Japan, Europe,
they're all below replacement. The US is an exception because
of only because of immigration. We need more people coming.
Otherwise, we would be there and this would not be any news
to anybody.
The real news is that people would point to developing world,
but Mexico is now aging faster than the US. China is aging
faster because of their one child policy. Of course, Japan is
completely … They are way under water completely. Even the
one exception is Sub-Sahara Africa and there's debate right now
about how fast or whether they're slowing down, but generally
around the world, South America, the rest of Asia, the rate of
fertility continues to drop and here's the thing is that the
demographic transition that is happening everywhere where
people become urban.
Every forecast shows the urbanity, the citification of the
population continuing and I can't think of any counter force to
stop this huge migration at the scale that we're seeing into the
city and as that happens, the birth rates drop down. Even in
places like Singapore or other places where they have taken
very, very active countermeasures of cash for having kids, day
care forever, bonuses, none of these work in terms of actually
trying to raise fertility levels.
You have to understand that to go above replacement level the
average woman has to have 2.1 kids. Well, that means there
has to be tons and tons of women who have three or four kids to
make up for those. How many people do you know with that
many kids living in cities? There's not enough of them. This is
a projection. Some of these are UN projections. They have
three. They have a low, high and medium. The low one is not

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

good news because there's not a large cultural counterforce for
women to have three. A lot, a very high percentage of the
population to have three or four kids in a modern world and
that's why the population continues to decrease every year.
Tim Ferriss:

This is perhaps a tangent, but one of the big debates in my head
right now is to marry or not to marry, to have kids or not to
have kids. I never thought those would even be questions in my
mind and yet, here I am and now they are. What are your
thoughts on having children? What type of people … This is
very broad, but should have children or shouldn't have children,
whichever way of answering is easier or how do you even think
about that question?

Kevin Kelly:

I think people who are privileged of which you are, should have
children because you can bestow so many privileges and
opportunities to your children and if the world is to be
populated, why not populate it with children who have as many
opportunities as possible? I also say from my own experience
of growing up one of many kids and having … Well, I have
three kids. One of my other regrets in life is not having a
fourth, but we just started a little bit too late and we were
unable to have a fourth, but all my kids wished that we had had
a fourth, too. I would say that it's a gift to your kids to have
more than one. I know that from hanging out in China where
so many kids grew up only children and really, really missed
that. There is a total gift of the siblings, the brothers to each
other, that is really very profound.
There is also I know from my friends who have had lots of kids
that there is a fair amount of teaching from the older to the
younger and that's a lot of what they learn and that the curve of
the amount of energy that you have to expend actually after
three doesn't really matter in terms of the parents. I have one
friend who has nine kids and I have another friend who has
seven and basically, how do they do that? The older kids were
helping to parent the younger kids. That's the only way that it
really works, but that is actually, basically they have five
parents instead of having two parents.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

Right. It's very traditional in a way, traditional meaning
reaching back thousands or tens of thousands of years.

Kevin Kelly:

It is. Of course, in that the old days you may have had 12 born,
but they rarely had 12 kids survive so that actually is a very
recent … I mean it's like the 1800s onward. I hang out with the
Amish a lot and they still have these very large families and
they all survived so they have in some senses an unnatural
expansion. One of my predictions, again going back to the
assumptions, one of my predictions is that in America in 100
years from now there will be … The complete countryside is
run by the Amish.
The Amish take over the entire countryside because they never
sell land. They have eight kids and then there's all these people
living in the city and it's like everybody's happy. You drive out
to the Amish lands and it's just fantastic. They are very happy
doing their thing and running the farms. I have been predicting
for years that the Amish would come and start buying upstate
New York and that's exactly what they're doing right now.

Tim Ferriss:

Why do you spend so much time with the Amish? This is news
to me, but very interesting and how long has that been going
on?

Kevin Kelly:

For a while. By the way …

Tim Ferriss:

Does your beard have anything, is there any relation to the
Amish?

Kevin Kelly:

I had the beard before my interest in the Amish. I'm going to
show you some pictures when I was 19-years-old. I have an
Amish beard, which means I have a beard without a mustache.
The reason why the Amish don't have mustaches is that it was
at the time that they were adopting their dress code, the
mustache was all military men had mustaches and so they were
very anti-military. They refused to serve in armies. They don't
even vote. It was their rejection of the military by shaving off
their mustache.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I hang out with the Amish because their adoption of technology
seems to us totally crazy because first of all, they're not Lettites.
They're complete hackers. They love hacking technology.
They have something called "Amish electricity," which is
basically pneumatics. A lot of these farms had a big diesel …
They don't have electricity, but they have a big diesel generator
in the barn that pumps up this compressor that sends highpressure air tubes down tubing into their barn into their homes
and so they have converted their sewing machine, washing
machine to nomadic.
Tim Ferriss:

Seems like a bit of a side-step of the word of God?

Kevin Kelly:

Exactly. They'll have horse-drawn buggies and horse-drawn
farm implements and the horses will be pulling this dieselgenerated combine and you're thinking, "What are they doing?"
In fact, if you look at our own lives and I have done this many
times, I can ask you Tim or you can ask me, there will be some
weird thing like, "We don't have TV in our house, but I've got
Internet." It's like, "What is that about?" We all have these
things, but here's the difference is that the Amish do it
collectively. They are very selective. They are selecting their
technology collectively as a group and secondly, because
they're doing it collectively they have to articulate what the
criteria is.
A lot of us are adopting, "We try this, we try that." We don't
have any logic or reason or theory or framework for why we're
doing this stuff. It's just a parade of stuff, but the Amish have
very particular criteria and their criterion is there are two things
that they're looking for. The main thing they want to do, the
main reason why they have all these restrictions like horse and
buggy and all of this stuff is that they want to have these
communities, very strong communities. They noticed that if
you have a car that you'll drive out and shop somewhere out of
the community or you go to church somewhere out of the
community, but if you have a horse and buggy you can go only
15 miles and so everything has to happen … Your entire life,
you have to support the community. You have the community

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

within 15 miles. You have to visit the sick and you have to
shop locally so you're shopping with your neighbors.
When a new technology comes along they say, "Will this
strengthen our local community or send us out?" The second
thing that they're looking at is with families. The goal of the
typical Amish man or woman is to have every single meal with
their children for every meal of their lives until they leave
home.
They have breakfast and they have lunch and they have dinner
so breakfast and lunch is they go to a one room schoolhouse
and they pedal back for lunch that their parents had with them.
That means that the business is ideally in their backyard. They
have a lot of shops and stuff. If they're not a farmer and they
have a backyard shop, which actually has to be cleanish
because it is in their backyard. Well, it is in their backyard, so
they really want to ensure that … Many of them have
metalworking shops which they really try to keep non-toxic and
work because it's in their backyard. That means that they can
come home for lunch. They have breakfast and lunch so they're
on the premise and they have every single meal with their
children until they leave.
They say, "Will this technology allow us to do that? Will it
help us do that or will it work against that?" Right now, they
have been deciding whether to accept cell phones or not, even
though they don't have land line phones. Basically, some of
them are going to accept cell phones and they do that by there's
always some early Amish adopter who's trying things and they
say, "OK Ivan. Bishop says you can …" He has to get
permission. He says, "You can try this, but we're watching you.
We're going to see what effect this has on your family, on your
community. You have to be ready to give it up at any time we
say that it's not working," and they do this on a parish by parish.
It's very de-centralized. They try it out. Always trying out new
technologies and they're always looking to see, "Does this
strengthen the families? Does this strengthen the communities?
If not, we don't want it."

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

I have two questions. The first is since you're normally as I
understand it based on the West Coast in Northern California,
how do you get out to the Amish or is there a separate
community closer by? Secondly, what have you incorporated
into your own life or your own family that originated from the
Amish?

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah. I don't get to see them as often as I want it actually,
when I go east I have some contacts that I will exercise and I try
to get to stay overnight and go to church in a buggy or
something.

Tim Ferriss:

This is Pennsylvania?

Kevin Kelly:

Actually, Pennsylvania is the heart of it, but actually there are
more communities in Ohio, where my brother lives, Iowa,
there's a lot more happening in New York. The Pennsylvania
are the Ground Zero, but in fact there are bigger, more
extensive communities outside of Pennsylvania.

Tim Ferriss:

I didn't realize that. The Amish Diaspora.

Kevin Kelly:

It is. I'm saying they literally are just buying up farmland.
They're expanding. They're constantly expanding. They have a
very small attrition rate, very large families. They all are
buying. Basically, they're buying farms and stuff for their
children and they never sell. They also don't even move into
areas as a ...
They have a minimum number of families that need to move in
at once. What did I learn from them? One of the things that
we've had, particularly when we had younger kids was
technological sabbaticals or Sabbaths I should say. I've now
seen other families who aren't even religious adopt that same
thing which is once a week you take a break from either you
can define it however you want, the screen or the keyboard or
connectivity or something and you step back. You do that not
because it's terrible or poison, but because it's so good.
There's lots of people who are like they're going to drop out
from Twitter. They're kind of like, "This is like a toxin. I need

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

to detox." I think that's entirely long way to think about it is
you want to take breaks from this not because they're toxic, but
because they are so good. It's like you want to step back so that
you can re-enter it and with a renewed perspective, with a
renewed appreciation, with having spent time looking at it in a
different way. I think that kind of rhythm of having Sabbaths
and then yearly vacations, retreats.
Then every seven years you take a true sabbatical, I think that
kind of rhythmic disconnection or Sabbath I think is very
powerful, something that works very well and was something
that we had in our family.
Tim Ferriss:

I take Saturdays off as it turns out as my screen-less day. I
really try to make that a weekly occurrence and it's incredible
the effect that it has, this galvanizing effect of just a mere 24
hours, not even that if you just consider the waking hours.
Every seven years a vacation or sabbatical of how long in your
case or your family's case?

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah. Partly because my wife actually is granted a sabbatical
from the company she works for which is Genentech. It was
one of the few companies that actually have an official
sabbatical for all their researchers at least and it's very meager.
It's six weeks. Of course, a six weeks sabbatical is basically a
European annual vacation. For an American …

Tim Ferriss:

Right. It's three years.

Kevin Kelly:

That's a big thing. We're doing something different. This year
we're taking one and we're going to camp in national parks for
one month of it and then the other two weeks we'll go to Asia,
but we haven't been to a lot of the national parks. I'm going to
do a different kind of project that I haven't done before and
we'll do some car camping. We haven't really done a big road
trip like that so it's all new for us.

Tim Ferriss:

What is the longest in the last few years that you've gone
without checking email?

Kevin Kelly:

Oh, probably two weeks and in China.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

How do you manage that?

Kevin Kelly:

Well, it was not very easy. I was unable to pick it up because
China was blocking Google.

Tim Ferriss:

Makes it more challenging.

Kevin Kelly:

I was in some remote places and so even the connection was
hard, but it was like they weren't letting me get it. I'm not a
mobile person. My first smartphone was the iPhone 5 and I’m
still not using it properly. I use it for phone calls.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah. I don't use my iPhone as an input device either. It drives
me nuts.

Kevin Kelly:

I can't type. When I travel I like to leave everything. I spend a
lot of my time sitting in front of a computer. I'm like the Zen:
walk-walk, sit-sit, don't wobble. I'm here. I'm really online.
Then when I leave this studio I don't want to be connected at all
and I won't be and I'm not checking email. I'm not checking
this other stuff and I can go days, typically I'll go days without
checking even in the US if I'm traveling. If I'm overseas I will
go probably three or four days before
I get the email. That's pretty typical.

Tim Ferriss:

Let me shift gears just a little bit. I'm looking at LongNow.org.
I recommend everybody take a look at it, Long Now
Foundation. Humans are generally I would say pretty bad at
thinking long-term, certainly when it comes to habit change,
very, very high failure rate with long-term incentives. "You're
going to get diabetes in 20 years," for instance, as opposed to
"You'll have more sex if you have a six-pack when it comes to
diet."
At the Long Now Foundation I just want to read a few things on
this website for people. "The Long Now Foundation is
established in 1996," written as 01996,
"To creatively foster long-term thinking and responsibility in
the framework of the next 10,000 years ago." Then you have

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

10,000 year clock, which is a monument scale, multi-millennial
all mechanical clock. It's an icon to long-term thinking; The
Rosetta project, building an archive of all documented human
languages; Long bets, featured bet is here, Warren Buffett,
Protégé Partners, LLC. "Public arena for enjoyable,
competitive predictions of interest to society with philanthropic
money at stake," and then "Revive and Restore," which is
bringing extinct species back to life. There is a lot here.
Can you explain to people because I have greatly enjoyed many
of the seminars and speeches of the Long Now Foundation. I'm
a supporter. I suppose I've even spoken there on stage and love
the email synopses that Stewart sends out. What is the function
of the Long Now Foundation and what is the value?
Kevin Kelly:

The Long Now Foundation is reactive. It's reacting to the very
inherent, short-term bias that our society, particularly this
technological society, particularly say the Silicon Valley
exhibits, which is often a focus on the next quarter, the next two
quarters, the next year, results needing to be immediate, instant
satisfaction, if something is not on Netflix streaming, we don't
even wait for the DVD. It's this fairly very fast-paced, short
term thinking and also, somewhat blinded by the fact that we
don't have a lot of sense of history either that we're ignorant
about what's happened in the past.
The term "The Long Now" came from Brian Eno who noticed
that we have a very short now, which is the next five minutes
and the last five minutes. The Long Now is an attempt to
expand that so that we, as a society and as individuals, would
try to think about things at a generational or civilizational scale.
How about working on something that might take longer than
your own lifetime to accomplish? You start something now
that maybe make it so that it might take … Like the cathedrals
of old, what if we were trying to make something that might
need 25 years to accomplish? How can we do that?
We're trying to encourage people to think in that perspective, to
take that perspective and then to maybe move in that direction.
We're not necessarily saying we have to have the Asimov

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Foundation where we have to have a master plan for the next
100 years and we're going to plan out the future.
No, we're agnostic about what it is that people make or do.
We're just saying that it would benefit thinking about the longterm. I've often heard some people who advised to counseling
to individuals about thinking about the long-term in your own
life, even though you might want to act locally and be
spontaneous, but you do want to keep in mind the fact that
you'll be around for a while, whether it's putting some savings
away or working on a skill that might take some time, more
than the six months or a year to acquire or whatever it is that
you can have both perspectives.
We're not attempting to get rid of the need for people to
survive, the need for companies to have a profit this year.
We're saying there can be additional perspectives in addition to
that where we say we commit to a program, a science research
where it's pure science and the results of this say in
mathematics is one of the most profound things that we can
invest in, even though most of the things in the beginning seem
to be non-utilitarian. They don't have any purpose, but we
know from our own history that in 20 years they'll pay off in
some way or other. Being able to construct a society so that we
can allow the rewards of long-term investment, long-term
thinking, long-term perspective that would make us a better
civilization.
Tim Ferriss:

I love the Long Now Foundation. I encourage everybody to
check it out, LongNow.org.

Tim Ferriss:

I'd love to perhaps jump into some rapid fire questions, and
they don't have to even be rapid.

Kevin Kelly:

Just some fire questions.

Tim Ferriss:

Just some fire questions. The questions will be rapid. The
answers can be as short or as long as you'd like. What book or

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

books do you gift or have gifted the most to other people
outside of your own books?
Kevin Kelly:

There is a short graphic novel by Daniel Pink called Bunko, and
it's career counsel advice. It's aimed at young people. It's a
graphic novel. It's a cartoon, basically, and it's aimed at young
people as trying to teach them how to become indispensable.
I've given that away to young people because it's, for me, the
best summary of ... Again, it's not how to become successful;
it's how to become indispensable, too.

Tim Ferriss:

That's right. It's Adventures of Johnny Bunko, or something like
that. I have that in my bookshelf back in San Francisco, in fact.

Kevin Kelly:

If you know a young person who is just starting out, hand them
that book. It's very easy for them to read. Again, it's graphic
novel. It's not threatening. It's fun. It'll give this five great
principles for starting out and helping them go orient
themselves as they start working, in the working life.

Tim Ferriss:

For someone who's facing a lot of the same questions let’s just
say, you have graduates asking the “what should I do? Why am
I here? What am I good at?” If we fast forward to say, for the
sake of argument, mid-30s, people in middle age hitting that
particular point, are there any books that you would recommend
they read?

Kevin Kelly:

There is a book that I'm recommending by Cal Newport. It's
called So Good They Can't Ignore You. This changed my mind
because I bought into the New Age California dogma of follow
your bliss, one will follow. He makes a really good argument
and convinced me that's actually not very good advice, that
what you really want to do is to master something and to use
your mastering of something as a way to get to your passion. If
you start with just passion, it's paralyzing because ... and I know

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

this from my own kids. They're 18. They literally don't know
what they're passionate about.
Some people are lucky enough to know, and a lot of people
aren't. This is a book for people who don't really know what
they're really excellent at, don't really know what they're
passionate about.
His premise is that you master something, almost anything at
all, just something you master, and you use that mastery to
move you into a place where you can begin to have passion,
and that you keep recycling that the way you find your passion
is through mastery rather than the other way around, which is
people think that they're going to get their mastery through
passion.
I believe that former ... that passion would lead to mastery, but
after thinking about it, looking at his examples and his
argument, I'm pretty sure that, at least, for most people, you can
get to your passion through mastery.
Tim Ferriss:

That would also give you a currency or a lever to use in getting
to that point.
Do you have a favorite fiction book?

Kevin Kelly:

Yes.

Tim Ferriss:

I usually don't get one answer. This is great.

Kevin Kelly:

Shantaram. It might take me a while to explain this, but it's
author who wrote one book because this is very
autobiographical. The premise of the book and the author's life
seems completely incredulous and almost Hollywood-ish, but
what you get from it and where it's set, it's set in India, it's set in
the slums of India, and you get an incredibly vivid, immersive,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

deep, and in some ways uplifting view of India and the
underworld in India, into that part of Asia.
The main protagonist is this very interesting Zen criminal. He's
sort of a Coyote trickster blend of someone who is ... He does
bad things, but at the same time, he's sorry about it, and he has a
cosmic perspective. It's very, very unusual, but it's a long book.
I actually recommend that if people are going to try this, you
actually to get the Audible version and listen to. It runs on and
on, but it'd be one of those books that you wish will never end.
I'll just tell you the beginning of it, which is that, and this is the
true part, which is that the guy, the author became a bank
robber in New Zealand. He was hooked on drugs, started
robbing banks, was eventually caught, and escaped from prison.
He made his way to the slums of India, where because he had a
medical kit, he was treated as a doctor.
Got involved and hooked on drugs in India; got involved with
the Mafia; was put to prison, tortured, left, abandoned. Nobody
knew he was even in there. Started writing a book. Hereafter, he
wrote his book, they ripped it up, destroyed it. He was
recruited, found a guru, an Afghani, was recruited in … was
fighting there because entire company was wiped out. That’s
just the beginning. That's like the first day.
Tim Ferriss:

It's really interesting that you would bring up Shantaram for
those people who haven't heard Josh Waitzkin. I also had him
on this podcast. Josh was the basis for Searching for Bobby
Fisher, the book and the movie. World class chess player. Also
very deep, soulful guy, and this is one of his favorite books as
well. You would love Josh. Sometime, I will have to put you
guys in touch, but any favorite documentaries?

Kevin Kelly:

Now you've asked the wrong question because I have a cycle of
true films, for the past 10 years. I have reviewed the best

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

documentaries, and I actually have a book called True Films,
which is the 200 best documentaries that you should see before
you die.
Tim Ferriss:

Oh my God! No kidding. You have no idea how timely this is.
It's T-R-U-E Films?

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah. True Films. There are a couple of films that I would say
have served universal appreciation. They may have a rating of
100 on Rotten Tomatoes or something. The one documentary
that I think everybody I know have seen has love is Man on
Wire.

Tim Ferriss:

That's such a good movie. Oh my God! Yeah.

Kevin Kelly:

It's just transcendent. It's just a beautiful movie. It's based on
fact that this guy basically he's going to walk the Twin Towers.
The moment was he was a 14-year old kid in France, was at a
dentist's office looking at a magazine, and he's hold ... There
were had the plans to build this Twin Tower New York. He saw
those two Twin Towers, and he said, "I need to walk between
them." He didn't know how to tight walk. The towers had not
been built. He was already planning this thing. He was filming
himself the whole way. He does it, and how he does it is
amazing.
Another great documentary that I love because it's very unusual
among documentaries and that it films the villain side of the
whole thing as well, which is King of Kong.

Tim Ferriss:

This has been recommended to me. I still have not seen this
movie.

Kevin Kelly:

King of Kong is about a guy who becomes the video game,
arcade game King of Kong. He becomes the champion, but he is
basically competing against this cabal of people who are trying

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

to subvert him and are doing all kinds of really terrible things to
stop him, which was all on film. Here's this really Midwestern,
really lovable guy, and you're rooting for him all the time while
these really sleazy guys are trying to take him down. It's just
fantastic.
Tim Ferriss:

I have to watch that.

Kevin Kelly:

That's the second one. The third one is when … but it's called
State of Mind. It's about the spectacles in North Korea, which
these two filmmakers had access to. They followed several
different young athletes who were practicing for this spectacle,
and these spectacles, of course, where there's these people are
pixels.
They have this huge stadium size things, and they're like little
robots. They're cogs in this machine, which is perfect. You can
imagine a picture that's made up of pixels, but every pixel is
actually a little boy or girl holding up a card, colored cards in
sequence so these things move, which means that there's not a
pixel missing. It means that nobody's sick. You're not allowed
to be sick. You can't make a mistake at all, and it's getting
inside of North Korea, which turns out to be a nationwide cult.
I think that in 50 years when they're gone, nobody will believe
that, that was impossible, and this documentary will be here
saying like, "No, no, no. There really was a nationwide cult,
and they really did believe this." It really is amazing just to see
what's going on there.

Tim Ferriss:

I know what I'm doing for the next few days, next few
evenings.

Kevin Kelly:

I can't go on unfortunately because I have a lot of them, but go
to the True Films.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

True Films.

Kevin Kelly:

I only review ones that are great, so I don't do ... I'm just saying
these are fantastic.

Tim Ferriss:

Man, I've been looking for this. I cannot believe that I'm only
learning this now. I'm embarrassed about that.
When you think of the word or hear the word successful, who's
the first person who comes to mind?

Kevin Kelly:

Jesus.

Tim Ferriss:

Why would you say that?

Kevin Kelly:

There aren't that many people who've left their mark on as
many people in the world as he has. I think what he was up to,
what he was doing is vastly been twisted, misunderstood,
whatever word you want, but nonetheless, what's remarkable is
... and here's a guy who didn't write anything.
I think success is also overrated.

Tim Ferriss:

I'd love for you to elaborate on that.

Kevin Kelly:

Greatness is overrated. I mentioned big numbers, but it's more
of the impact that they had on people's lives. I think we tend to
have an image of success that's so much been skewed by our
current media, just like our sense of beauty of women. In terms
of all possibilities, it's in a very small, narrow, define ...
ritualistic in a certain sense. I think our idea of success is often
today it means you're somebody who has a lot of money, or
who has a lot of fame, or who has some of these other
trappings, which we had assigned, but I think can be successful
by being true to, and being the most 'you' that you could
possibly be.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I think that what's I think of as when you think of Jesus,
whether you take him as a historical character or anything
beyond, was about ... He certainly wasn't imitating anybody, let
me put it that way. I think that's the great temptation that people
have is they want to be someone else, which is basically they
want to be in someone else's movie. They want to be the best
rock star, and there's so many of those already that you can only
wind up imitating somebody in that slot.
I think to me the success is like you make your own slot. You
have a new slot that didn't exist before. I think that's of course
what Jesus and many others were doing, but they were making
a new slot. That's really hard to do, but I think that's what I
chalk up as success is you made a new slot.
Tim Ferriss:

What is your new slot? You knew that was coming.

Kevin Kelly:

Who says I'm successful?

Tim Ferriss:

I'm not. I'm trying to not make any assumptions here. Or what
would be your slot?

Kevin Kelly:

My slot would be Kevin Kelly. That's the whole thing. It's not
going to be a career or you would really ideally be something
that would ... you had no imitators. You would be who you are,
and that is success actually in some sense is you didn't imitate
anybody, no one else imitated you afterwards.
In a certain sense you have, if you become an adjective, that's a
good sign, right?

Tim Ferriss:

Mm-hmm (affirmative).

Kevin Kelly:

I think success is actually you make your own path. If they're
calling you a successful entrepreneur, then to me that's not the
best kind of success.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

Because you're being confined to that category.

Kevin Kelly:

You're in a category.

Tim Ferriss:

If you could change one thing about yourself, what would it be?

Kevin Kelly:

I could sing.

Tim Ferriss:

Aha! You'd like to sing.

Kevin Kelly:

Yeah. I seem to be unable to carry a tune. I can't remember
when my wife can hear something once, she can just sing it
back later. I can hear the same song or have heard the same
song and I couldn't tell you three notes of it. I'm sure because
I'm a Tim Ferriss fan, I'm sure I could train myself to … that. I
know I could, but I guess I haven't, and it would be something
that I have to really work at and I haven't, but I have trouble
carrying a tune, staying in tune, remembering a tune.
I love music, and that I appreciate it, but in terms of actually
singing and/or play ... I don't play an instrument, so maybe I
would say if it was a little easier for me, that would be
something nice.

Tim Ferriss:

Have you take lessons or attempted to take lessons?

Kevin Kelly:

No.

Tim Ferriss:

I got it. Just in the spirit of trade. I've recently started exploring
hand drumming with Jim bass and different types of drums. If
anyone out there can get me a pen art hang, I would really love
to hear from you. Those of you that ... won't mean nothing to
most people who are hearing this, the research that has peaked
my curiosity most recently, and, of course, you don't want to
run out and just start swallowing these things, but there's a
common anti-epilepsy drug called the Valproate, which
apparently has some implications for opening a window for

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

achieving perfect pitch in mature adults. Very fascinating stuff.
If I do any experiments with that, I will certainly report back.
Kevin Kelly:

Now that you've talked about it, not the drug part, but I did, I
remember I did take one class ... You mentioned drums. I took
a one class at an adult summer camp, which I highly
recommended. If your kids go to camp, you should go with
them, and that was a steel drum course. I loved that. Like you, I
think if I did take up an instrument, it would be drums of some
sort because that, I seem to respond to it, and I did pretty good
for the intro course on steel drumming.

Tim Ferriss:

I find percussion to be so primal. It just satisfied some type of
need that probably predates verbal communication even.
Certainly written notes.

Kevin Kelly:

I think it's your inner cave man that's responding.

Tim Ferriss:

Are there any particular, let's just say in the first two hours of
your day, any particular morning rituals or habits you have that
when performed consistently, you find produce better days for
you. I'm leaving better days undefined on purpose, but I love
studying mornings and/or what people do when they wake up.
What time do you wake up? Are there any particular habitual
rituals that you find contribute to better days?

Kevin Kelly:

I'm a very good sleeper. I don't sleep a lot. These days, I get up
at 7:30 and I have some rituals, but I don't vary them enough
maybe to know whether they are ... I'm not morning person to
begin with.

Tim Ferriss:

You're not a morning person. The fact that you don't vary them
is perfect.

Kevin Kelly:

I know, but I don't necessarily optimize it in any way, or I can't
tell which is better, but for better or worse, one of the first

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

things I do is I read the paper version of the New York Times.
It's what I call a guilty pleasure. I don't know whether that
makes me better at anything else I do, but I don't drink coffee or
anything. It's a ritual, and when I'm not here, I don't read it, so
it's like I don't miss it. I'm curious, but if I'm here, it's like I got
to do it. It's weird.
Tim Ferriss:

Is that immediately after waking you read the paper, or is there
anything you do?

Kevin Kelly:

Just about. In my pajamas, I walk out to the front gate, and I
pick it up, and I read it. I don't read all of it. I just go through,
and I usually don't even read the news part. I read the slower
stuff. I'm not sure why. Now that you're asking, and that's it.
That’s the entire ritual. I don't have the same thing for breakfast
or anything like that. It's just that morning hit.

Tim Ferriss:

Do you do anything throughout your day, regularly? Maybe it's
before bed or anything else that most other people probably
don't do.

Kevin Kelly:

That's a good question. No.

Tim Ferriss:

Really?

Kevin Kelly:

I have no special sauce.

Tim Ferriss:

But you're very consistent. Your days seem to be ... don't vary
very well. At least that, in and of itself, might be something that
a lot of people don't.

Kevin Kelly:

Let's pick up two different things. While I'm here in the studio,
have a lot of control over my time. What I do during the day is
greatly varied though. I do a lot of things for short amount of
times. I'll go into my workshop. I'll read, actually read books,
sit down and read books during the middle of the day. I'll go
out. I'll do a hike and bring my camera almost every day.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Maybe that is something that most people don't do is probably
they probably aren't taking pictures with their camera every
day.
Tim Ferriss:

More reading books in the middle of the day for them I think

Kevin Kelly:

Maybe that's true, I guess.

Tim Ferriss:

How do you choose your books? That's a paradox of choice
problem for a lot of people.

Kevin Kelly:

It is. It's like, what are you going to listen to next in music. The
music becomes free, and everybody has all the music in the
world, but deciding what you're going to listen to becomes the
thing you pay for. That's been my prediction about Amazon is
they will soon going to have any book you want for free.
Amazon Prime, digital version of it. You can have it whenever
you want, but you'll pay for us for the recommendations

Tim Ferriss:

That's a great point.

Kevin Kelly:

I have a network of friends, and I listen to lots of podcasts. I get
it from all over the place. Like probably you are at this point, I
long ago decided that in terms of the greater scheme of things,
the cost of books are really cheap, and if I wanted a book, I
would buy it.
The result is that I'm right now speaking in a two-story high
library of books that I have. I don't do the same with digital
books because I finally figured out that if I purchase it, a book
before I'm reading it, it's not going anywhere. It's just sitting
there. I shouldn't really purchase a digital book until five
seconds before I'm going to read it.

Tim Ferriss:

I have exactly the opposite habit.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Kevin Kelly:

It's just there. The whole point of Kindle is that you don't have
to have it until you need it. On the digital books, I don't buy
anything until I'm seconds away from reading it, then I'll get it,
but the paper books, I was near to the point of actually
digitizing and getting rid of all my paper books.
I was that close about five years ago, but then I had an
epiphany. I went to private library, and I realized that books
were never as cheap as they are today. They never will be as
cheap, and that there's some power about having these things in
paper always available, no batteries, never obsolete, and that if
you made a library now, you would never be able to make some
of these libraries in 50 years, so I decided to keep and to
cultivate this paper library as something that was going to be
powerful in the future.

Tim Ferriss:

I like that. Or at least I can use it as justification for keeping a
lot of paper books around.

Kevin Kelly:

I get tips for books from podcasts, from blogs, from friends,
from Amazon recommendations, anywhere, and whenever I
hear someone recommend a book, I'll go and check it out, and
then I'm fairly free in buying it, but which means I read a lot of
really mediocre books.

Tim Ferriss:

What?

Kevin Kelly:

That's part of my job in Cool Tools. The book that we were just
talking about, which is this catalog of possibility for the selfpublished that has, oh I don’t know, 15 hundred. Maybe there's
couple hundred books that are recommended, but I probably
read thousands and thousands and thousands of books in order
to select those.
I see part of my job reading through, and I read a lot of how-to
books. Most of the books I'm reading is nonfiction. A lot of the

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

easy, instructional stuff on how to build a stonewall, how to do
origami, how to send a cell, microcell to space, whatever it is, it
doesn't matter. I'll look at it, and I've seen tens of thousands of
them, 50 thousand how-to books over my lifetime. I can spot a
really good one, but still I'll read through the other ones so that
someone else doesn't have to and I can recommend the same,
"This is the best book on building a tiny house if you want to
build a tiny house."
Tim Ferriss:

When you read these books on origami or stonewall, do you
follow through and attempt these projects, or are you evaluating
it purely based on your amassed experience of reading lots of
these types of instructional books?

Kevin Kelly:

No. Actually, maybe one of the other things that I don't do
every day, but one of the things I do in general that maybe
everyone else is not doing is that I have thousand hobbies. I
dabble in things. I have built stonewalls, more than one. I have
done origami. I have made beer. I have made wine. Whatever it
is, I've tried to do these things in my life, and I continue to try
and do that. I have homeschooled my son.
As much as possible, this is ... I was telling you before about
my day. It's irregular in the sense that I'm here and I have
things, but I'm doing new things, and I'm reading new things all
the time. When I'm outside, I’ll make a go-kart or a wall; do
something that I haven't done before. That's the basis for
helping decide about these books. I don't have to be an expert in
them, but I can know enough to tell whether or not the
information they're telling me is useful.

Tim Ferriss:

What odd project over the last year has been the most fun? Let's
start there, for you.

Kevin Kelly:

Just the last couple of months, I finally built myself a real
workshop. I wish I could show it to you because one of the cool

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

things that I did was if you go on to U Line or somewhere, this
container, they have these racks of bins. I've filled an entire
wall of hundreds and hundreds of bins so I can organize stuff.
I'm a big fan of Adam Savage. He has a principle for his
workshops called First Order Access, which basically means
that you don't want to store things behind anything. Everything
has to be at the first level so you can look and see it. It has to be
within reach. He says you have to be able to see everything that
you have and it's accessible. You don't want things hidden
behind other things.
That’s part of what I was doing with this workshop is this first
order access. It's tremendously powerful. The few days or the
weeks I've had working, and it just transforms everything.
I had the same problem with my books for many, many years. I
had books like multiple different bookshelves in the house. I
had them in boxes. I had them this and that. Moving everything
to one location, to a library where there was two stories, I could
see all my books, just transformed them and made it really
useful because I could find them. Just really go and reach for
them. The same thing was I'm finally bringing that to my tools,
which is that you want to have things plugged in, ready to go,
labeled, organized, first order access, and it can make simple
jobs really simple instead of the hours of looking for something.
AlsoTim Ferriss:

Like gathering all the tools.

Kevin Kelly:

Gathering all the tools and also-

Tim Ferriss:

Just like cooking. It's just like cooking. It's like having a
manual, random access memory, right?

Kevin Kelly:

Right.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

You have your mise-en-place right in front of you.

Kevin Kelly:

You know the tools are.

Tim Ferriss:

That's very cool. If there were one object, manual project,
building something, do you think every human should have the
experience of doing, what would that be?

Kevin Kelly:

That's very easy. You need to build your own house, your own
shelter. It's not that hard to do, believe me. Actually, I built my
own house.

Tim Ferriss:

Your house is amazing.

Kevin Kelly:

Not this house. I built one from cutting down the logs, cutting
down the trees in upstate New York, and doing the stone hearth.
Unfortunately, I don't recommend this, maybe like 2 by 4s
from trees. You don't want to do that because it's a pain.
Standard lumber is very good. If those things are off a little
quarter of an inch as they are with rough sewn lumbers, it's a
mess.
Nonetheless, a large portion of people in the world have made
their own homes, adobe, rammed earth, bamboo, whatever it is.
Going back to what we originally started off with, even if you
don't wind up living in it, it's empowering to know that you can
do it, and if you do wind up living in it, I have a friend, Lloyd
Conn, who built his magnificent place in Balinese that he built
with salvaged material from scratch over the many years. It
gives you the power to alter it.
I believe that your house should be an extension of you, that
really is another projection. It's another way of, and also, going
back to what we're talking about, is just another way to discover
who you are and discover what you're good at because a welldesigned house should really reflect you. What I've discovered,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

lot of people designed houses, and they have this imaginary
fantasy idea about themselves and what they're going to do.
Whatever it is, they're going to have a swimming pool. They're
never going to use a swimming pool. Whatever it is.
Very few people actually have a very good sense of who they
are and what they're going to use something for, but if you
really study yourself and really are honest and designed
something that space can help you become successful in the
sense of making a slot for you, making your own slot.
It's both a by-product of who you are, and also can help you
become who you are. It works both ways.
Tim Ferriss:

I like that. You're not just finding yourself; you're creating
yourself.

Kevin Kelly:

This is a larger philosophical question, but this is something I
talk about a lot. In a very high dimensional space, which means
space of many pending possibilities, the act of finding and the
act of creating are identical. There's no difference between
discovering something and inventing something. We could say
that philosophically, Benjamin Franklin invented electricity.
We could say that Christopher Columbus invented America.
We could say that discovery and invention are the same, so that
discovering yourself and inventing yourself is really the same
things that bring about that process. You have to do both at
once.

Tim Ferriss:

I really enjoyed that. Last question. If you could give your ...
let's say, you can pick the age, either 15 or 20-year old self, one
or a few pieces of advice, what would they be?

Kevin Kelly:

You don't have to do everything yourself. You can hire people
to do stuff. I wish I had known that when I was younger. I wish
that I had, when I was 20 working for Whole Earth catalog, I

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

wish I had known that I could have hired a programmer to do
something. I could have hired someone. It took me a long time
to understand that.
Then recently, I'd been really big on it, hiring people through
Elance. Because I came from a little bit of a do-it-yourself ... I
made a nature museum when I was 12. I had a chemistry lab
that I built myself, building that stuff. I could buy any
glassware, but I had a whole chemistry lab. I had nature
museums. I did all the stuff, and I did it myself, and then of
course moving into the Whole Earth catalog, which is a do-ityourself thing, I really was ... I just talked about building my
own house.
Now, I will hire professionals to work. It just took me a long
time to realize that there's something about ... Being able to pay
professionals to do what they do really well is not a weakness.
It helps them. I'm happy. They're happy. We're all happy. I can
do a lot more. There's certainly a pleasure in doing things
yourself and dabbling in it, but there's also this other thing,
which I didn't realize, which is there's this leverage that you get
by hiring people who are really good, paying them fairly,
working with them to amplify what it is that you want to do. I
wish I knew that when I was younger.
Tim Ferriss:

That's a fantastic answer. You have, if I remember correctly, an
assistant and a researcher. Is that still true?

Kevin Kelly:

Yes, one and the same person.

Tim Ferriss:

They are the same. I thought that at one point, you had believed
that you needed those people to be two separate people but you-

Kevin Kelly:

Here's what I was saying was that it's very unusual to find one
person who can do both of those tasks. Both of those tasks are
often not found on the same person because there's the hunting,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

the researching. There's a hunter aspect to research that's often
found in a certain personality, and then they're the kind the
admin. It's more nurturing, kind of making sure things,
gardening a little bit. It's often rare to find someone who can do
both, but it's possible.
Tim Ferriss:

Was it luck that you happened upon this particular individual
that you work with now? Or did you have a method for ... ?
Was there a particular approach …

Kevin Kelly:

I found that the place where I found … over the 14 years, I've
had two, the place where I found that they're more likely than
not to have a combination was librarians.

Tim Ferriss:

I love it.

Kevin Kelly:

We put out notices on the librarian mailing list and stuff.

Tim Ferriss:

I said last question. This will be the last question. Is there any
other thoughts or advice you'd like to leave with the listeners,
and then where would you like people to find more from you,
your writing, anywhere else.

Kevin Kelly:

I would say congratulations to the people who have listened to
the podcast. I think podcast are these fantastic new medium. I'm
spending a lot of time there. I think it's this really great. We're
in the early days of where this will go. I'm really impressed by
the power of this medium to teach and to inform; sometimes to
entertain. Again, I'm thankful to you, Tim, for having me on
and having the chance to gab here, but to the people who are
listening, I think keep going. Listen to more podcasts. Try to go
wide. I know Tim mentions them here and there. Take a chance.
Listen to some more.
That's one thing I would say as far as finding out more about
me, I lucked out with a very easy website. It's my initials, KK.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

KK.org. I have very public email for the past 25 years. You can
find it very easily on my website if you want email directly. I
have not outsourced that unlike other people that I know. My
writings and books and whatnot are www.KK.org.
Cool Tools is a book that I really believe that each of you out
there should have. It's on paper. It's the best of the website,
Cool Tools, which is me going on for 11 years now where we
review every day, one great tool. They're only positive reviews.
Why waste your time on anything but the best? Tools in the
broadest sense of the word of things that are useful, whether it's
Elance, or a book on how to do psychedelics, or a book on how
to build a workshop, or how to build a house, or how to
hitchhike around the world.
I and others recommend the best here with some great contexts.
It's printed on paper, available on Amazon. Not so easily found
in bookstores because it's huge. It's like 5 pounds weighs. It's
really, really big. If you don't find 500 things you didn't know
about but you wished you know about, like last year, I'll give
you your money back. Enjoy that. That said, Cool Tools or
Cool Tools in Amazon.
Tim Ferriss:

Kevin, this has been a blast. It always is. Every time we chat, I
feel like we should chat more. Hopefully, we'll get a chance to
spend some more time together soon back in Nor Cal or
somewhere else?

Kevin Kelly:

Nor Cal? In China.

Tim Ferriss:

Or in China. It's been a long time. I could get back.

Kevin Kelly:

I'm heading back to Japan again, and I know that you have lots
of roots in Asia, but I go there to renew my sense of the future
because they are ... They're bulldozing the past as fast as they
can and headed, racing into the future. I want to see what Asia

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

has in store for us because mathematically, we don't count
anymore. 1.3 billion, whatever, the 3 billion Asians and 300
million Americans. What can you say?
Tim Ferriss:

Study up, folks. Specialization is for insects. I think that was a
hind line.

Kevin Kelly:

Hind line.

Tim Ferriss:

Enjoy your time on this planet and look broadly like Kevin
said. Kevin, thank you so much. I will talk to you soon, and
have a wonderful day. I will talk to you soon.

Kevin Kelly:

Thanks for having me, Tim.

Tim Ferriss:

Buh-bye.

Kevin Kelly:

Bye-bye.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

