If knowledge is power, then learning is our superpower


  

Remember what you read


Read a book in intervals of max 25 minutes, then put the book down and write down what you learned, or do something else




Forget: What you already know / What is not urgent or important ( the mind can't multi-task ) / Your limitations
Act: Be active in learning, take notes
State: Information times emotion helps create memories
Teach: Learn with the intention of teaching
Enter: Add learning oppertunities to your calender
Review: Review the previously learned material before reading on


My dominant question:
Is there a joke here?


Turn knowledge into power with these questions:


* How can I use this?
* Why must I use this?
* When will I use this?


Mindset


* Get rid of limiting beliefs
* If I have to choose, I would say I'm a blaze genius: The ability to connect with people 


Keys to getting rid of limiting beliefs:


1. Name your limiting beliefs: Once you identify those voices in your head, start talking back to them
I always make bad decisions
I don't know how to handle my finances
I'm not very smart
I don't perform well under pressure
2. Get to the facts: Your limiting beliefs are in many cases just plain wrong. Where is the proof you can't do something?
3. Create a new belief


The 7 lies of learnig:


   1. Intelligence is fixed
It's not how smart you are, it is how you are smart. Intelligence is a combination of attitudes and actions and is dependent on context. Intelligence is fluid
   2. We only use 10% of our brains
   3. Mistakes are failures
   4. Knowledge is power
Knowledge is only power when put ito action. Do not talk about what you learn in this book, show what you learned. It's better well done than well said. Don't promise, prove!
   5. Learning new things is difficult
   6. The criticism of other people matters
   7. Genius is born
Genius leaves clues, there is always a method behind what looks like magic.




Motivation
Current Passions:
      1. Climbing
      2. Comedy
      3. Re-building myself to be better than before


Goals


      1. Write a stand up special: I want to try doing standup and know that I gave it my all 
      2. Write a movie script: I want to learn how to write a movie script because it will help me think of material and learn to write stories
      3. Complete a full sketchbook: I would love to be more creative
      4. 7a bitches: Climbing is a pure sport, physical and mental resistance are tested and 7a is quite a performance + I just fucking love climbing


I am:
      1. Sensitive
      2. Smart
      3. Healthy
      4. Freaking handsome


Disadvantages of not putting this book into action
      * Being stuck in a job I don't like without ever knowing if it could have been different 
      * Forgetting I am limitless
      * Losing confidence




Benefits of putting this book into action
      * More confidence
      * Actual time being spent in creating my own show
      * Learning more
      * Become happy again




Energy


      1. A good brain Diet ( 8/10 )
      2. Brain Nutrients ( 9/10 )
      3. Exercise ( 9/10 )
      4. Killing ants: Automatic negative thoughts ( 3/10 ) 
      5. A clean environment: Stop smoking ( 6/10 )
      6. A positive peer group: Nick / Eduardo / Alex ( 9/10 )
      7. Brain protection ( 9/10 )
      8. New learning ( 9/10 )
      9. Stress management ( 9/10 )
      10. Sleep ( 8/10 )




Small simple steps


Writing a movie script:
      * Look for tutorials on writing scripts


Writing stand-up
      * Read Mastering stand-up


The four stages of flow


      1. Struggle
      2. Relaxation
      3. Flow
      4. Consolidation


Finding Flow:
      1. Eliminate distractions
      2. Give yourself enough time
      3. Do something you love
      4. Have clear goals
      5. Challenge yourself.. A little


Enemies of Flow:
      1. Multi-tasking
      2. Stress
      3. Fear of failure
      4. Lack of conviction




Method


Focus


Current level of concentration 4/10


      1. Breathe
4-7-8 method: Exhale completely ( woosh ) - Close your mouth, inhale 4 seconds - Hold your breath for 7 seconds - Exhale ( woosh ) 8 seconds
Repeat 3x ( total of 4 )
      2. Do something that has been causing stress
      3. Schedule time for distractions


7 Habits to unlimit your study:


         1. Employ Active Recall
review the material and then close the book and write down or recite what you just reviewed. after this check how much you remembered
         2. Employ spaced repitition
         3. Manage the state you are in
Sit up straight and smile
         4. Use your sense of smell
         5. Music for the mind
         6. Listen with your whole brain
Halt: Be completely present
Empathy: Feel from their perspective
Anticipate: Engage in the experience
Review: Imagine yourself teaching it to someone else
         7. Take note of taking notes


Speed Reading


3 books I would start reading if I knew how to read faster:


            1. Astrophysics for people in a hurry
            2. Thinking Fast & Slow
            3. Essentialism


How fast do I read now? 42/3 = 14 x 30 = 420/2 = 210


Subvocalizing slows reading down while not being required for understanding. Lead you reading by using your finger ( or mouse ). Your eyes want to follow the motion


How to read even faster:


            1. Reading is like exercise
            2. Expand you peripheral vision
            3. Counting


Problem solving: 6 thinking hats








1, 3, 2, 1, 1, 1, 3, 1, 3, 3, 2, 3, 2, 2, 3, 1, 2 /  A K A  A A A A K