The Tim Ferriss Show Transcripts
Episode 125: Derek Sivers
Show notes and links at tim.blog/podcast
Tim Ferriss:

Derek, welcome to the show.

Derek Sivers:

Thank you.

Tim Ferriss:

I’m so excited to have you on. This has been in the works for many
months, and I’m gonna read a bio, and a short intro for you for
folks in a second, but we’re gonna come back to the subject of
fasting, because I’m eight days into a 10-day fast, and I was
astonished to hear, when we were chatting the other day, that you
have done something very similar, if not the same. So, before we
get to that, though, for everybody listening, Derek Sivers, one of
my favorite humans, so excited to have him on the phone, and here
is a sketch of his background.
Originally a professional musician and circus clown, Derek Sivers
– you should say hi to him @sivers, on the Twitter. That’s S, I V,
E, R, S. Created CDBaby in 1998, became the largest seller of
independent music online, with $100 million in sales for 150,000
musicians. In 2008, Derek sold CDBaby for $22 million, giving
the proceeds to a charitable trust for music education.
He is, and has been, a frequent speaker on the TED conference
circuit, with over 5 million views of his talks, and, since 2011, he’s
published 24 books, including Anything You Want, which shot to
No. 1 on all of its Amazon categories. It is also one of the few
business books, which I think, categorically, are generally terrible,
that I’ve not only read multiple times, but listened to multiple
times. The last of which was in Sweden, about a month ago, before
deciding to take my startup vacation, effectively my retirement
from startup investing. So, Derek, thank you for putting out such
good work, first of all, before we even jump into it.

Derek Sivers:

Thanks, good to finally, officially talk to you, I guess. Because we
always talk off the record. Which is funny, because people always
ask me about hey, do you know what Tim’s investing in? And, I
just, I think, you know, every time you and I talk, we just, we talk
about women.
That’s so funny. So, here we are, having an official conversation,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

finally.
Tim Ferriss:

No, we are. And, I should also, underscore for people, No. one,
I’m eight days into fasting, so if I sound like an idiot, I’m gonna
blame it on that. But, second is that I consider you a reality check
for me, and we first met – I wanna say it was at a Music and Tech,
or Tech and Music event, in 2007 perhaps, 2008, and I was
familiar with some of your work, you had read the 4-Hour Work
Week, and the prompt for me, sometimes, to call you is, No. one, if
I just need a sanity check. Where, for instance, if people around me
seem to be asking the question, how should you best grow your
company, and then there’s an A, B, C list. I don’t necessarily go to
you to get a D and an E. I go to you, because you will say, why do
you want to grow your company in the first place?

Derek Sivers:

Exactly. You ask the wrong questions, a lot of you.

Tim Ferriss:

And, secondly, because you’re very good at simplifying, and
breaking things down. I recall – and, I might be getting the location
wrong. But, I seem to place this in Times Square, sitting on the
bleachers, talking about – I think it was SQL, and databases, and I
was extremely uncomfortable, felt out of my depth when talking to
engineers and stuff like that. And, you were like, it’s not that hard.
And, on a single piece of paper, sketched out databases, and SQL,
and how it worked. And, I just admire the – not only capability,
which is not that common, but the willingness to simplify
something, where I think we live in a world where many people
complicate to profit, right?

Derek Sivers:

Correct.

Tim Ferriss:

If what you do is simple, then you feel like you’re dispensable, if
that makes sense.

Derek Sivers:

Yes.

Tim Ferriss:

But, I wanna stop talking and ask you, because I’m not sure I ever
heard the full story. Originally a professional musician and circus
clown. What? What is the circus clown story?

Derek Sivers:

Okay, there’s actually a good lesson inside the story. Is that I was
18 years old, and all I wanted in my whole life, was to be a
professional musician. I mean, ideally, a rock star, yeah. But, if
I’m just making my living doing music, that was the goal. So, I’m
18 years old, I’m living in Boston, I’m going to Berklee College of
Music. And I’m in this band where the bass player, one day in

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

rehearsal says, hey man, my agent just offered me this gig, it’s like
$75 to play at a pig show in Vermont. He rolls his eyes, and he’s
like, I’m not gonna do it, do you want the gig?
I’m like, fuck yeah, a paying gig? Oh my God! Yes! So, I took the
gig, to go up to Burlington, Vermont.
And, I think it was like a $58 round trip bus ticket to Vermont.
And, I get to this pig show, I strap my acoustic guitar on, and I
walked around a pig show playing music. And, I did that for about
three hours, and took the bus home, and the next day, the booking
agent called me up, and said, hey, yeah, so you did a really good
job at the pig show. We got good reports there. Wondering if you
can come play at an art opening is Massachusetts, I’ll pay you $75
again. Yeah, sure. So, same thing again, I took a $60 bus out to
Western Massachusetts, got $75 for playing at an art opening, And,
the agent was there, and he was really impressed. He said, hey,
I’ve got this circus, the musician just quit, so we really need
someone new.
And, I really like what you’re doing, so there’s about three gigs a
week, I can pay you $75 a gig, they’re usually Friday, Saturday,
Sunday, do you want the gig? I was like, hell, yeah, I’m a
professional musician now, this is amazing!
So, I said yes to everything, which is gonna come up later, with the
hell yes or no thing, that I think it’s really smart to switch
strategies. But, when you’re earlier in your career, I think the best
strategy is, you just say yes to everything. Every piddly little gig.
You just never know what are the lottery tickets, so this one ended
up being a real lottery ticket for me. Because as soon as I joined
the circus – I’m 18, I have no stage experience, and after a few
gigs, they said, hey, the previous musician used to go out and open
the show, with this big theme song, and get everybody up and
dancing. Could you do that?
And, I said, yeah, sure. And, a couple gigs after that, they said, the
previous musician used to close the show with that same theme
song, could you do that? I said, yeah, sure. And then it was, the
previous musician used to go out between every act, to like, get the
audience to applaud and thank them, and introduce the next act. Do
you think you could do that? And, I said, yeah, sure, and I was
really bad at it, but I got better. I became the ringleader MC, of this
whole circus.
And I was 18 years old. So, if you were to go to the circus, it
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

would’ve looked like my show. And, eventually got paid more
than $75 a show. Eventually, I got paid $300 a show, and it
became my full-time living, and I even bought a house with the
money I made playing with the circus. And then, that led to so
many other things. So many opportunities, and ten years of stage
experience, came from that one, piddly little pig show. And I said
yes to that one little thing. And so, yeah, the only reason I stopped
doing the circus is when CDBaby started taking over my life, and I
started – I had to start turning down circus gigs. But, yeah, that was
my life for ten years.
Tim Ferriss:

What did you learn that made you better? What were the lessons
learned that made the biggest difference in your performance as
this MC?

Derek Sivers:

Good question. It was –

Tim Ferriss:

Or, the biggest mistakes that you made early on, that you
corrected. Either one’s fine.

Derek Sivers:

Okay. Alright, it’s kind of the same answer, in that at first, I was
too self-conscious, because I thought it was about me. Like, I was
going up onstage, thinking that the audience was somehow judging
me, Derek Sivers, like, as if I mattered, you know? So, I would get
self-conscious of what they thought of me. And, eventually, it took
maybe ten or 20 gigs, with the – the circus was run by a husband
and wife team, and Carlton was the wife, that – she was the one
kind of out on the gigs, and really kind of leading the circus. The
husband was more of the booking agent. And, she’s the one that
single-handedly gave me my confidence that I have today.
Sometimes, when people ask me, why am I so confident, it’s
because of Carlton. That’s a longer story we can get into.
But, anyway, Carlton is the one that – she kept pushing me from
backstage, like, come on, you’re up there acting like David
Letterman, don’t do this kind of, uh-huh, I’m so cool, alright
everybody, here’s the next act. Like, I think I was trying to be cool,
because I thought that people were judging me, right? And, she
said, these people came here for a show. Go give them what they
came here for! And so, one time, I decided to go out there, and be
just over the top ridiculous.
I went out there, and I said, ladies and gentlemen, what you’re

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

about to see is one of the most amazing – we have an elephant that
is going to be coming from backstage – I did this whole thing, and
the fast talking voice, and a real pizzazz to it, and the audience
loved it, and I came backstage, and she said, there you go! That’s
what people come to the circus for! So, now that I’ve been on stage
thousands of times, this really sunk in. You go onstage to give the
audience what they came there for.
Or, even things like this, this interview we’re doing. This isn’t
necessarily for you or me, we could just hang up the phone and
talk, we don’t need to – but, we’re doing this for the listeners.
We’re going to give them something that’s useful to them. This
isn’t about me, this isn’t about you. This is about them.
Tim Ferriss:

Uh-huh.

Derek Sivers:

So, that was the biggest lesson learned. Luckily, I learned it early
on, when I was 18, 19, and yeah.

Tim Ferriss:

So, I know we could come back to it, but I don’t want to forget,
since I have low glucose brain, which I think I just made Japanese
accidentally, but how did she give you your confidence? Or, if you
prefer to answer in a different way, because I get this question a lot
from fans on Twitter, how did you get so confident? And, there are
things I can point to, from athletic training with specific wrestling
coaches and so on, but if – what did that woman do to help make
you more confident?
Or, if you were trying to coach somebody, who’s gonna get up and
give their first TED Talk, what would you say to them? And, I
don’t know if the answers are similar.

Derek Sivers:

Completely different answers, so we’ll just do the confidence one.
I can give TED Talk advice later, if you want. Is that, in my case,
you gotta understand, Carlton was hot. I was 18, she was 33, and
even the first I ever saw her – I told you she was the booking
agent’s wife. So, when I took that bus out to western
Massachusetts, the first time, I’m sitting in the Worcester-Mass
bus station, it’s nasty, it’s the dregs of the earth, with fluids
dripping – and it’s gross, and I’m sitting there, waiting for
somebody to pick me up.
And then, like, the door opens to the bus station, and it’s like that
scene in the movie, with the backlit woman, and the fan blowing
her hair and... dreamweaver! It’s that moment, this gorgeous
woman walks in the bus station, and I’m like, who is that? And,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

she walks towards me, and she says, Derek? I was like, ah! So, that
was Carlton. It’s important to know that Carlton is hot.
She still is. And, I was 18, and I was dating girls in Boston, and of
course, everybody just broke my heart, and this one girl from
Texas just dumped me, and I was sad, and at that point, Carlton
and I had been traveling on the circus for a year or so, so she knew
me very well. And, when I told her about the girl from Texas that
dumped me, she said, Derek, you don’t understand. I’ve met a lot
of guys in my life, a lot of guys. She said, you are one of the
smartest, brightest, most considerate – you’ve got a future, you’ve
got your shit together. If some woman doesn’t see that, that’s her
problem.
Okay, so, the first hundred times she said this, I thought she was
just being nice, you know? I was like, oh, thank you, but I’m still
sad.
And, I think it took about a year, where she just kept telling me this
and kept telling me this. And, after about a year, it kinda sunk in.
Like, I had noticed that I had just kind of internalized this, Like,
yeah. Sorry, I know you can’t see me right now, but I just changed
my posture, I’m like, yeah. I’m pretty fucking awesome. I’m cool.
I internalized that, so I just carried that with me ever since. There’s
this beautiful Kurt Vonnegut quote, that’s just a throwaway line in
the middle of one of his books, that says, you are whatever you
pretend to be.
Tim Ferriss:

That’s such a good line.

Derek Sivers:

And, I just took that to heart. I thought, you know – I’d also been
reading Tony Robbins’ stuff by then. In fact, oh, God, she was the
one – Carlton’s the one that told me to read Tony Robbins’
Awaken the Giant Within, when I was 18, and that changed my
life. So, yeah, she’s one of the big three influences in my life.

Tim Ferriss:

That’s probably exactly the same age as the time when I read that
book, as a side note.

Derek Sivers:

Good time to read it.
It was formative years. So, yeah, you are whatever you pretend to
be. I think I just realized somewhere in there that you could just
choose to be confident. She helped kinda start it for me, but I kept
it up myself, even when everything’s going terribly, and I have no
reason to be confident, I just decide to be.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

It seems like most of my friends who are what most people would
consider successful, in various respects, can trace their confidence
back to either, or, both, and a specific woman, or a specific coach,
or mentor of some type. It almost always comes down to one or
both of those.

Derek Sivers:

Ooh, Tim, you know, I never told you about Kima Williams.

Tim Ferriss:

That’s a great name, and I wanna learn more. No, I don’t know
anything about it/

Derek Sivers:

This is so up your alley; I can’t believe I never told you about this.
Thanks for prodding me, prompting me about this, because you’re
right. It was a gorgeous woman, Carlton, and it was a music
teacher, Kima Williams. That – see, but he changed my life a year
or two before I met her. So, imagine this. I’m 17 years old now,
I’m living in suburban Chicago, and I decide to go to the Berklee
School of Music, because I want to be a famous musician. And,
just two or three months before I’m supposed to go, I see an ad in
the local Chicago Tribune for music typesetting. And, I’m
wondering how much sheet music I’m going to have to be writing.
So, I call up this classified ad in the paper, and I say, can I ask you
some questions about music typesetting? And, he said, sure, why
do you wanna know? And, I said, well, because I’m about to go off
to Berklee School of Music in a couple of months. And he said, oh,
really? He said, I used to teach at Berklee College of Music. I said,
you did? Do you think you can give me some tips? He said, yeah,
here’s my address. Come to my studio at 9:00AM Thursday
morning, see you then.
So, and he lived way downtown Chicago, in an area I’ve never
been to. And, I’m gonna do a little foreshadowing of the story.

Tim Ferriss:

Perfect.

Derek Sivers:

Right now, because when I got married, years later, to the woman I
met when I was sitting in Times Square with you, he was one of
only three people I invited to the wedding. It was Carlton, from the
circus, Kima Williams, my first music teacher, and my first
girlfriend, Camille. Those were my only three guests to my
wedding. And, Kima Williams told the story to my family. He
said, I tell people all the time. I get all these kids that wanna be
famous, and I say, yep, show up at my studio at 9:00AM, and he
said, nobody ever does.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Nobody has their shit together to show up when I tell them to.
And, he said, so, I’d honestly forgotten that there was this kid who
had called from a classified ad.
Tim Ferriss:

That was his way of saying no. Not no, it was just his hurdle. He
was like, yeah, sure, alright kid, here’s this seven-foot hurdle, let’s
see how you do.

Derek Sivers:

Exactly. So, he says, my doorbell rings on Thursday morning, at
8:59AM. And, I open the door, and there’s some longhaired
teenager standing there. So, now, flipping back to first person point
of view, is, Kima Williams is this large, black man from Hawaii,
that was a musician that attended Berklee School of Music, and
they stayed there to teach for a while. And so, what he taught me,
in four lessons, got me to graduate Berklee College of Music in
half the time it would take, and here was his thing. He said, the
reason I wanted you to study with me for a bit, he said, I know you
only have eight weeks before you go to school.
He said, I think you can graduate Berklee School of Music in two
years instead of four. He said, the standard pace is for chumps.

Tim Ferriss:

I should get a t-shirt made.

Derek Sivers:

I know! This is total Tim Ferriss stuff, right? That’s why I can’t
believe we haven’t talked about this stuff before. He’s the one, at
the age of, like, 17, 18, got me into this mentality. He said, the
standard pace is for chumps. That’s – the school has to organize its
curricula around the lowest common denominator, so that almost
no one is left out. So they have to slow down so everybody can
catch up. But, he said, you’re smarter than that. Or anybody can be
smarter than that, if they want to be, so you can go as fast as you
want. And, here’s how.
And so, he sat me down at the piano, he said, okay, what do you
know about music theory? I said, well, I don’t know, let’s find out.
And, he just asked me a few of these questions, like how does a
major scale go, da, da, da, da, da, right? And, okay, show me a tritone, do you know what the tri-tone is? Okay, play me a tri-tone in
the C major scale. I’m like, okay, B and F. He said, okay, now,
how can you take that, and what other chord can you make from B
and F? He said, okay, that’s called the substitute chord. What is the
resolution? And, he would just, like, boom, boom, boom, at this
kind of pace, he was doing all this music theory stuff with me.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

It was so intense, and I had all this adrenaline, like a video game, I
was like, this is amazing! Okay, keep going! And he’s like, okay,
do that and this, and this! And, that was like a two-hour lesson, that
went at that kind of pace, and then, he dumped a bunch of
homework on me. He said, okay, go home tonight, and take this
big book of jazz standards. Find me all the 2/5 substitutions, or 2/5
closures. Substitute chords for that, come back next Thursday, and
we’ll do this again. So, we did that for four Thursdays in a row.
And, sure enough, what he taught me in four two-hour sessions
was, basically, two years of Berklee College of Music. He
compressed it into four lessons.
Tim Ferriss:

Wow.

Derek Sivers:

So, that when I showed up to my first day of Berklee, I tested out
of the first few years of classes, just thanks to him. And then, he
even taught me a strategy, just he offhand mentioned. He said, you
know, I think they might still have a rule in place, he said, those
other courses that you have to take to graduate?
He said, I think you could just buy the books for those, and then
contact the department head to just take the final exam to get
credit. So, I did that too. So, when I got there, all those required
classes, like Bach counterpoint classes, I wasn’t so interested in it.
So, I bought the book, did all the homework, approached the
department head, said, can I take the final exam for this? And, he
said, looked at me weird, and said, okay. Took the final exam and
got credit, without ever having to attend the class. And, yeah,
that’s how I graduated Berklee College of Music in two years.

Tim Ferriss:

That’s incredible. What I gift. Did he ever, I mean, aside from just
showing up, which is, of course, half the battle, if not more than
half the battle. Did he ever explain to you why he adopted you in
that way? Were you the first person, first student he’d done that
for, or is this something he’d done before?

Derek Sivers:

I think he, yeah, he’s definitely done this before, and since. So, last
time we spoke, yeah, he’s still teaching at Columbia College, in
downtown Chicago.
So, I think he’s done this for many people. He’s just an amazing
guy that is a really great teacher, a really strict teacher. He holds
everybody to a really high standard. That sort of, if he said show
up to my studio at 9:00AM, if I would’ve rang the doorbell at 9:10,
he would’ve said, hmm, you’re not serious. And, he probably
would’ve turned me away, you know? So, he does that with his

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

students, and he’s done that for many people before and since, I
think,
Tim Ferriss:

What would he say to you, if you recall, if you did something
incorrectly? How did he provide feedback?

Derek Sivers:

Hmm, well, I think for certain things, he’d just give me that raised
eyebrow look. Like, oh, really? You think that that – but, you
know what? Here’s kind of the answer to your question, is he
would question things. Kinda like you were talking about.
Calling me when wondering if people are asking the right
questions. So, when I first, that very first phone call, when I said,
I’m gonna go to Berklee School of Music in eight weeks, and he
said, really? Why do you wanna go to Berklee? And, I said,
because
I
wanna
be
a
famous,
successful
singer/songwriter/performer. He said, hmm. He said, well, four
years, and $100,000 in tuition, it’s a lot of money to learn to write
a verse and a chorus. That kind of thing, just like, oh, really? Is that
really the reason you’re doing this? Just constantly questioning.

Tim Ferriss:

That’s so incredibly – especially at that age. What an incredible
molding that he provided.

Derek Sivers:

Ever since then, you know, you and I have, often, the same
approach to life, looking for the shortcuts, or just looking at the
way that most people do things, and saying, you know, you don’t
have to do it that way, that’s very inefficient, you could just do
this.
So, he just gave me that approach to life, and it’s great.

Tim Ferriss:

And, on a related note, could you talk about – we’ve talked about
this a bit, but I never tire of it. Relaxing for the same result,
because I think this is such a huge observation, that it’s incredibly
important for Type-A personalities, or at least for me, because I
have a tendency to almost want to burn the candle at both ends, to
prove to myself that I’m putting forth the maximum effort, I’m
leaving as little as possible to chance.

Derek Sivers:

You? No!

Tim Ferriss:

With certain things. But, tell everybody about the bike. About the
bicycle experience.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah, this was kinda profound. Now, granted, I didn’t learn this

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

until later, but yeah, I’d been very, very, very Type-A, my whole
life. Even before I met Kima Williams, the age of 14.
My friends called me the robot, because they would never see me
sleep or eat, or relax, or hang out. I just was so focused on being
the best musician that I could be, that I would just practice every
waking minute. If I’d begrudgingly go to a party, I’d bring my
guitar, and I’d be sitting in the corner practicing my scales and
arpeggios, while everyone was hanging out and getting high. So,
yeah, I’ve always been very Type-A, and so a friend of mine got
me into cycling when I was living in LA, and I lived right on the
beach in Santa Monica, where there’s this great bike path in the
sand, that goes for, I think it’s 25 miles in the sand. No, hold on.
Something like that.
The exact number doesn’t matter. But, what I would do is, I’d go
onto the bike path, and I would get like, head down and push it, as
hard as I could, I would go all the way down to one end of the bike
path, and back, and then head back home, and I’d set my little
timer when doing this.
Tim Ferriss:

Huffing and puffing, red-faced,

Derek Sivers:

Yeah, just red-faced huffing, all the way, pushing it as hard as I
could, just every thrust of the leg, and of course, that made me
quite fun if someone was in my way on the bike path.

Tim Ferriss:

Sure. That guy’s got places to go.

Derek Sivers:

So, but I noticed it was always 43 minutes. If you know Santa
Monica, California, you know the weather is always about exactly
the same, all year round. So, it was always – unless it was a
surprisingly windy day, it was always about 43 minutes, is what it
took me to go as fast as I could, on that bike path. But, I noticed
that, over time, I was starting to feel less psyched. About going out
on the bike path. Because just mentally, when I would think of it, it
would feel like pain and hard work.

Tim Ferriss:

It sounds like pain and hard work.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah, it was, but I guess, at first, it was okay, and after a while, it
just felt like, I don’t know, riding the bike, why don’t I just hang
out. So, then, I’d say, you know, that’s not cool for me, to start to
associate negative stuff with going on the bike ride, why don’t I
just chill?

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

For once. I’m gonna go on the same bike ride, but just, I’m not
gonna be a complete snail, but I’ll go at, like, half of my normal
pace. So, yeah, I got on my bike, and it was just pleasant. I just
went on the same bike ride, and I noticed that I was standing up,
and I was looking around more. And, I looked into the ocean, and I
saw there were these dolphins jumping in the ocean, and I went
down to Marina Del Rey, to my turnaround point, and I noticed in
Marina Del Rey, that there was a penguin that was flying above
me. I looked up, I was like, hey a penguin, and he shit in my
mouth. I was like, blah!
Tim Ferriss:

Was it a penguin or a pelican?

Derek Sivers:

Oh, yeah, a pelican.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, I was like, a flying penguin in Marina Del Rey, what did you
take before your ride? So, a pelican shit in your mouth.
That’s incredible accuracy, did it from, like, how far away was it?

Derek Sivers:

A good 20 feet up.

Tim Ferriss:

Wow.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah, I don’t know if he was accurate, or I was. So, the point is, I
had such a nice time, it was just purely pleasant. There was no red
face, there was no huffing, I was just cycling, it was nice. And,
when I got back to my usual stopping place, I looked at my watch,
and it said 45 minutes. I was like, no way, how the hell could that
have been 45 minutes, as opposed to my usual 43? There’s no way,
but it was right, 45 minutes. And, that was a profound lesson that I
think changed the way I’ve approached my life ever since. It’s
because I realized that, what percentage of that huffing and
puffing, then?
We could do the math, whatever, 93 point something percent of
my huffing and puffing, and all that red face and all that stress was
only for an extra two minutes. It was basically for nothing. I mean,
we’re not talking about me competing in something, where the
huffing and puffing might’ve been worth it. But, for life, I think of
all of this maximization, and getting the maximum dollar out of
everything, and the maximum out of every second, and the
maximum out of every minute, and I think I just take this approach
now, of going, like, or, you could just take that lesson.
Take most of that lesson, and apply it, be effective, and be happy,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

but you don’t need to stress about any of this stuff. And so,
honestly, that’s been my approach ever since. I do things, but I
stop before anything gets stressful.
Tim Ferriss:

Is there any particular way that you remind yourself of that, given
a lifetime of hard charging? If – I would find, I do find that I
sometimes lose track of that type of truth, which I think is a truth,
in every aspect, at least in the endeavors that I partake in, at least.
Are there any particular ways that you remind yourself of that, or
keep it present for you?

Derek Sivers:

I think it’s just noticing the pain. Luckily, I live in a world where
there’s more psychic pain than physical pain, right? So, you have
to notice the psychic pain that you’re feeling, whether it’s doing
things you don’t wanna be doing, and feeling the pain and
frustration of that. Just, you notice this internal argh. That’s my
cue, I treat that like physical pain. Like, what am I doing? I need
to stop doing that thing that hurts. What is that? And, it usually
means that I’m just pushing too hard, or doing things that I don’t
really want to be doing.
Because I was asking the wrong questions, and following the
wrong path, the wrong outcome.

Tim Ferriss:

Now, rewinding the clock a little bit. 1998. How did CDBaby
come to be?

Derek Sivers:

It was just – I was really just selling my own CD, on my band’s
website. I was just, I had a band called Hit Me, and I had a CD,
that was being played on radio stations across the country, and I
think it was on 350 college radio stations across America. But, the
only way to buy it was to mail a check or money order to my
address. This was before the average person could get any ecommerce online, because there was no PayPal.
I guess I could’ve put it up on eBay or something, but that was the
only way you could sell your CD online, as an independent
musician. There was just nobody that would sell it for you. There
were a couple big online record stores at the time. There was
MusicBlvd.com, and CDNow.com, I think Amazon bought them
both. But, the only way to get into their system was to go through
the major labels.
Basically, get a major label record deal, and then, be in the major
label distribution system, and then you would appear on

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

CDNow.com. Right? So, I thought, this is just a horrible,
convoluted thing. It should just be dead simple, to just put your
stuff online, have a buy now button, and ship it to the person that
buys it. It shouldn’t need to be that complicated. So, I did the
research, and I did the work, and I went and got myself a credit
card merchant account, which is like $1,000 in setup fees. They
actually had to send an inspector out to my location, to make sure I
was a valid business.
I think I even had to incorporate to make them happy. Did all of
this red tape, all this paperwork, $1,000 in setup fees, but after
three months, I had a credit card merchant account, and then, I had
to figure out how to make a buy now button on my website, and
that was also hard. Had to buy a book on CGI-BIN Perl scripts,
and copy the example from the book on how to make a buy now
button, but after three months of hard work, I did it.
My band’s website had a buy now button. That was like, wow,
look at that. And so, my friends in the New York City music scene,
my fellow musicians, said, whoa, dude, do you think you could sell
my CD through that thing? I said, you mean, on my band’s
website? They said, yeah, if you don’t mind. I said, yeah, sure,
why not? So, it was like a favor to my friend, Marco. Actually,
here’s a little tidbit of information.
Marco, who I just knew as a musician, Marco Artesardi, I just
knew him as a cool musician in New York City, he was technically
the guy who gave me the idea for CDBaby. Later, I found out that
he’s the son of the Prime Minister of Finland. And, it was like, all
in the news, and I had no idea, but Marco, thank you. He’s the one
that asked me if I could sell his CD through my band’s website.
So, I did, and then I started getting calls, like, hey man, my friend
Marco said you could sell my CD through your website.
I said, yeah, no problem, a friend of Marco’s is a friend of mine,
and it grew by request. Which kinda led me to this – when people
ask me, how do I grow my business? I’ve got this business idea,
basically, I’m trying to push it into the world, how do I push my
idea into the world? I have no idea, I have no advice for those
people, because I’ve only ever worked on the pull method, where
people ask me to do things for them, and I say yes.
So, CDBaby just happened because all of my musician friends
were asking me to sell their CD on my band’s website. And, then, I
just – eventually, there were so many that I just took them off of
my band’s site, and put them onto their own site, and that was
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

CDBaby.com.
Tim Ferriss:

Of your projects that have done well, what percentage have come
from scratching your own itch, a la CDBaby? Are any of the
projects that have gained traction projects that you’ve thought of
sending to a market that didn’t include you?

Derek Sivers:

Actually, after that first one – I mean, yes, I built a thing to sell my
own CD, but all of them were scratching other people’s itches. I
don’t wanna picture that. So, like, for example, shortly after that –
I already had a UPC barcode thing, the way it used to work, to get
a barcode on your album, you had to pay $400 to the Universal
Code Council, in order to get a six-digit prefix, which then let you
assign the next five digits. Which meant 100,000 products
underneath your barcode, product ID, or something like that.
So, a lot of musicians in the independent music world wanted to
have a UPC barcode for their album, that would let them sell it in
physical stores. And, a lot of physical stores wouldn’t let you sell
something, unless it had a UPC barcode.
But they didn’t want to all pay the $400 to get a company account.
But, I already had a company account. And so, I just let a lot of
musicians know, if you need a barcode, let me know, I can get one
for you. So, enough people started taking me up on this that I
started to charge $20 for it. Because it would take me some time to
assign them an idea and then generate the EPS or TIF graphic file
to be included in their album artwork, and eventually I automated
it. Point is, 100.000 barcodes were assigned, at $20 each.
That was what I charged for the service, it was like $2 million
made, for the $400 setup fee, for getting a Universal Code Council
account. So, you could say I was scratching my itch, but really, it
was more – I think of it as the co-op business model.

Tim Ferriss:

It was responding to demand, rather than trying to create demand,
is that?

Derek Sivers:

Yes, I’ve only ever responded to demand, I’ve never tried to create
demand, I don’t know how.
I’ve only basically ever answered the calls for help, right, and it’s
usually using this, what I call the co-op business model, which is,
I’ve already got something, other people could use it, I’m happy to
share it. I’ll just charge a little something to help pay for my time
and resources, so that we can all share this resource that I’ve

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

already got.
Tim Ferriss:

I love – this is a great example of spotting something small,
perhaps looking at a situation that many, many other people have
been presented with, and spotting something interesting, in this
case, an opportunity. And, I wanna highlight one other example,
which is an email that you wrote, and I’m gonna just read a little
bit, here. So, this is from some of your writing. When you make a
business, you’re making a little world where you control the laws.
It doesn’t matter how things are done everywhere else, in you little
world, you can make it like it should be.
And, I know you’re better at reading this stuff, but I’m just gonna,
just because I have it right in front of me. When I first built
CDBaby, every order had an automated email, that let the customer
know when the order was actually shipped, and of course, this is
Tim speaking now, everyone’s seen these. They tend to be very
Plain Jane, very generic, very boring. At first, it was just the
normal – this is back to your writing – your order shipped today,
please let us know if it doesn’t arrive, thank you for your business.
A few months later, I felt it was very incongruent with my vision
to help people smile. I knew I could do better, so I took 20
minutes, and wrote this goofy little thing. So, this is the email that
would go out to folks. Your CD has been gently taken from our
CDBaby shelves, with sterilized, contamination-free gloves, and
placed onto a satin pillow. A tram of 50 employees inspected your
CD, and polished it, to make sure it was in the best possible
condition before mailing. Our packing specialist from Japan lit a
candle, and a hush fell over the crowd, as he put your CD in the
finest, gold-lined box that money can buy.
We all had a wonderful celebration afterwards, and the whole party
marched down the street to the post office, where the entire town
of Portland waved goodbye to your CD –
On its way to you, in our private CDBaby jet, on this day,
Wednesday, June 6. I hope you had a wonderful time shopping at
CDBaby, we sure did. Your pictures on our wall as Customer of
the Year. We’re all exhausted, but can’t wait for you to come back
to CDBaby.com!! Two exclamation points. So, that 20 minutes,
what happened, after you put that together?

Derek Sivers:

Well people would get it, and reply back. Like, who ever replies
back to an automated shipping email, right? Like, who ever replies
back to Amazon, saying, wow, guys, thank you so much. But, the

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

face that this quirky little email had so much personality, for one, it
let them know, there’s real people here. And, so, customers would
often reply back, saying, you guys are hilarious! That was the
weirdest thing ever! Awesome! But, more importantly, people
started sharing it.
They would forward it to all of their friends, like, you guys have to
see this. And, people who had blogs would post it on their blogs.
Even just you know, little Blogspot, or Wordpress, or any of those
blogs. So, now, if you take any of those sentences, from that email,
and you put it into quotation marks and search for it on Google,
you’ll find literally thousands of blogs have pasted my
confirmation email onto their blogs. And, I think about this when
young entrepreneurs ask me, how can I get traction for my idea?
How can I get word of mouth and buzz happening?
I think you can read business books, and try to do these very
serious, furrowed-brow, analytical approaches to this. Or,
sometimes, it’s just these cute little funny things, that you do, that
set you apart from the rest, that make you remarkable, that make
people remark on you, about you. So, yeah, I think thousands of
people heard about CDBaby, because of that one little silly email.
Tim Ferriss:

And, I think comparable might be Zappos, for instance.
And, their customer service. And, what was the anecdote that got
spread around? The anecdote was, you could call up Zappos for
anything. Even if it was unrelated to the product You could call
them up and say, yes, I’m looking at the website, but I’d actually
really like a pizza delivered to my house, and they would figure
out a way to do that. On the serious, analytical side, you say, oh
my God, that’s such a waste of human and capital resources, and
can you imagine if everybody called to order pizza? Which, of
course –

Derek Sivers:

It doesn’t scale!

Tim Ferriss:

Is never gonna happen, ever, and they got probably millions of
dollars of free publicity, just by making that okay. And, how long
did that take? Not long at all.

Derek Sivers:

Plus, like, I don’t mean to sound New Age-y, or whatever, but it’s
the right thing to do for the world, right? Just put aside the
numbers for a bit, it’s the right thing to do. It’s cool, it makes
people happier. It makes the people working there happier, which

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

makes them more into the whole feeling of what they’re doing.
There’s so much to a business than just the money. So, yeah.
Tim Ferriss:

So, tell me about – I remember reading about this, but I think we
might have talked about it at one point, which was, when people
would call CDBaby, trying to offer you financing. How did those
go?

Derek Sivers:

Well, so remember, I started CDBaby at the end of ’97, beginning
of ’98, so it was the first dot com boom. And there was just so
much money flying around, and everybody was trying to push
money at anyone that had a dot com in their domain name, and had
anything going on. So, of course, me, with an actual, profitable,
running, business, which was, really, the only game in town, by the
way. Like, back when I started it, if you were a musician that
wanted to sell your music online, there was a guy named Derek in
New York that could do it for you, and that was it.
There were no other businesses that would do it. Some showed up
like, a year or two later, but at first I had no competition at all, I
was it. So, tons of money was shoved my direction.
And, I entertained the first few calls. They said, we want to invest
in your company, and I said, well, why? They said, so you can
grow it faster. I said, but, I don’t wanna grow it faster. They said,
well, don’t you wanna scale, or get more resources? I said, no, I
have all the resources I need, I’m good. I was profitable, since the
first month in business. Because my startup costs were $495, is
what it cost me to start the business, and get it running. It took me
six days to build the site, and get it up and running.
And, it was profitable in the second month of business, when I sold
over $400 in CDs, that first month in business, I was profitable
ever since. And, I just didn’t need the money, and so, yet, people
kept offering and they would wave these big dreams in my face,
thinking it was going to distract or entice me, but it just didn’t, and
I remember – I doubt you remember, but MP3.com was a big deal.
In, like, 1999 through 2002 or so, they were like the big daddy of
independent music streaming online, and downloads. And so, they
were all – yeah, I think they had an IPO, they were public, and
MP3.com was interested in buying CDBaby, and they asked what
my price would be, and I said, just not interested in selling. And,
they said, come on, everybody’s got their price. And I said, no, I’m
not interested, I’m having fun.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

They said, come on, even billions of dollars? I said, come on, what
are you, Carl Sagan? No! I don’t wanna sell, there’s just nothing in
it for me, I’m enjoying what I’m doing, I don’t need the money.
So, after that point, after the first year or two, I just taught my
customer service people, if you get any calls from investors, or VC
firms, or anything like that, please just tell them no. Don’t even
send them my way. We’re not interested. So, yeah, that lasted for
ten years.
Tim Ferriss:

And, how did you develop that relationship with money?
Is that something from your parents? Is that – and, I’m gonna ask a
very personal question, also, and you can feel free to not answer it.
But, why did your family – why were none of your family
members at your wedding?

Derek Sivers:

Oh, sorry, they were too. I’m sorry, when I said three guests, I
meant other than them.

Tim Ferriss:

Alright, now that I’ve checked that, okay.

Derek Sivers:

I hate them! I hate them!

Tim Ferriss:

It was in the back of my mind. So, how did you develop this
relationship with money where you would say no for ten years?
Because that’s not what most people would do.

Derek Sivers:

Because I had enough. Because I – actually, you know what? It’s a
bit of a trick reason, because in the early days, I still considered
CDBaby to be a bit of a distraction. Because you remember, I was
making my living as a professional musician, which was my
original goal and dream. So, I was living my dream. I was touring,
playing on people’s records, producing people’s records.
I played about 500 colleges in the Northeast. I was making good
money as a professional musician. Like, that’s what I really wanted
to do, and this little CDBaby thing was a favor I was doing for my
friends, to kinda give back to the community, right? So, as it grew.
I didn’t want it to grow, because it was taking me away from my
music. Which is my real love, making the music, not selling other
people’s music.
So, there as this moment when I think I kind of sadly realized, I’ve
created a business, oh well, I might as well make it something
awesome. Meaning, I wanna make it like a utopian dream come
true, from a musician’s point of view, and I spent the night

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

brainstorming. What would a real dream come true, from a
musician’s point of view, look like?
And, I don’t know if this will make sense to your listeners, but
let’s just find out. It was that it was going against everything that
was the way that the music distribution world worked at the time.
So, it’s like, number one, I wanna be paid every week. No. two, I
wanna know the full name and address of everyone that buys my
music. No. three, you’ll never kick me out for not selling enough,
because that was a huge problem in the traditional music
distribution world. You’re given a window of time, kind of like
physical books still are.
You have to prove yourself in a window of time, they’ll put you
into the bookstore, if it doesn’t sell well, you’re yanked out to
make room on the shelf for other stuff. And then, No. four, no paid
placement, because it never felt fair that people could come in and
buy up the front page to get unequal footing, right? So, that was
my utopian ideal for how this would work. The reason why I’m
telling you this is, I wasn’t trying to make money. I already had
enough money, that I had made gigging and touring, and all that
stuff.
I already had money, so this is something that I was doing to give
back to the community, to create something that needed to exist.
Kind of artistically, or just kind of almost like a community service
type thing. So, that was the original DNA of this thing, and you
know, from what we know about DNA, it helps decide what things
grow into, right? So, this was the DNA, and then, as it grew, and
then, it became really profitable. And, I was making, I don’t know,
$100,000 a month doing this thing, and I had all of my bills paid,
there was nothing I wanted to buy.
So, if someone from California contacted me, saying they wanted
to give me lots of money to take a big chunk of my business, and
help turn it big, big, big. We think you could do an IPO. I would
just sneer, like, oh, no, that sounds awful. I don’t want that life.
I’m enjoying being fully in control here, and doing things for the
right reasons, doing things for my musician friends, to make them
happy.
Make the customers happy, make the musicians happy. All’s good.
Tim Ferriss:

What was the business model, in the very beginning?

Derek Sivers:

It was only two numbers. Actually, it’s a cute story. Most of us,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

you know, when we start charging money for the first time, for our
services or our goods, we don’t know what to charge, right? So, for
Marco, my first friend that asked me to do this, and maybe the next
10 to 15 friends that came after, I was charging nothing, I was just
doing this as a free favor, this was my community service. And
then, once I realized total strangers were sending me their music, I
thought, alright, I better charge something. But, I don’t know what
to charge.
So, I was living in Woodstock, New York at the time, and there
was a cute, tiny little record store in town, that sold consignment
CDs on the counter, of local musicians. So, I walked in there one
day, and, I said, hey, how does it work if I wanna sell my CD here?
And, she said, well, you set the selling price at whatever you want.
We just keep a flat $4 per CD sold, and then just come by every
week, and we’ll pay you. So, I went home to my new website that
night, and wrote, you set your selling price at what you want, we’ll
just keep a flat $4 per CD sold, and we’ll pay you every week. And
then, I realized that it took about 45 minutes for me to set up a new
album into the system, because I had to lay the album art on the
scanner, and Photoshop it and crop it, and fix the musicians’
spelling mistakes in their own bio, and all that kinda stuff.
That took about 45 minutes per album. So, that shows you what I
was valuing my time at in those days, that I thought 45 minutes of
my time, that’s worth about $25 bucks. So, I’ll charge a $25 setup
fee to sign up for this thing. And, then, ooh, at the last minute, I
thought, in my mind, 25 and 35, they sort of occupy the same brain
cell. In my head, 25 and 35, those numbers don’t feel very
different when it comes to cost.
$10 is different, and $50 is different, but 25, 35, that occupies the
same space in the mind, so you know what? I’m gonna make it
$35, that will let me give anyone a discount, any time they ask.
Even if somebody’s on the phone and upset, I’ll say, you know
what? Let me give you a discount. So, I added in that little buffer,
so I could give people a discount, which they love. So, yeah, $35
setup fee, $4 per CD sold, and then, Tim, for the next ten years,
that was it. That was my entire business model, was generated in
five minutes, by walking down to the local record store, and asking
what they do.
Tim Ferriss:

I love that story, because I think there is an infatuation, a
fetishizing of pivoting in the tech startup world that has infected
many other types of entrepreneurship. Where people think, oh if

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I’m not pivoting, I’m doing something wrong. I need to change my
entire business model and my customer base every two months.
And, I don’t view that as a virtue.
Yes, there are times to change, if something isn’t working, but, if
you don’t take the time up front to think about it, and then, you’re
constantly chasing the latest sort of fad, or whatever appears on the
cover of TechCrunch, or Ink Magazine, or something like that, it’s
a recipe for failure for most people. I mean, there’s a huge
survivorship bias – I’m just gonna rant for a second. There’s a
huge survivorship bias, that I think it’s important to realize, if
you’re hoping to become an entrepreneur, or are an entrepreneur. If
you’re only reading the cover stories, you’re only getting the
happy success stories.
And, for that reason also, I think it’s dangerous to idolize people
who bet the farm, and just happen to pull it off, because those are
the people who are going to be written about. Much like if you
open a Barron’s. and look at mutual funds with these spectacular
records, well, maybe they just got lucky, and all these other ones
can’t afford to buy advertisements, because they’re no longer in
existence. So, it’s very similar to that.
One of the essays that you’re best known for is, “Hell Yeah, or
No.” And, this has been extremely important for me to consistently
reread, or listen to. How did it come about, and what is the gist of
that?
Derek Sivers:

There was a music conference in Australia, that I had told my
friend I would go with her to. It wasn’t even like the conference
themselves were really expecting me. It was my friend, Arielle
Hyatt, is one of the best publicists I know, and she was speaking at
that conference, and asked if I would come with her, as a copresenter in her mentoring session, or something. So, I had said yes
like, six months before. Yeah, sure, Australia, I’m living in New
York City, sure!
And then, once it came close, it was time to book the ticket, I was
like, ugh. I don’t really wanna go to Australia right now, I’m busy
with other stuff, and it was actually my friend Amber Rubarth,
who’s a brilliant musician, I was on the phone with her, and kinda
lamenting about this, and she’s the one who pointed out, she’s like,
it sounds like, from where you’re at, your decision is not between
yes and no, you need to figure out whether you’re feeling like, fuck
yeah! Or, no.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

And, I said, yeah, that’s really what it comes down to, right?
Because the idea is, if you’re feeling anything less than, oh, hell
yeah, I would love to do that, it would be amazing! If you’re
feeling anything less than that, then just say no. Because most of us
say yes to too much stuff, and then, we let these little, mediocre
things fill our lives.
And so, the problem is, when that occasional, oh my God, hell
yeah thing comes along, you don’t have enough time to give it the
attention that you should, because you’ve said yes to too much
other little, half-ass kinda stuff, right? So, once I started applying
this, my life just opened up, because it just meant, I just said, nope,
nope, no, no, no. Then, I was really like, you know what? That’d
be awesome. Then, suddenly, I had all the time in the world. And,
you know, people say this every time people contact you, every
time people contact me, they say, look, I know you must be
incredibly busy. And, I always think, no, I’m not.
Because I’m in control of my time, I’m on top of it. Busy, to me,
seems to imply out of control. Like, oh my God, I’m so busy, I
don’t have any time for this shit! To me, that sounds like a person
who’s got no control of their life.
Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, no control, and unclear priorities.

Derek Sivers:

Yes, exactly. You asked how that still applies to my life. So, still
just on the little, tiny, day to day level, even personal things. God,
even people you meet, even as I’m dating, you have to do the hell
yeah or no approach, or people ask you to go to events, or even
people asking to do a phone call or anything, I think, am I really
excited about that? And, almost every time, the answer’s no. So, I
say no to almost everything, and then, occasionally, something will
come up. Even a little surprise will be dropped in my lap. Like this
thing that just happened two months ago, called the Now, Now,
Now Project.
Which, we don’t even need to talk about the details don’t matter so
much, but it was just something that popped up, that seemed really
interesting and people really wanted, and luckily, because I say no
to almost everything, I had the time in my life to make it flourish.
So, for the last six weeks, all I did full time, was work on this
brand new thing that showed up, because I could. So, that’s, to me,
the lovely result, of taking the hell yeah or no approach to life.

Tim Ferriss:

Where can people learn more, and also check out the Now, Now,
Now Project? And, also, I should note in advance for folks

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

listening, that we will also include links to anything we’ve
mentioned in the Show Notes, which will be at
fourhourworkweek.com/Derek, all spelled out. But, where can
people find out more about Now, Now, Now?
Derek Sivers:

It’s, if you go to nownownow.com, you’ll find more about that. It
was just, in short, I found that everyone has an about page on their
site, and people have a contact page on their site, but often, when
I’m looking at someone’s personal site – even yours, I often
wonder, I wonder what he’s up to now, like, working on kinda
stuff.
And, Twitter and Facebook don’t answer that. I mean, you can see
somebody’s stream of stuff, but it just kinda says, like, okay,
here’s what I had for dinner last night, here’s something in the
news I’m mad about, or here’s a cute thing I’m sharing. But, it
doesn’t really tell me, like, how are you? If you and I haven’t
talked for a year, what’s up, how you doing? So, to me, the whole
idea of a now page on your site, is just a general, here’s what’s up
with me now, sorta page.
So, I had one of those on my site, I had a now page, and then, a
guy named Gregory Brown saw it, liked it, he put one on his site,
and all I did was just retweet him, when he told me. I said, cool, I
wish everybody had a now page. And, within a few hours, eight
more people had a now page, and within a month, 550 people had
a now page on their website. So, I put together nownownow.com,
as kind of a cute collection of people who have a now page on their
website. Anyway, you know what I mean.
As always, the details don’t matter, but I’m so glad I had the time
to do that. And, it was only because I say no to almost everything,
that I was able to just throw myself into this project, and build this
new thing on a whim, and catch the momentum.

Tim Ferriss:

So, I am reading a section on this blog post that I wrote, about you
and the best email you ever wrote, with the Japanese boxing
specialist, and so on, and one of the paragraphs that I put here, for
those people interested, it’s just the most successful email I ever
wrote, but it’s everywhere online. And, it reads, “Stranger still, at
its largest, Derek spent roughly four hours on CDBaby every six
months. He had systematized everything to run without him.” And,
feel free to correct that, if it needs to be corrected, but what –
assuming that’s roughly true, what were some of the most
important decisions or realizations that made that possible?

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Derek Sivers:

Hmm. I love the timing for when I read Four-Hour Work Week,
because it was actually just after I had done this complete
delegation of everything. It was feeling the pain, from everything
having to go through me. Like, it was my business, right 100
percent, no investors, no nothing. And so, I hired people to help
me, it was all me, me, me. So, four years into it, it was growing, it
was really taking off. I had, I don’t know, 20 employees, but still,
almost everything went through me.
And, it made my day kind of miserable, because I’m a real kind of
introverted, focused kind of person. I love to just sit down and do
one thing for 12 hours without distraction.

Tim Ferriss:

You’re an INTJ, Meyers-Briggs?

Derek Sivers:

Uh-huh, yep, are you?

Tim Ferriss:

I’m 100 percent INTJ.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah, so I hated going to the office, and being distracted every five
minutes.
With my employees asking me questions. That what I felt such
pain about, just, argh, I hate this! That I really, literally, man, I
booked a flight to Kauai, I believe, and I was going to move to
Kauai, and not give my employees my phone number, and literally
move. I don’t mean take a vacation, I mean, I am now going to be
the owner of CDBaby, on a little island in Hawaii, and you guys
just figure out your own damn problems, because I was just having
so much psychic pain about this.
But then, luckily, with lovely coincidence, that night, that I booked
the flight to Hawaii, I watched the movie Vanilla Sky. And, in
Vanilla Sky, Tom Cruise is the owner of this big publishing
company, but he gets all caught up with these crazy women, and
gets all tangled in focusing on his own happiness, or unhappiness.
And all that, and pretty soon, his company is just wrestled away
from him. And, I thought, oh, I don’t want that to happen. I don’t
wanna just plug my ears, close my eyes, and run away, and have
my company taken away from me. I need to give this – I need to
deal with my problems, instead of running away from them. So, I
cancelled the trip to Hawaii, and went into work the next day, and
decided to fix this thing.
So, the next time somebody asked me a question, I gathered

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

everybody around, I said, okay, everybody, Tracey just asked me,
Derek, what do we do when somebody on the phone wants a
refund? I said, okay, everybody stop working, everybody gather
around, okay. Tracey asked what we do if somebody wants a
refund. Okay, here’s not only what we do, here’s why. Here’s my
philosophy. Whenever anybody wants a refund, you should always
give it to them. And, I would explain not just what to do, but they
why. It was constantly communicating the philosophy –
To get to the core of it, and I think you mentioned this back in 4Hour Work Week, There’s almost nothing that really has to be you.
You can almost get kind of AI, and figure out how your brain
works, how your decision making works.
Tim Ferriss:

Definitely.

Derek Sivers:

So that other people can do it, and yeah, so that’s what I did, for
every single thing that ever came my way, I would gather
everybody around, explain the philosophy behind it, why we do
things this way, why I’m about to say what I’m about to say, and
now, here’s what I think we should do. Do you understand why?
Now, please write it down.
But, it was also important I taught it to multiple people, not just
one, and had them write it down. And, the cool thing is, I wasn’t
doing the hiring anymore. In the company, I had taught other
people how to do the hiring. So, soon, my employees were doing
the hiring, and then they were teaching new people how to do
things out of the book.
And, so, yeah, let’s see. So, that really started four years into the
company. It was six months of difficult work, to make myself
unnecessary. And so, my girlfriend at the time decided to go to
film school in LA, so I decided to follow her down there. So, I
moved down there to be with her, which is sort of a nice little way
to let the company know, you’re on your own. And, in fact – so,
there’s one little caveat to the thing where you said I was working
on CDBaby for four hours a year, or whatever you said.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, four hours every six months.

Derek Sivers:

Is, that’s how much time I spent doing the stuff I didn’t want to be
doing. The monotony, the bureaucracy stuff. That, I had reduced
down to almost nothing. Like, a few minutes a week. But, what I
was doing every day, from 7:00AM to midnight, was programming
the future of CDBaby. And, it was just, that’s just the stuff that I

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

love doing. So, it was about making my life the way that I wanted
it to be, doing the stuff I wanted to be working on, and not doing
the stuff I didn’t.
Tim Ferriss:

Which – and I’m glad you brought that up, because I wanted to
clear up something, which is a common misunderstanding, related,
understandably, to the title of The 4-Hour Work Week, and it’s like,
the single largest blessing and curse, that’s gonna follow me for the
rest of my life. But, it’s a catchy title, yes, I tested it on Google
Adwords, yes, it had a great conversion rate. That’s why it’s that
instead of something stupid, like Lifestyle Hustling, or The
Chameleon Blah Blah Blah. I had a bunch of awful titles, that one
performed best.
But, the objective is not to be idle. The objective is to control this
non-renewable resource called time, so that you can allocate it to
the things you wanna be doing. So, in other words, I don’t have a
problem with hard work, as long as it is applied to the right things,
that are determined with some degree of self-awareness and
forethought, or planning. So, that’s sort of a PSA, not for you.
Derek, because you’ve read the book.
But, for every dick that stands up at a public Q&A, and goes. Well,
Tim, I just wanted to ask, do you work four hours a week? I just
want to turn into one of the Fantastic Four, and punch him in the
neck from 300 feet away. But, for everyone that might be inclined
to ask that question, there’s the answer, read the book. And, I
bumped into somebody recently – you mentioned this book, with I
guess, the Frequently Asked Questions, and he was like, you
should just make – because I was like, I try to be really patient, I
try to answer people’s questions when they have them.
But, it’s so clear that most people asking questions have not read
the fucking book, and they’ll be like, can I eat bananas on this low
carb diet? Can I eat quinoa after chocolate custard on this low carb
diet? And, I’m just like, fuck! If you have to ask, the answer is no,
and you clearly didn’t read it. And, he’s like, and you should just
make, just have t-shirts that say, what was it? RTFM? Read the
Fucking Manual.
But, I’ll cut that screed short. The book itself, I wanna dig into
some specifics with this manual, this rulebook. When you had
multiple people write it down, how did you then convert it into a
resource that could be shared with new hires?

Derek Sivers:

Actually, I think we put it on a Wiki inside, but most of it was just

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

word of mouth, the legend inside. Like, there were a few internal
stories, kind of like the Zappos pizza story you just told. The one I
always heard was Nordstrom’s, there’s some legend, that like, a
guy buys a shirt from Sears, and it gets burned up in a fire, and he
goes to Nordstrom’s to return it. Like, they have such a liberal
return policy that they’ll even let you return burnt stuff from
another store.
And, so, a legend like that will travel down, and it carries the
philosophy inside of it. So, it’s almost like, a little story like that
can replace 20 pages of an employee handbook.
Tim Ferriss:

Totally agree, yeah. It’s an aphorism, or it’s a story.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah, so, there were quite a few of those especially inside
CDBaby, and the people would see the decisions that I had made,
and the people that I had given all their money back, in case
anything went wrong. Or, just talking to me, and the conversations,
and getting my philosophies. And, the early people at CDBaby
really got it, and then they would spread it to the new people.
On the – so, if we flip from book writing to book reading, you have
a page on your site – sivers.org/book, I’ll link to it in the show
notes, I think it’s book, correct me if the url is wrong. You have
notes on over 200 books.

Tim Ferriss:

Derek Sivers:

Uh-huh.

Tim Ferriss:

You appear to be a voracious reader. How do you select the books
you read, and how do you read them?

Derek Sivers:

Okay, I select – usually, I let – usually, large numbers of people
decide. Meaning, like, lots and lots of five-star reviews on
Amazon. Occasionally, someone that I really respect, and that
knows me will tell me, you need to read this book. And, even if it’s
had no reviews on Amazon, I’ll just trust them. But, for the most
part, I tend to go for things that I’ve seen lots of rave reviews, then
I’ll browse through the description on Amazon, and really read the
reviews that people have said, and okay, this sounds like
something worth my time.
Because I don’t read fast, and I don’t try to read fast. I like to sit
and ponder as I’m reading. So, when I’m committing to a book,
yeah, that’s 20 or 30 hours, often.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

So, I don’t take it lightly, so I tend to go with lots of Amazon
reviews, but then, I also give up quickly. So, if by chapter three,
I’m not really into it, I’ll just ditch it. And, you don’t even see
those on my site. So, I’ve ditched almost as many as you see there.
I just don’t write them up, I just delete them on the Kindle and
move on. So, but here’s the interesting thing, is – well, okay,
there’s a couple interesting things.
So, years ago, actually, it was right around the time when I first
read The 4-Hour Work Week. I was living in London, even though
CDBaby was still up and running in Portland, Oregon. Just because
I wanted to experience the world, I was living in London at the
time. And, actually, I don’t know if I ever told you this cute story.
It was my friend Arielle Hyatt, who I mentioned earlier, who told
me about you, but who told me a little fable about you.
Tim Ferriss:

Uh-oh, uh-oh.

Derek Sivers:

So, I can’t remember if I ever confirmed this with you.

Tim Ferriss:

We’ll find out right now.

Derek Sivers:

I think, at the time, she was going to some kinda Masterminds
seminar, by one of those how-to-be-a-millionaire kinda guys. And,
apparently, five or six of those how-to-be-a-millionaire kinda guys
held some big Mastermind thing in Hawaii, or something, and you
were supposed to be there. And you didn’t show – and people like
Robert Kiyosaki, and people like that were there. And, you were
supposed to be there, but you didn’t show up, and you showed up
late on the third day, where you showed up covered in mud,
because you decided, on a whim, to try sleeping in a tree, or
something like that, the legend goes.

Tim Ferriss:

Uh-huh.

Derek Sivers:

And, she told me about The 4-Hour Work Week, but basically, in
the context of this guy, Tim, that doesn’t give a fuck about
convention. And, totally sounds like your kinda guy, that is doing
things the way you do it, because you don’t give a fuck about
convention either, and you should read his book. And, it wasn’t
even available in England. I think the first time I got 4-Hour Work
Week was some kind of illegal PDF download of it off BitTorrent,
or something.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

That how it happens a lot. So, that story, I believe is true, because I
remember this particular event in Hawaii, around the time that the
book came out, or maybe a year afterwards, within the year
following publication. And, I remember going to Hawaii, and
realizing that I wanted to explore Hawaii, as opposed to sitting
trapped in the conference room. So, I rented a car, and ended up
finding a bed and breakfast, where the house was built in the trees,
this is totally true.
But, it wasn’t available, or it wasn’t on the market, and the
caretaker ended up being this very attractive woman, and I said,
well, is there anything that I can do, to be able to sleep in this
treehouse? Because I’m really obsessed with the idea, and it looks
like Jurassic Park here, with these prehistoric plants.
I’ll even – and she had a ditch or something, that needed to be dug,
and so I did that, and I did all this manual labor, and I ended up
being able to stay in this treehouse. And, I think that it was on the
– I wanna say the Hana Highway, if I’m getting that right. Just
spectacular. I think it was in Maui. And so, I did show up to the
event late. In a tank top, and these absurdly, even to me now, like,
European short shorts, and I don’t know why. So, yeah, that’s a
true story.

Derek Sivers:

The legend is true!

Tim Ferriss:

So glad that could be confirmed, it’s so funny.

Derek Sivers:

I forget what tangent we were on.

Tim Ferriss:

Oh, we were talking about how you read books.

Derek Sivers:

Ah, so, right around that time, I’ve been reading books voraciously
for years, and people often ask about mentorship, and did you have
any mentors, and I say, well, no, books are my mentors. Books
guide almost all of the stuff I do. The stuff I’ve learned from books
totally guides my life.
So, I realized that I would love a book while reading it, and it
would sometimes echo with me maybe two weeks after, but two
years later, I couldn’t even remember if I had read it or not, and I
thought, that’s really a shame. I remember at the time, that book
meant a lot to me. Why is it now, two years later, I’ve forgotten
everything? I said, no, no, no, that’s not good.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

So, what I started doing in 2007, is every book I read, I would keep
a pen in hand, and I would underline my favorite sentences, circle
my favorite paragraphs, write notes in the margins, and then, after I
was done reading the book, I would put aside two hours to open up
a blank text file, and type out everything into a plain text file. So
that I could – knowing that plain text files are the most long-lasting
format there can be. They will work on everything. You can read
them on phones, or new devices we haven’t even thought of yet.
We’ll always be able to read plain text files. So, I started doing this
for every book I read.
And then, I would review my notes later. So, every time I’m, say,
just eating breakfast or something, for ten minutes, I’ll pull up one
of the notes from a previous book I read and just kind of rereview
it. Sometimes kind of stop, take a sentence that means a lot to me
right now, open up my diary, and write about that for a while,
really internalize. Basically, I wanted to memorize every lesson I
had learned, in every one of these books.
So, that’s what I started doing. I even started putting them into
spaced repetition programs. And, that didn’t really work out too
well, because I wasn’t really sure how to formulate that knowledge
into a Q&A flashcard kinda format.
Tim Ferriss:

Using SuperMemo, or something like that.

Derek Sivers:

Anki, exactly.

Tim Ferriss:

Anki, side note for people, means rote memorization in Japanese.

Derek Sivers:

Really?

Tim Ferriss:

Yep. A, N, K, I. Sorry to interrupt.

Derek Sivers:

So, it wasn’t until, say, 2010, that I realized I had all these lovely
book notes hidden on my hard drive, just for my eyes only.
And, I thought, well, why don’t I just put them on my website? If
the publishers tell me to take them down, I will, but maybe they’ll
be some use to people. So, yeah, sivers.org/book, what you’re
seeing is all my detailed book notes since 2007.

Tim Ferriss:

If you were to, and this may be a very difficult question to answer,
but to suggest five to start with. Or so. I mean, I’m just throwing
out a random number. But, if you were to suggest some books to
start with at sivers.org/book. And, by the way, this is not a setup

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

for my own book.
Derek Sivers:

Oh, no, no, no. God, wouldn’t that be cheesy?

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah. First, The 4-Hour Work Week. Second, see rule No. one!

Derek Sivers:

So, the – I’ve actually already answered the question for you,
because once I posted them on my site, I realized I should give
them a 1 to 10 rating, because I knew this is the next question
people are going to ask.
Is, well, which ones would you recommend? So, I give every book
a 1 to 10 rating, and it’s, when you go to sivers.org/book, it’s
already sorted for you, with my top recommendations, up top, and
I think it’s, you know what? I haven’t told you this, either. Back in
2008 or ’09, you and I were sitting down the hill from your house,
at that local coffee shop. And, we were talking about the Charlie
Munger book. That big, thick, black one, I forget what it’s called.

Tim Ferriss:

Oh, Seeking Wisdom.

Derek Sivers:

Yes!

Tim Ferriss:

Seeking Wisdom: From Munger to Darwin, or maybe the other
way around. By Peter Bevelin.

Derek Sivers:

That’s it! So, -

Tim Ferriss:

That’s a fascinating book.

Derek Sivers:

Well, I’m glad to have turned you onto it.

Tim Ferriss:

Yes, I appreciate it.

Derek Sivers:

So, after talking about that book, we were talking about the books
that changed our life. And, you told me, I think, The Magic of
Thinking Big, is that it?

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, David Schwartz. I have it face out on my shelf in my living
room.
So that I can see it constantly.

Derek Sivers:

Okay, so when you told me that The Magic of Thinking Big made
such a big difference to you, I picked it up and I read it. And, it did
nothing for me.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, it has to catch you at the right time.

Derek Sivers:

Exactly. And, so, that’s why –

Tim Ferriss:

And, it’s also one of those books, sorry, but I’m getting defensive.
But, it’s one of those books that I read in around 2000, maybe a
year or two after college, and I was in a shitty 100-plus hour a
week job, where I was sleeping at my desk, and sitting the the fire
exit, because that’s the only place they can fit me. But, yeah, it has
to catch you at the right time.

Derek Sivers:

Exactly. And so, there have been people who I tell about how Tony
Robbins’ Awaken the Giant Within totally changed my life, and I
give it to friends, and they go, enh, it did nothing for me. So,
you’re right, it does matter when you read a book. Even, I noticed,
on a specific subject. I read, and loved Stumbling on Happiness.
Loved that book.
And so, I read two or three more books on the subject of the study
of happiness. And, by the time I got to the third one, I forget what
it’s called right now. Maybe Happiness Project, or something like
that. Whatever the third one I read was, I remember flipping
through the book quickly, like, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
whatever, I got it, I got it. And so, I gave it a really bad rating on
my website. And, someone emailed me later, and went, my God,
that book changed my life, I can’t believe you gave it a 2 out of 10
rating on your website!
And, I looked again at my notes, and I thought, you know what?
It’s probably actually a really good book, I had just read it at the
wrong time, because I had just read two other books on that
subject, and –

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, exactly, just in a different order, it might’ve been a 10.

Derek Sivers:

Right, exactly! If I read that one before Stumbling on Happiness,
which I gave a 10 to, then I’d’ve given that one a 10, and
Stumbling on Happiness might’ve been like, yeah, yeah, yeah, I
know this already.

Tim Ferriss:

Stumbling on Happiness is a great book, for those people who are
familiar with the term I use in The 4-Hour Work Week, the
deferred life plan.
In other words, saving and retiring in order to retire at some point

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

in the future, maybe 10, 20 years down the road, 30 perhaps, to
redeem all of that toil for some reward, like sailing around the
world in a sailboat. Stumbling – I always forget. Is it stumbling on
or upon happiness.
Derek Sivers:

On. Stumbling On Happiness.

Tim Ferriss:

Stumbling On Happiness, by Daniel Gilbert, is that right?

Derek Sivers:

Yeah.

Tim Ferriss:

Is a great, I think, reality check, for that type of extremely risky,
doomed to failure deferred life planning.

Derek Sivers:

So, I’ve got to tell you, so we haven’t really talked about this yet,
but this is so up your alley, up your listeners’ alley, people who are
into books will appreciate this. So, a lot of my friends – actually, I
don’t think any of my friends are as into reading as I am. Okay, a
couple are, but most aren’t.
And so, whenever I tell them about some amazing book I’ve read,
the gist I get from my friends is, just tell me what to do.

Tim Ferriss:

Give me the index card, yeah.

Derek Sivers:

It’s like, yeah, like they don’t wanna read the book. So, my friend
Jeff, he’s a smart guy, he’s a lawyer, he’s smart. But, he just looks
at me with these tired eyes, and is just like, I’m not gonna read the
book, dude. You can stop pushing it on me, it’s never gonna
happen. He said, just tell me what to do, he said, I trust you. I like
you, you know me, so tell me what to do.
And, I realized that, if you trust the source, you don’t need the
arguments. That so much of a book is arguing its point, but often,
you don’t need the argument. If you trust the source, you can just
get the point. So, after reading, taking detailed notes on 220 books,
on my site, I realized that distilling wisdom into directives is so
valuable, but it’s so rarely done.
In fact, the only time I can think of that it was done was Michael
Pollan, with his three books in a row, about food, each one getting
shorter and shorter. I think the first one was, was it Omnivore’s
Dilemma?

Tim Ferriss:

Omnivore’s Dilemma. Yeah.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Derek Sivers:

Which was big, so I know you’re the kind of guy that would –

Tim Ferriss:

It’s a great book, but also, I mean, there are, like 70 pages on corn
production in the US, and most people just drop out. Even I was
like, God, my eyes are glazing over here. But, I know there’s some
great stuff coming, so I’ll just slog through it. But yes, a very great
book, but a very big book.

Derek Sivers:

And then, he did another one a year later, that basically took the
best stuff from Omnivore’s Dilemma, and made it into a shorter,
kinda more pop market kinda 2 to 300-page book. I forget the
name of that one. And –

Tim Ferriss:

Could it have been In Defense of Food, maybe?

Derek Sivers:

Yes, that sounds right, thank you.
So, even that one, I remember someone telling me I should read it,
and I remember looking at it and going, I don’t know if I wanna
read 300 pages about food. But then, about a year later, he put out
a teeny, tiny, little book called Food Rules. I think that’s what it’s
called. And, it’s like, you basically can read the whole thing while
just standing in the bookstore. It’s, he took the energy and the
effort to compress everything he’s learned into very succinct
directives. And, that’s what it is. Sentences that tell you what to do.
Do this, do that.
Or, don’t do that. If your grandmother wouldn’t recognize it as
food, don’t eat it. And, his tagline for that book, the popular phrase
was, “Eat food, mostly plants, not too much.”

Tim Ferriss:

Right.

Derek Sivers:

And, I so admired that. I got inspired by the effort it takes to distill
the blah, blah, blah, blah blah, down into the specific sentences for
the people that just aren’t going to read that 900-page book, right?
Probably all of that same information is in the 900-page book, but
we have to be honest for a minute and admit that not everyone is
going to read the 900-page book. So, as I’m reading these 300page books, 220 of them, very often there’ll be this, like, brilliant,
amazing, important point on, like, page 290, and I feel almost a
little sad that almost nobody’s gonna read that. I wish that these
little, tiny points were extracted, without all the surrounding
argument.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

So, especially – okay, I’ll admit, this was also sparked by the idea
of when I had a kid, and I thought, I might not be alive when he’s
my age, or even when he’s 19, I might die before he gets older.
How can I compress everything that I’ve learned, that I think he
should know, into a real, succinct format, that he will definitely
read? And, of course, then I thought, other people will read, too.
So, I got onto this idea, of the Do This Project.
Which is, instead of talking around a subject, just giving directives,
saying, do this, do that, don’t do this, don’t do that. Which is kinda
funny, because it feels very presumptuous, right? Like, who am I
to tell others what to do? But then, I think, well, who am I not to?
Right, it’s useful, so get over myself. Kinda like you asked about
me onstage when I was 18, what was the biggest lesson learned?
Like, this isn’t about me, people aren’t here about me, they’re here
for their own gain.
Oh, you asked about my advice to TED speakers. That’s my main
advice to TED speakers. It’s like, people aren’t here to see you, or
your life story. People come to TED, or watch TED videos, to
learn something. So, just speak only about what is surprising, and
skip everything else.
Tim Ferriss:

If people could start with one of your talks – I know I’m
interrupting. But, which talk would you suggest, as a starter?

Derek Sivers:

My favorite one is, I think on the TED site, it is called “Weird or
Just Different?” I call it the Japanese Addressing System.

Tim Ferriss:

And, I actually know what that means, yeah. It can be so
confusing, everybody does it different.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah, until someone explains it to you, and then you realize oh,
it’s just a different way of thinking. And, here, I’ll just give you a
little teaser. And, the talk is only three minutes long. So, you go to
TED.com, and search for Derek Sivers, and it’s called “Weird, or
Just Different.” And, the little teaser is, it blew my mind when I
found out they don’t – the reason the streets don’t have names, is
because they think of the streets as the blank, unnamed spaces,
because the blocks are the things that have names.
The blocks are the piece of land with houses on them, that’s what’s
important. Whereas, in America, and most of the world, if you say,
what is the name of that block, people will look at you weird.
Well, this is Oak Street, this is 3rd Avenue. What do you mean?

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

You say, well, what is that block called? That doesn’t have a name,
we don’t name our blocks, we name our streets. The blocks are just
the unnamed spaces, in between named streets. So, in Japan, it’s
the opposite. The streets are the empty, unnamed spaces between
named blocks.
So, I realized that, how many things in life actually work just as
well the complete opposite way we’re used to thinking of them.
Both ways are correct, so anyway, that’s the idea.
Tim Ferriss:

Yeah. But, we were talking about directives.

Derek Sivers:

Yes.

Tim Ferriss:

And, how, the advice to give TED speakers is how I took us off
track.

Derek Sivers:

That’s alright, go ahead.

Tim Ferriss:

No, I was gonna ask – and, I’m not trying to cut this short, so I
don’t forget to ask, where can people find the directives?

Derek Sivers:

Only in this podcast. No, it’s true. I haven’t done anything with it
publicly. At first, I thought I was gonna make this into a big,
keynote speech I was doing at a conference. The World
Domination Summit Conference, in Portland.
I spent four months of fulltime work, from 7:00AM to midnight,
for four – seven days a week, for four months in a row, just
rereading all 220 book notes, extracting, or trying to turn all of this
advice or this knowledge, this wisdom, trying to turn it into
directives. Because a lot of it, almost never is in the directive
format already. People talk around a subject, they talk about
findings and research. But, it takes some real effort, kind of like
the old philosophers, the – you’ve read the stoicism book? The
Guide to The Good Life?

Tim Ferriss:

Yes, I have. I have that up on my living room wall, as well.

Derek Sivers:

And, in that book, right in the intro, he says, if you were to ask any
kind of modern person who calls themselves a philosopher, what
should I do with my life?
He said, sit down and get comfortable, because they will tell you,
well, it depends on what you mean by what, and it depends what
you mean by do, and really, it depends what you mean by life. Or,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

really, maybe it depends on what you mean by my life. So, people
talk around the point a lot, but back in 600 BC, if you would’ve
asked one of these philosophers, what should I do with my life,
they would sit down and tell you exactly what to do with your life.
Do this, don’t do that, pursue this, don’t pursue that.
So, I was really inspired by that intro too. So, the idea was, now,
how can I go back, through all of these amazing books I’ve read,
and compress them into specific directives? So, it took me four
months of work to come up with the following like, 18 sentences.
Do you wanna hear them?
Tim Ferriss:

I do wanna hear them. I’m super-excited about this.

Derek Sivers:

So, this was going to be a 35-minute long keynote speech, and it
turned out to be a horrible, 35-minute long talk. But, it’s
entertaining for about three minutes. So, here’s the three-minute
version. Okay, first, I had fun categorizing them. So, this is the
category called “How to Be Useful to Others.” Ready?

Tim Ferriss:

I’m ready.

Derek Sivers:

No. one, get famous. Do everything in public, and for the public.
The more people you reach, the more useful you are. The opposite
is hiding, which is of no use to anyone. How to be useful to others,
No. two, get rich. Money is neutral proof that you’re adding value
to people’s lives, so by getting rich, you’re being useful as a side
effect. Once rich, spend the money in ways that are even more
useful to others. Then, getting rich is double useful. How to be
useful to others. Share strong opinions. Strong opinions are very
useful to others. Those who are undecided or ambivalent can just
adopt your stance.

Tim Ferriss:

But, those who disagree can solidify their stance by arguing
against yours. So, even if you invent an opinion for the sole sake of
argument, boldly sharing an opinion is very useful to others. How
to be useful to others: be expensive. People given a placebo pill
were twice as likely to have their pain disappear when told that that
pill was expensive. People who paid more for tickets were more
likely to attend the performance. So, people who spend more for a
product or service value it more, and get more use out of it, so be
expensive. That’s it.
This is good stuff.

Derek Sivers:

That’s just how to be useful to others, that’s just one category. I’ve

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

got a few more, if you wanna hear them later.
Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, well, let’s – what is your favorite, of the remaining
categories? Maybe we could do one more.

Derek Sivers:

Well, okay, good. If you imagine that I’ve got a few more that are
done in that format, like, I’ve got – this is very stoicism, I’ve got
one called, “How to Thrive in an Unknowable Future.” That’s
prepare for the worst, expect disaster, own as little as possible.
Choose opportunity, not loyalty, choose the plan –

Tim Ferriss:

Let’s do that one. Because you know I’m a sucker for stoicism.

Derek Sivers:

Alright.

Tim Ferriss:

Let’s talk about that one.

Derek Sivers:

Okay. So, how to thrive in an unknowable future. Prepare for the
worst. Since you have no idea what the future may bring, be open
to the best and the worst. But, the best case scenario doesn’t need
your preparation, or your attention. So, mentally, and financially,
just prepare for the worst case instead. And, like insurance, don’t
obsess on it, just prepare, and then carry on appreciating the good
times. How to thrive in an unknowable future. Expect disaster. If
you’ve ever watched a VH1 Behind the Music, you know every
single success story had that moment where the narrator would
come in and say, “And then, things took a turn for the worse.” So,
fully expect that disaster to come to you at any time. You have to
completely assume that it is going to happen and make your plans
accordingly
Not just money, but family, and health, and freedom, you have to
expect it to all disappear. Besides, you appreciate things more
when you know this may be your last time seeing them. How to
thrive in an unknowable future? Own as little as possible, depend
on even less. The less you own, the less you’re directly affected by
disaster.
How to thrive in an uncertain future is, choose opportunity over
loyalty. Have no loyalty to location, corporation, or your last
public statements. Be an absolute opportunist, doing what is best
for the future in the current situation, unbound by the past. Have
loyalty for only your most important human relationships. How to
thrive in an unknowable future? Choose the plan with the most
options. The best plan is the one that lets you change your plans.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

For example, renting a house is actually buying the opportunity to
move at any time, without losing money in a changing market.
And, lastly, how to thrive in an unknowable future? Avoid
planning.
For maximum options, don’t plan at all. Since you have no idea
how the situation or your mood may change in the future, wait
until the last moment to make each decision.
Tim Ferriss:

Which of these have you most concretely implemented in your
own life, from this category?

Derek Sivers:

Oh, God, I really internalize this category. It’s the whole way I see
the world. Like, if you look inside my head, it’s just that, you’d
think I was a little nuts, in that I’m just always expecting
everything to disappear, even something like – I step outside, and
I’m living in New Zealand now, and I step outside, it’s just
gorgeous, I’m surrounded by nature, and blue skies, and I just
inhale, and I think, yep. This is all gonna disappear. This is all
gonna go to shit. Pollution’s gonna wreck this all. But, I don’t
think that in an awful, doom and gloom way. You can tell I’m not
Eeyore.
But, it’s just part of my appreciation for everything now. And
every person I know, and even just my health. God, when I stand
up in the morning, I’m like, I just wake up full of energy. I think,
yep, in another couple decades, that’s not gonna happen anymore. I
better really appreciate this. So, yeah, it’s more just a deep
mindset.

Tim Ferriss:

So, practical, I give a short, 5-minute talk called Practical
Pessimism. I think it was just –

Derek Sivers:

Yes, yeah.

Tim Ferriss:

Stoicism as a productivity system, I talked about this, because I
think it’s so important not to be brainwashed into looking at
everything with rose-colored glasses, because it is not always a
constructive exercise. In fact, it can very much be the opposite, and
the reason, one of the primary reasons I’m fasting right now, I’m
eight days into a target of ten, I’m getting a little woozy today, but
all things mostly manageable, is – and, I’m also, and I haven’t
mentioned this to you.
Also unshaven, also wearing the same, mostly the same clothing.
Pants, jacket, etc., all week long. And, the reason for that is, and

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

actually, what you just said reminded me a lot of Marcus
Aurelius’’ Meditations. Which were the Emperor of Rome’s
wartime journals, and never intended for publication. But, it would
always start with, today, you are gonna meet rude, ungrateful,
arrogant people, and this is how you’re going to contend with it.
And, it seems very depressing, until you realize that he was setting
a – creating a mindset that could deal with those worst-case
scenarios, if they presented themselves. And, similarly, in Seneca –
who is a very controversial Stoic, but nonetheless, my favorite to
read. I have a huge, like 30 hours of audio coming out related to
Seneca shortly. But, one of his, one of my favorite passages from
Seneca is –
One that reads, and I’m gonna massacre this, but it’s paraphrased.
“Set aside some time each month, where you subsist on the
scantest of fare, the roughest of dress, etc. etc. etc. Asking yourself
all the while, is this the condition I so feared?” And so, not only
are you mentally preparing yourself by visualizing the worst-case
scenario, you’re actually practicing. You’re rehearsing poverty, or
lack of variation. Or, in my case, no food. I’ve done this before
with, say, rice and beans, for five days, and you’re like, okay, it’s
cost me $2 a day to eat, and I feel fucking fine.
And, in fact, not having the paradox of choice, having to go to the
Thai restaurant and pick from 150 items that all have the same six
fucking ingredients? That’s been really relaxing. And, so on and so
forth. So, that’s maybe a slight digression, but I’ve always
appreciated that, about how you have designed your life.
On the books, so, I’m gonna give – sorry, go ahead?
Derek Sivers:

I wanna actually, before we close out this subject, I need to give
you sort of the big punchline ending to these directives. Because
some of these didn’t fit into this do this, do that format, and I
didn’t want to start making lists of what not to do, because I liked
the idea that every single sentence should be actionable. Right, and
so don’t do this, don’t do that didn’t feel actionable enough to me,
so I had fun, kind of like our mutual hero, Charlie Munger.
Had a speech once that he gave, I think at USC, about how to be a
failure. And it was – so I made a category called “How to Stop
Being Rich and Happy.” So, this is after you’re rich and happy,
how to stop being rich and happy. And, I thought you’d appreciate
this first one. Prioritize lifestyle design. You’ve made it, so it’s all
about you now. Make your dreams come true.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Shape your surroundings to meet your every desire. Make your
immediate gratification the most important thing. How to stop
being rich and happy: chase that comparison moment. You have
the old thing, you want the new thing, yes! Do it! Be happy for a
week. Ignore the fact that happiness comes only from the moment
of comparison between the old and new. Once you’ve had your
new thing for a week, and it becomes your new normal, then just
go seek happiness from another new thing. Yeah, you get the idea.
Tim Ferriss:

No, I do, and I agree with the first point, people might think that I
wouldn’t, but I’ve been doing a lot of reading and practice with
meditation and so on. But, if you read, say, Tara Brock, which, she
has a fantastic book, called Radical Acceptance. Which I highly
recommend to people who are Type-A in particular. But, most
suffering – actually, Tony Robbins would say this too. I attended
my first live event a few weeks ago, which was very fascinating.
And, a lot of fun. But, that most suffering comes from a focus on
me, on the self.

Derek Sivers:

Yes!

Tim Ferriss:

And, as soon as you – I received a piece of advice, maybe five
years ago, from someone, who said, if you’re having trouble
making yourself happy, just make someone else happy.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah.

Tim Ferriss:

And, it sounds so clichéd, but it’s actually really pragmatic, and it
makes me think of this – something simple that I’ve been doing,
that Gabrielle Reese, Gabi Reese, who was on this podcast with
Laird Hamilton, both very famous athletes, and they’re married.
She said, go first. And all she meant by that was, during your day,
be first. Be the first to look at someone and smile, be the first to
look, when you walk up to the barista, ask them how they’re doing.
Be the first to initiate that, and it’s such a simple way to put a smile
on people’s faces. Not always, but a good portion of the time, and
that can change your own state.
Two things on books. Just because you’re sharing your methods,
I’ll share a couple that I’ve enjoyed. One is, on Amazon, I will
look at the four-star – if it has a sufficient critical mass, of say, five
stars, to be worth looking into, if that’s how I’m filtering, then, I
will look at the most helpful critical reviews, that are four and
three-star. In addition to that, I will go to, I think it’s just
kindle.amazon.com, and I will read the public highlights.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

So, I will take maybe five minutes to look at the most critical three
and four-star reviews. Because the five-star, and the one-star and
two-star tend to be worthless, in a way, because they’re so onesided. So, look at the three and four-star, most helpful critical
reviews, and then, I will look at the Kindle highlights, and that is,
in effect, seeing the movie trailer.
It’s like, if you don’t like the highlights from the movie trailer,
you’re definitely not gonna like the full feature film, especially
when it takes 30 hours, instead of one and a half. And, the reason
why I started using a Kindle was specifically so I could export my
notes.
Derek Sivers:

Yes!

Tim Ferriss:

As text files. So, the – that’s one of the ways that I filter books
these days. But, the question that I always ask, that I’d like to ask
you, and I think we might have to do a round two sometime,
because I think we’re gonna have to hop off in maybe ten minutes
or so. But, what – there’s so many questions I wanna ask you.
What is the book you’ve given most as a gift?

Derek Sivers:

A Geek in Japan.

Tim Ferriss:

A Geek in Japan?

Derek Sivers:

A Geek in Japan, by Hector Garcia. Because I’m fascinated with
understanding the mindset of a place. Right, like, I would really
love to understand the philosophy of Brazil, India, China, Finland,
France, Japan, Thailand. Like, to me, each place seems to have its
own cultural norms, in how it approaches time, or long term versus
short term kind of thinking, or what’s precious, and should be
protected, Or, human interactions, relationships, dealing with
obstacles, conformity versus rebellion. Or, just how it approaches
people who are unfortunate,
So, we think of philosophies, like existentialism, stoicism,
nihilism. But, I’d love to study Brazil-ism, Japan-ism, Thai-ism. I
really do think of each country’s culture as like a working modern,
applied philosophy.

Tim Ferriss:

Totally.

Derek Sivers:

So, A Geek in Japan is written by this Spanish guy, who’s been
living in Japan for ten years, and while most of the book is, hey,

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

look at this, check out that, it has a section in the middle, that, I
think, explains the Japanese mindset better than anything I’d heard
before.
And, I spent months in Japan over the last 20 years. I’ve gone there
five or six times, and I used to play guitar for a Japanese pop star,
and toured the country. But, somehow, A Geek in Japan made me
understand Japan more. So, I give that to everyone who’s going to
Japan. But, actually, an even better book I’ve found since then, on
describing the mindset of a country, is called Au Contraire:
Figuring Out the French. It is so deep! It explains the mindset so
well. I wish there was a book like this about every country.
I highly recommend it. So, you listeners out there, if you know of
any books like this, that explain the mindset of a country, please
email me to let me know.
Tim Ferriss:

There is a book – and, I’m gonna rely on the readers as well. What
is your email, just Derek? If you wanna give it out.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah. derek@sivers.org.

Tim Ferriss:

And, in the comments, guys – links to all these books, the show
notes and everything, will be at fourhourworkweek.com/Derek.
But, there is a book out there, I wanna say Enrico Something, I
think is the author, but an Italian – I think it was an Italian,
effectively writes Geek in America. But, from the standpoint of an
Italian traveling through the US, including the heartland.

Derek Sivers:

Nice.

Tim Ferriss:

So, that’s one.

Derek Sivers:

Cool.

Tim Ferriss:

What $100.00 or less purchase has most positively impacted your
life, in the last six months, or recently?

Derek Sivers:

Well, I’m such a minimalist that I always avoid letting any new
possession into my life, right? But, I took my little 3-year-old to a
café one morning, that had a big box of toys. Little figurines, and
cars and dolls and monsters. And he was just in the zone, for like,
two or three hours, completely engrossed in all these toys. So, I
was like, yeah, I can’t push my minimalism on him, he needs toys.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

So, that night, I went onto eBay, and I found someone selling a
huge box of old, used toys, just like that, you know. Figurines and
cars and stuff, and endless hours of entertainment since. Best
$20.00 I’ve spent in a long time.
Tim Ferriss:

That’s awesome. Do you have a favorite documentary or movie?

Derek Sivers:

No. I really don’t watch hardly anything. I don’t – I mean, relative
to the norm, right? I mean, I watch movies, but more kind of for
the artistry, the cinematography, and I listen to music, of course,
but, I don’t watch documentaries, or TED talks, or TV shows, and
also, I don’t even read blogs or articles, and I don’t listen to
podcasts. In fact, I listened to my very first podcast two weeks ago,
that was the one with you and Tony Robbins, that was the first
time I’d ever listened to a podcast. Because I just have this lovely,
optimized life, where I wake up, and I just write, write, write,
write, write, all day long.
I have no commute, I’m never really driving anywhere, so I don’t
have any downtime like that. And, if I’m outside, I wanna hear the
birds in the trees, you know? And, if I’m working out, I’ll either
crank up the hiphop, or sometimes, just enjoy the hardcore sound
of the clanking metal plates. So, I really just prefer books as my
medium of learning and input.

Tim Ferriss:

Of information intake. What are you listening to now or recently
for working out?

Derek Sivers:

I’ve started realizing that I don’t know my American history of
hiphop. I’ve always been loosely aware of it, but I recently saw the
Chris Rock movie, Top Five. And, the running punchline in that
movie is, he goes around going “What are your top five?” And,
people kinda name their top five hiphop artists, who they think are
most important. And, there are some in there, I realized, I’ve
actually – I know who these people are, of course we’ve all heard
of KRS-One and Rakim, but it’s like, wait, I don’t think I actually
know their music well.
So, I’ve started giving myself an education in the history of
hiphop, and so, lately, I’ve been listening to nothing but hiphop,
going back to the very beginning, the Wild Style movie, and the
very early stuff, kinda giving myself the chronological history of
hiphop, it’s been fun.

Tim Ferriss:

Any favorites, so far? I would say Eric B. and Rakim are way up at
the top for me.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Derek Sivers:

Yes! Especially once I understood the context, when you hear the
before and after. Like, right now, you can take, Rakim for
example, I mean, sure, you can take him for granted, the way that
if you listen to Jimi Hendrix, you can take him for granted, now,
because people have expanded on that. But, if you think about
what people were doing with guitars before Jimi Hendrix and after,
it was just mind-blowing, and so, I think Rakim is like that for
hiphop.
You listen to what was going on before him, and then after he
came along, it was just such a whole new approach, that changed
everybody since.

Tim Ferriss:

If you could have one billboard, anywhere, with anything on it,
what would it say?

Derek Sivers:

Well, my real answer, if I was taking that literally, is that I would
remove all the billboards in the world, and ensure that they were
never replaced. Have you ever driven through India? It’s so sad.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah. Well, I haven’t driven, but on my way to the Calcutta ER,
where I spent a week, I was briefly looking out the windows.

Derek Sivers:

Even in these small towns in Karalla, there is almost no space that
is left without advertising. So, I really admire those places, like
Vermont, and I think Sao Paolo Brazil, that ban billboards. But, I
know that that wasn’t really what you were asking. So, my better
answer is, I think I would make a billboard that would say, It
Won’t Make You Happy, and I would place it outside any big
shopping mall, or car dealer. So, ideally – you know what would
be a fun project, actually, would be to buy and train thousands of
parrots to say, it won’t make you happy!
And then, you let them loose in the shopping malls and superstores
around the world. That’s my life mission. Anybody in? Anybody
with me? Let’s do it.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, it won’t make you happy. Very stoic, very stoic. Which does
not mean you can’t have joy in your life, but it’s – I think
Stumbling on Happiness is a great one for people to peruse. Do
you have notes on Stumbling on Happiness, on –

Derek Sivers:

Yeah. That’s on there.

Tim Ferriss:

Alright, great, so we will link to that. Okay, last, effectively, last

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

question, maybe we’ll give you one or two more, and then, we’ll
have to talk about a round two. If people are interested. So, if
you’d like to hear more with Derek, please let me know, @tferriss
on the Twitter T, F, E, R, R, I, S, S, and you could loop in @sivers
as well. What advice would you give your 30-year old self? And,
place us, if you would, for where you were at 30, and what you
were doing.
Derek Sivers:

At 30, well, let’s see, I had just started CDBaby, when I was 30,
but I think I – the biggest advice I would give to my younger self,
more like knowledge learned, like, hey, younger self, you should
know this now, is that women like sex. I didn’t know that until I
was 40. I think I didn’t get that. I think that through teenage
movies and whatever, we’re kind of taught the opposite. Men
always want sex, and women don’t. I don’t know why the media
always portrays it like that, but later, I found out that that’s not
true. But, I think that the more interesting answer is, the advice I
would give to my 30-year-old self would be, don’t be a donkey.

Tim Ferriss:

And, what does that mean?

Derek Sivers:

Well, I meet a lot of 30-year-olds that are trying to pursue many
different directions at once, but not making progress in any, right?
And then, or they get frustrated that the world wants them to pick
one thing, because they wanna do them all, and they get a lot of
this frustration, like, I wanna do this, and that, and this, and that.
Why do I have to choose? I don’t know what to choose! But, the
problem is, if you’re thinking short term, then you’re acting as if
you don’t do them all this week, they won’t happen. But, I think
the solution is to think long term. To realize that you can do one of
these things for a few years, and then do another one for a few
years, and then, another. So, what I mean about don’t be a donkey
is, you’ve probably heard the fable about, I think it’s Buridan’s
Donkey, who – it’s a fable about a donkey who is standing halfway
between a pile of hay, and a bucket of water. And, he just keeps
looking left, to the hay, or right, to the water, trying to decide. Hay
or water, hay or water?
And, he’s unable to decide, so he eventually falls over and dies of
both hunger and thirst. So, the point is, that a donkey can’t think of
the future. If he did, he’d realize he could clearly go first to drink
the water, then go eat the hay.
So, my advice to my 30-year-old self is, don’t be a donkey. You

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

can do everything you want to do. You just need foresight and
patience. So, say, for somebody listening. If you’re 30 years old
now, and say you have, like, five different things you wanna
pursue. Well then, you could do each one of those things for ten
years, and you’ll have all of them done by the time you’re 80.
You’re probably going to live to be 80, so it sounds ridiculous to
plan to the age of 80 when you’re 30, right? But, it’s a fact that’s
probably coming, so you might as well take advantage of it. It’s
like, use the future. That way, you can fully focus on one direction
at a time, without feeling conflicted or distracted. Because you
know that you’ll get to the others in the future.
Tim Ferriss:

And, I think also, just to build on that. I agree. I think most people
– this is not something I thought up on my own, but underestimate
–
They overestimate what they can achieve, in a day or a week, so
they have 20 items on their to-do list, but they underestimate what
they can achieve in a year, or even two years. The way that, if you
look at, for instance, a lot of what I’ve done, much of which ended
up being the result of accidental discoveries. But, the book career,
but then, you had the angel investing, starting in 2007, 2008 – and
I treated that as a two-year, self-imposed MBA.
And, it was like, okay, I want to try this, and really focus on it for
two years, and I’m not going to expect to have any kind of
financial return, but just as an MBA, I’m gonna sink this amount of
cost into it, which was identical to Stanford Graduate School of
Business at the time, and assume that the network and relationships
and the things I would learn would be worth that two years. And,
just viewing them as two year experiments – which I did with the
TV also.
Which did not turn out as ideally as I’d like, even though I’m very
proud of The Tim Ferriss Experiment. Podcast, same thing. It was
not a five-year commitment, but it was also not a one day or oneweek commitment. It was like, okay, I’m gonna do this for at least
six episodes, maybe it takes me six months, and then, I’ll correct
course at that point. But, yeah, I think a lot of 30-year-olds feel
pressured, or younger, or older, for that matter. To pursue many,
many things in parallel, when, if you were just to tweak that
slightly, and make them serial, the results would be much better.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah. It’s a really hard lesson to learn. We can even say it right
now. But, it’s really tough, I even find that now.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, it’s a constant challenge. The five-minute journal I find very
helpful. I’ve mentioned this to people before, so I won’t belabor
the point, but people can check that out if they want to, or the
Pomodoro Method is also very helpful.

Derek Sivers:

Yeah.

Tim Ferriss:

Okay, we are going to wrap this first conversation up, for our dear
public, but do you have any asks or requests of my audience before
we close up?

Derek Sivers:

Not really. I mean, honestly, the main reason I do interviews like
this, public ones, instead of just you and me, sitting on the phone
and shooting the shit, is I really like the people that I meet through
them. Like, the kind of people that would listen two hours into this
conversation are my kinda people. So, I usually tell people to just
email me. Derek@sivers.org, I read them. I kind of enjoy putting
aside a little time each day, to read emails, and I answer every
single one. Because I said hell yeah or no to the rest of my life, so
I’ve got time to do it. So, yeah, that’s it. Just feel free to email me
if you have any questions or anything, or just to say hi.

Tim Ferriss:

Awesome, and for those people who do not want to wait for round
two – Derek, you’re hilarious. I put out a tweet recently, which
was what would you want me to ask @sivers, I’m gonna be
interviewing him soon.
And, I couldn’t ask any of them, because you went online, and
basically answered all of them, on Twitter. So, if you search
@tferriss, two R’s, two S’s, and @sivers, you will see – or, you
could just look at my tweet, and then all the various responses, and
then Derek’s responses to almost all of them, you can get an
encore performance.

Derek Sivers:

Well, I just thought we weren’t going to get to all of those
questions, so I’d better answer them with a tiny punchline.

Tim Ferriss:

Yeah, no, fantastic. Well, Derek, as always, so much fun to jam,
we need to spend more time in person soon, and thanks so much
for taking the time.

Derek Sivers:

Great, of course.

Tim Ferriss:

Alright, and everybody listening, thank you all for listening,
department of redundancy department.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

And, the show notes, as always, you can find for all episodes at
fourhourworkweek.com/podcast, for this episode specifically, at
fourhourworkweek.com/Derek.
Until next time, thank you for listening.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

