The Tim Ferriss Show Transcripts
Episode 87: Sam Harris, Part 2
Show notes and links at tim.blog/podcast
Tim Ferriss:

Hello, boys and girls. This is Tim Ferriss and welcome to another
episode of The Tim Ferriss Show, where I interview and
deconstruct world-class performers. This episode is a special
episode. It is a Round 2 with Sam Harris – H-A-R-R-I-S – who is a
neuroscience Ph.D. and the author of many bestselling books,
including “The End of Faith,” “The Moral Landscape,” “Free
Will,” “Waking Up,” and “Lying.” His work has been discussed in
many different places, ranging from The New York Times to
Scientific American, Nature, many journals, Rolling Stone, etc.
In the last episode together, we explored the science of lying, the
uses and different types of meditation, psychedelic drug use,
spiritual experiences, and much more. But it’s really broadly a
discussion of the human experience. In this, Round 2, we dig even
deeper into all sorts of fascinating topics, because you all
submitted questions and voted nearly 19,000 times on almost 700
questions. And Sam is going to answer your top questions.
So before we get to that, just want to tell you where to find more
on Sam. It’s samharris.org. He has some great guided meditations
and other essays. He’s also @samharrisorg on Twitter, so please
say hello and let him know what you thought of this episode. And
without further ado, please enjoy Round 2 with Sam Harris.

Sam Harris:

Hey, Tim and Tim’s many fans. Hi, this is Sam Harris. I’m very
happy to be doing this Q&A for my buddy, Tim Ferriss; who,
among other things, has inspired me to do my own podcast. So,
thank you, brother. Tim has sent me to a Google doc file or
actually, Google moderator, which ominously says that it will
disappear on June 30th. I think entire piece of software is going to
disappear. So I will answer your questions now. There have been
almost 19,000 votes on almost 700 questions, from over 1,000
people, 1,168 people.
So that’s a nice response. I’ve looked this over a little bit. There
are some good questions here. I think there’s probably a founders’
effect where the early questions to get voted up at the ones that
everyone reads and seems to like and they get voted on. The
questions that got added to the mix much later have far fewer eyes

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

on them, so it’s a bit of an illusion, I think, so that these are the
most popular. But I will start with the most popular and maybe dig
around at the bottom of the list at some point.
“What are five books you think everyone should read?” This is
from Matt in Houston. This is a hard question. I just went to my
shelves to get some ideas, but there are just so many good books in
all my areas of interest. I’ll probably name more than five. One
book I recommend on philosophy, just to get your bearings, is
Bertrand Russell’s “A History of Western Philosophy.” Bertrand
Russell, as you surely know, is one of the great philosophers of his
time and just a remarkably clear thinker and writer.
Just a great example of how English should be written and just a
great voice to have in your head as a result. Being a philosopher
himself, he was quite opinionated about the very schools and
traditions in philosophy. It’s a fun read, provided you care about
the history of Western philosophy. I also recommend Derek
Parfit’s book, “Reasons and Persons,” which is just brilliant and
written as though by an alien intelligence. It’s a deeply strange
book filled with thought experiments that bend your intuitions left
and right.
It’s just a truly strange and unique document and incredibly
insightful about morality and questions of identity and well worth
reading if you are of a philosophical cast of mind. I also am a big
fan of Thomas Nagle’s earlier work. Thomas Nagle is a
philosopher of mind and a moral philosopher.
Of late, unfortunately, he’s made some slightly crazy noises about
evolution and some annoying defenses of religion. He wrote a
review of my book, “The Moral Landscape” that I thought was
fairly wrong-headed. But his earlier stuff is great and I actually
align with him on questions related to consciousness and the
philosophy of mind, in general, more than align with people like
Dan Dennett, with whom I have more of a relationship. And Nagle
is a very fine writer, a very clear. Just as a style of communication,
I think he’s worth going to school on.
I would recommend you read his little book, “The Last Word,”
which champions rationality in a very compelling way. Also, he
has a book called “Mortal Questions,” which is a collection of
essays. There are some very good essays in there that were very
influential in philosophy and should be more influential in the
culture, generally. He introduces a concept of moral luck, for
instance, which very few people think about it.
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I think it’s very important, ethically. It boils down to this: if you
imagine someone texting while driving and killing some
pedestrians. What should happen to that person? Well, this person
is very likely doing something that you or your best friend or your
sister will do later this afternoon. All right? This person is
behaving not in an egregiously irresponsible way; although we
may ultimately decide that about texting while driving. I think we
probably should. I think it is egregiously irresponsible, but yet
many, many millions of people are doing it. It’s not viewed in the
same way as drunk driving.
It should be but it isn’t and this person is guilty of doing something
that you and your friends very likely do from time to time, if not
incessantly. And yet this person is so unlucky, that he is the guy or
the gal who is going to run over a child in a crosswalk and spend
the rest of his life in prison, perhaps or many years in person,
having his life ruined by having caused so much suffering for
others based on his negligence.
The concept of moral luck is this: managing to be moral, managing
to function well in the world entails a certain amount of luck and
there are people who get very unlucky and wind up doing things
that have hugely negative consequences. It seems to me we should
factor that in in how we punish people. In any case, it’s a very
interesting and useful concept and I think there should be a space
in our conversation about morality that more or less fits this shape
and I think Nagle is the first person to put a name to it. There is
significant luck involved in living a moral life and that fact itself
has moral significance. So moving on from philosophy, I think
everyone should read the Holy Koran.
Very few of you have read the Koran. Many of you have heard me
make unpleasant assertions about it. Read it. It’s much shorter than
the Bible. You can read it in a weekend and you will be informed
about the central doctrines of Islam in a way that you may not be
and it’s good to be informed, given how much influence these
ideas have currently in our world. Actually, there’s another work
of philosophy here. Sort of philosophy/science that I’ve been
greatly influenced by of late.
The philosopher, Nick Bostrom, wrote a book called
“Superintelligence,” which has impressed many people for the
thoroughness with which he has argued that we have a serious
problem looming with respect to the birth of intelligent machines.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

There have been many books on this topic and there are other good
books: “Our Final Invention” by James Barrett is also good.
But “Superintelligence” is really the clearest book I’ve come
across that makes the case that the so-called “control problem,” the
problem of building human level and beyond artificial intelligence
that we can control, that we can know in advance will converge
with our interests, that’s truly a difficult and important task
because we will wind up building this stuff by happenstance if we
simply keep going in the direction we’re headed.
Unless we solve this problem in advance and have good reason to
believe that the machines we are building are benign and their
behavior predictable, even when they exceed us in intelligence, a
thousand, a million or a billion-fold, this is going to be a
catastrophic intrusion into our lives that we may not survive. A
very interesting topic; I’ve been getting more and more into it. I’m
actually in the middle of writing a short book myself with a
collaborator on it. I’ll say more about that when that book is
further along.
So yeah, read Bostrom’s book. It’s a little dense for the uninitiated,
but it really repays study. There’s a writer – William Ian Miller –
who I think is unfairly neglected. He writes some fascinating
books. Several have been on negative emotions. One book is
entitled “Humiliation,” which was a great read. Just on the
phenomenon of being humiliated and differentiating it from
embarrassment and other similar emotions. He also wrote a book
on disgust called “The Anatomy of Disgust,” which is also fun.
These are very interdisciplinary books.
He is a lawyer, I believe or a professor of law. But he goes deep
into the relevant sociology and these are cool books. I suspect
many of you want recommendations on books about meditation
and spiritual experience. There’s no book out there that is free of
the superstition and religiosity you tend to get with books about
Buddhism or Advaita Vedanta, the Hindu teachings of non-duality.
I can’t really recommend those books without caveat. I wrote the
book that I think needed to exist, “Waking Up,” which was my last
book. I am reluctant to include my own book in a list of books
everyone should read, however. But there was a reason why I
wrote that book, because there’s really no book I could point
rational people, students of science, critics of religious mumbo
jumbo, with a clear conscience. There are certainly books written
by wiser yogis and mediators and more experienced ones that I am
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

or am ever likely to be, but they are, as I said, mingled with a fair
amount of woo.
So with that caveat in mind, I will recommend “In the Dzogchen
Tradition,” which if you’ve read Waking Up, you know is the
center of the bull’s eye as far as meditative wisdom. There’s one
book called The Flight of the Garuda, which I think is especially
beautiful and wise.
And among the Hindus who teach Advaita Vedanta, the non-dual
teachings of yogic meditation that really just talks about pure
consciousness and the illusion of the self – don’t be confused about
the assertion of the existence of the big Self, capital S. They’re just
talking about awareness in that case. But the book “I am That” by
Sri Nisargadatta Maharaj, who was a guru in Bombay in the ‘60s,
‘70s. I think he died in the mid-‘80s, I believe, around ‘87. I never
met him. I studied with one of his students.
He was an incredibly clear and amusingly irascible guru. He said a
few crazy things, as many gurus do. But if you stick to what he
was claiming about the nature of experience, I think you’re on firm
ground and that book is very accessible and it’s in dialogue format.
So I’ve given you more than five books and I haven’t covered
many other interesting areas like neuroscience or psychology or
really any science. I guess Bostrom’s book is technically science,
in addition to philosophy. But I’ve given you enough to chew on.
Oh, I’m sorry, William Ian Miller is also treading on science there.
Actually, another book comes to mind. Many of you probably
know that I spend a fair amount of time thinking about people’s
misbehavior – just how spectacularly wrong things can go in our
world.
If you want to see what it’s like when things go about as wrong as
they can go, read “Machete Season,” which is a short book about
the Rwandan genocide that is, if I recall correctly, entirely borne of
interviews with some of the main perpetrators of this genocide. So
not merely the people who were swinging the machetes, but the
people who were running those gangs and enforcing people’s
membership therein.
So these were people who were ordering Hutus who wouldn’t kill
their Tutsi neighbors to be killed. There was an immediate and
ultimate penalty paid for not collaborating in these gangs. I believe
they were called Interahamwe. Forgive me if that pronunciation is
terrible. This is a fascinating and harrowing book because these
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

were, at least the people they chose to interview, rather
disconcertingly smart, introspective guys who have totally clear
consciences with respect to what they did. It is amazing to get into
their heads.
They invite you in there and they give you the full tour. It is
uncanny that circumstances can come together culturally,
neurophysiologically and otherwise so as to produce this kind of
behavior again with a clear conscience.
These guys were just unhappy to be have been caught and to have
landed in jail, but you really get the sense that they would do this
over and over again. Their behavior really survived Nietzsche’s
principle of eternal recurrence. They would be happy to live in a
universe where they’d do this an endless number of times because
it was clearly the right thing to do from their point of view. So it is
a short book and a very sobering one worth reading, if you can
stomach that sort of thing. Okay, on to the next question.
“In the End of Faith,” you briefly discuss the ethics of having
children and the evidence that parents are less happy and less
productive than their child-free counterparts. Why did you decide
to have children?” From Benjamin Lithgow in Beverly,
Massachusetts. I guess there are two possible answers. One is it’s
just a failure to be emotionally moved by the data. There are
certain things you may understand to be true, but you just can’t
make their being true emotionally relevant enough to have it guide
your behavior.
That’s one explanation. I don’t think it’s the most likely, in my
case. I actually feel like it’s more a matter of my feeling based on
who I am and who I’m married to and what she wanted and what I
wanted, that we were very likely to be exceptions to the rule.
There’s no doubt a certain amount of self-deception, if not
delusion, on offer there when you begin looking at scientific data
and imaging that it doesn’t apply to you. But in our case, I think
we stood a very good chance of being happy parents, having happy
kids and being glad that we were parents and finding the
alternative, at least retrospectively, unthinkable. And that’s sort of
where we are. I’m a very happy father. I love my daughters. The
idea that I might not have had them does seem unthinkable now.
But I’m also aware that having them has created forms of suffering
that we wouldn’t otherwise know. We’ve certainly given hostages
to Fortune, as someone, I think it was Francis Bacon, said. You
worry about the future; you worry about all sorts of things that you
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

would be quite insouciant about if you were just on your own
living out your adulthood productively. So it’s not without its
downsides, but even the downsides have a silver lining, or many of
them do. I think being concerned about the future because you
have kids is good ethically and it does lead to a kind of
productivity that might not otherwise be available. In fact, I was
just at this conference on artificial intelligence, where the main
agenda was to try to get a handle on its dangers and the pressing
issue of the control problem that I just mentioned.
One of the organizers, in fact, the main funder of the conference,
Jaan Tallinn, one of the founders of Skype, said that when talks to
people about this issue, he asks only two questions to sort of get an
understanding of whether the person he’s talking to is going to be
able to grok just how pressing a concern artificial intelligence is.
The first is, “Are you a programmer?” the relevance of which is
obvious. And the second is, “Do you have children?” He claims to
have found that if people don’t have children, their concern about
the future isn’t sufficiently well-calibrated so as to get just how
terrifying the prospect of building super-intelligent machines is in
the absence of having figured out the control problem.
I think there’s something to that. It’s not limited, of course, to
artificial intelligence. It spreads to every topic of concern. To
worry about the fate of civilization in the abstract is harder than
worrying about what sorts of experiences your children are going
to have in the future. And in a future that hopefully extends beyond
your own.
You can certainly tell a story about all the work you’re not able to
accomplish because you’re busy changing diapers or pushing your
kids on the swings, but there’s other work that you do connect with
in a way that you might not otherwise. I have certainly noticed that
in myself. One of my great jobs, honestly at this point, is pushing
my daughters on the swings. So there’s a lot to be said for having
kids and that really is not a rejoinder to the research that suggests
that people are made, for a very long time, reliably less happy as
parents. You can find this in Daniel Gilbert’s work on effective
forecasting, which he summarized in a book “Stumbling Upon
Happiness,” which is also a good book which I recommend.
So Question 3: “Why have you stopped doing public debates? Is
there anyone you would like to debate?” Well, I haven’t so much
as stopped as I haven’t been offered one that has made any sense
of late.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

And I also haven’t been doing much public speaking. This goes
back to all the work I’m not doing because I’m a father. I just don’t
like leaving my family at this point. So there has to be a good
reason for me to get on a plane and go somewhere to stand at a
lectern and argue with someone about God or anything else. So it
really has to be a debate that is compelling where I’m not merely
going to repeat myself with someone against whom I feel like I’m
going to make points that make a difference. It really has to be
worth it.
So I don’t actually know who I would debate in the usual vein if
you’re talking about debating religion versus science or religion
versus atheism. A little of those debates goes a long way at this
point, so it just has to be worth it. I would debate people on other
topics, and have tried to engineer debates that seemed worth it.
Those often fall through. Often I’m trying to do that in writing
because it allows for more precision and doesn’t require travel.
And so I have a few of those on my blog and quite an ill-fated
attempt with Noam Chomsky recently. But I am trying to have
difficult conversations that I now don’t tend to think of as debates.
The debate format is not really a good context in which to make
progress on these issues. It’s a foregone conclusion that the
participants in the debate are not going to have their mind changed
and it really is not about even having a semblance of a
conversation. You are colliding and deliberately not changing your
mind. In many cases, deliberately not even noticing the other
person’s point if you’re a dishonest debater in the presence of
others who can be swayed one way or another. So it’s all about the
audience experience. It’s not about having an honest conversation.
At least most people approach it that way.
I’ve never really approached it that way. I’ve just known the kinds
of things I’ve been debating are not the kinds of things I’m likely
to be swayed on. So standing up there with William Lane Craig,
what were the chances that he was going to say something that was
going to convince me that I should fall on my knees and give
myself over to Jesus Christ as my savior? It wasn’t likely. So it’s
not that it’s impossible, but it’s setting the bar pretty high. On other
topics where I’ve had a debate, I really have approached it as a
circumstance where I may very well change my mind in real time
in front of the audience and I would be thrilled to be able to do
that.
To some degree, that did happen in this exchange I wrote with
Maajid Nawaz, which is coming out under the title “Islam the
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

Future of Tolerance.” It’s a book coming out in the fall. That is a
circumstance where yeah, it’s much more of a conversation,
though many people will view it as something of a debate.
So I think debate is the wrong frame, but I am into having difficult
conversations. But again, I try to have them more and more
remotely. At some point that will change and it certainly change on
any given weekend if I have the right interlocutor. As far as
anyone I would like to debate, there are people who I have
challenged to debate on these issues and they haven’t accepted the
challenge or they’ve accepted it only to then disappear. Francis
Collins, is someone who I’ve gone after before. He’s declined to
debate me for understandable reasons.
There’s no percentage in it for him. He’s the head of the NIH. Why
does he want to be on stage with me, having his totally illegitimate
commitment to evangelical Christianity exposed as unscientific in
all the ways that he wants to pretend it’s scientific? There’s no
reason for him to do that. So I don’t take it personally.
I think there are many people who don’t want to be in that situation
for understandable reasons. Many people have urged me to debate
Robert Pape, who is a scholar or is often believed to be a scholar of
terrorism. He’s looked at all the terrorist incidents in recent history
and categorized them in various ways that has made it seem like
terrorism has nothing to do with Islam or religion and has
everything to do with politics and nationalism. Many people have
thrown Pape’s work at me as a rejoinder to everything I’ve said
about the link between Islamic extremism and Muslim violence,
Muslim terrorism.
So I offered to debate Pape. He agreed. I announced it publicly.
We were going to do this in writing and then he disappeared and
disappeared in such a way that he – is he alive? I don’t know. I’m
sorry if he’s dead and I’ve just castigated the man’s ghost, but I
think he’s very much alive and he just disappeared.
And that happened with David Eagleman, the neuroscientist. He
does very interesting work scientifically. He’s a very nice writer.
He said some deeply silly things about religion and atheism. So
many readers wanted the two of us to get together and debate those
things. He agreed to debate and then at some point declined. So it’s
not the easiest thing in the world to find the right people to debate,
but I’m certainly open to it and I’m open to suggestions. The goal
is to not bore myself and everyone else. So not every suggestion
makes sense.
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

“Could you talk about one of your differences with Hitch?” That
is, Christopher Hitchens. “Specifically his pro-life stance. Do you
believe he was mistaken?” Now Hitch – it could be that I’m
unaware of everything Hitch said about abortion, but from what I
recall, I don’t think it’s fair to call him pro-life.
I think he said that he found abortion, depending on the stage at
which it occurs in pregnancy, to be a serious ethical concern and
not to be entered into lightly. I certainly agree with that. I would
never call myself pro-life. I’m certainly pro-choice in the
conventional sense, but I don’t think anyone should be eager to
have a late-term abortion and I can’t imagine anyone is. Now
where one draws the line between it being a trivial loss of a few
dozen cells and something more akin to a murder of an infant,
that’s not obvious. The convention of breaking a pregnancy into
three trimesters and considering the first 12 weeks to be more or
less a time in which one is free without any ethical concern to
choose to terminate a pregnancy, I don’t know that there is a
neurologically principled stand to take there.
I’m not close to this developmental literature at this point. I don’t
know what we know about the possibility of suffering at each
week past conception. Any line you draw is going to see arbitrary
if you’re a day on either side of that line. There’s no way to escape
the sense of these landmarks being arbitrary. But I’m certainly prochoice and I think if a woman really wants to terminate her
pregnancy, more often than not there’s a very good reason why she
would and that’s not a child you want to bring into the world. A
woman can’t be forced to have a child and put it up for adoption.
The ethical ballast is all on the side of the freedom for a woman to
choose what to do with her body. But at a certain point, it is
obvious it’s not merely her body. You’re talking about now a
creature increasingly like a newborn infant who can feel pain and
who has interests of some sort.
Where they become fully human interests, at the moment I don’t
know a better line to draw than the viability of the fetus outside the
body. So at 22 weeks or so, you’re talking about something that is,
for all intents and purposes, just a premature infant that could be
delivered at that point and survive. I know people who have had
infants that premature who, after a few months in the NICU, are
now wonderful children who are fully intact. A third trimester
abortion is problematic, ethically. I don’t know how someone finds
themselves in that situation.
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I think that’s kind of the salad of concerns I just served you is what
Hitch was thinking about, if I’m not mistaken. I think I share his
view. More book recommendations. If you haven’t read
Christopher Hitchens, you should. He was a brilliant writer and
also a brilliant speaker. You should watch him on YouTube.
You can get the benefit of both his voice and his writing if you
listen to his audiobooks, the ones he read himself. “God is Not
Great,” and “Hitch-22” are two of those. I don’t know if he read
any of the others. But it’s great listening. That last question was
from Gentry in Austin, Texas.
Next question: “What fact/event has made you change your mind
about a topic recently?” That’s from – forgive for this
pronunciation – spelled H-R-O, Hro. Is that actually a name from
Sweden? Hro. I don’t know how to pronounce your name, but
you’ve come from Sweden. What have I changed my mind about
recently? Well, sorry to go back to this attractor, but artificial
intelligence is something that I never thought much about.
When I did think about it, I had more or less bought the line that
either hadn’t panned out or wasn’t likely to in any timeframe that
should motivate us to think about its dangers. I have now gotten
religion on that topic. I’m not a conventional fan of the singularity.
I’m not somebody who’s awaiting these changes with Kurzweilian
glee. I’m referring to Ray Kurzweil, whose work most of you
probably know. If we can do this well, obviously huge benefits
will come from building artificial general intelligence. Everything
that’s good in our lives is more or less the result of human
intelligence.
So intelligence is almost an intrinsic good. We want more of it if
we can have it. But the question is how do you get there without
inadvertently building an angry little god in a box that takes no
more concern over your interests than we take over the interests of
snails and cockroaches and ants?
It sounds like pure science fiction, but when you get into the
details, you see that not only is this a plausible set of concerns, we
are on collision course with this reality unless we destroy ourselves
some other way. It’s like we stand in front of two doors. Door
No. 1, you open that and you find that we have destroyed ourselves
for some reason and not invented artificial general intelligence. We
had a global nuclear war; we had an incident of bioterrorism that
created a global pandemic that set civilization back 300 years; or
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

we had an economic catastrophe that did the same thing and we
just now no longer know how to build computers or improve their
software.
But absent that, Door No. 2 is we continue to make progress on
hardware and software. At a certain point, this progress gets into
the end zone of super human level intelligence.
And then those intelligent systems themselves make the further
progress. Then you get what’s called an intelligence explosion, or
the singularity. There’s, again, a lot to say about this. But I was
convinced until somewhere around New Year’s of this year that all
of that either may not happen or is likely some species of technoreligious bullshit that I didn’t have to pay attention to. My mind
has totally changed on that point.
Okay, next question. This is from Urban Nomad in Portugal: “I
have never heard Sam Harris explain his morning ritual. Usually
you ask this question, Tim. But on your podcast, you didn’t ask
Sam. I would especially love to know what his meditation ritual is.
Is it daily? How long? At what time does he wake up?” Okay.
Well, I think I’m going to have an embarrassingly sloppy response
to this.
What I do is I get up in the morning and then I more or less break
all of the wise and helpful rules that Tim has laid out for us. I
check my email. I get, from time to time, perturbed and derailed by
it. Which is to say I get handed something that is not on my to-do
list, but is on someone else’s to-do list. And then I do that thing for
the better part of the morning. I break all the rules. But I think
Tim’s advice is good and I take it when I have my wits about me.
The piece of advice I now take more often than not is when I get to
my desk to do the one thing that if done would make the day truly
productive. So I’m often focused on the one most important thing
when I hit my desk now. So that’s part of the ritual. That often
comes early and it often comes before I would meditate.
So I would get up at 6:00 or 7:00, or 8:00 is probably the latest,
depending on how late I’ve gone to sleep the night before. I’m not
a great sleeper. Then I sometimes will just make a cup of tea or
coffee and just go straight to my desk. Sometimes I’ll meditate
first. But again, there’s no ritual. What you should have in your
mind is a picture of controlled chaos. These are not the smoothly
oiled gears of a well-calibrated machine. This is somebody
staggering out of his bedroom in search of caffeine and he may or
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

may not have checked his email before the whistle on the kettle
blew. But I do meditate frequently and certainly try to make that
every day. I’ve been in various modes. That’s another influence of
having kids, depending on how old your kids are and how many
you have of them. It can be hard to hold to any real structure.
But I do sit for anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes, somewhat
reliably every day. There have been periods of my life when I’ve
dropped that. I think probably the longest has been a few months
where I’ve stopped meditating in the last going on 30 years. But
for the most part, I’ve been a daily meditator for 30 years. This has
taken various forms. There were periods where I did a lot of
retreat, so then I would come back into daily life and mediating for
an hour or two or even more a day was just a very easy thing to do,
having come from a context of weeks and months where I was
meditating 12 to 18 hours a day and not having the same kinds of
responsibilities that I have now.
I would say that meditating regularly every day is I think a very
important thing to do. In my case, it didn’t really become useful,
which is to say it really didn’t become true meditation, until I had
sat my first one or two intensive retreats.
I remember the experience clearly. I don’t remember if it came
after the first – I think it came after the first 10-day Vipassana
retreat. I think I’d been very disciplined and been sitting an hour
every day in the morning for a year before I sat my first 10-day
retreat. I remember looking back over that year at some point,
somewhere around the middle of my first Vipassana retreat and
realizing that I had just been more or less thinking with my legs
crossed every hour that I had practiced that year. This is not to say
that’s true of all of you who are practicing meditation without ever
having gone on a retreat, but it’s very likely true of many of you.
It’s hard to build enough concentration in your daily life to really
connect with mindfulness or with whatever practice you’re doing.
Every silent retreat is a crucible where you can develop enough
energy and attention to break through to another level where you
see what the practice really is about and what you need to be
noticing to be paying attention.
That experience of breaking through to deeper levels continues to
happen. As I write about in my book, “Waking Up,” the crucial
level for me is the insight that the self, as we imagine it to be
doesn’t exist. The sense that there’s an ego, a self in the center of
consciousness. The one who is doing the meditating, the one who
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

is paying attention, the point behind your eyes from which you
would pay attention to the breath or to a mantra or to any object of
meditation, that point is a fiction. There is no point there behind
your eyes. There’s just a field of consciousness. And everything
that you can notice is arising in it and arising as a perturbation of
consciousness. It is being noticed effortlessly by consciousness
itself without a center.
And so for me now, mindfulness is a matter of cutting through the
illusion of a center, cutting through the illusion of the self. And
when you have that insight, then daily practice does have a
different character. It’s not as dependent upon concentration, and
therefore it’s not as dependent upon building up enough
concentration to have sustained attention so that you can feel that
your mindfulness is really connecting with experience in a deep
and sustained way. You’re then able to – the moment you look –
see the deepest and most profound thing you are ever going to see
on a three-month retreat, say.
So then sitting for five minutes here and there throughout the day
can be quite profound in a way that it might not be – almost
certainly won’t be – if you don’t know what to look for and you’re
just trying to pay attention to the breath.
That’s not to say that sitting for five minutes paying attention to
the breath is a bad thing to do; it’s a great thing to do. It’s the
preliminary practice for anything else I would recommend. It’s just
a way of saying that now the way I think the way I should practice
would be to sit for some period during the day for 20 minutes or a
half an hour. But to then sit for a minute or two every hour, I find
myself essentially doing that without having a timer or any kind of
mechanism that enforces it. But there are experiences I have where
I am essentially enforcing a kind of meditative clarity. Whether
I’m pushing my daughters on the swing or whatever it is.
There’s no difficulty in doing that. So I view practice as not being
very separate from life at this point. But it’s also true to say that
most of my life is too distracting. Most of my work is too
distracting. Most of what I’m doing with my attention is too
distracting for me to have any pretense of calling that meditation.
I am lost in thought most of the time. But an ability to cut through
the illusion really is available and it punctuates my day, more or
less no matter what I’m doing. So I hope that wasn’t a totally
confusing answer to this question. The picture you should get is of
somebody who does not have quite as much structure in his
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

various enterprises as he should, but I’m still managing to get most
of what I want to get done, done. I am not miserable. Other things
that fall into the pattern of ritual might be exercise. I think that’s
probably of interest to Tim’s audience, to an unusual degree. I try
to do something more or less every day. Probably I do that at least
five, maybe six days a week. Whether it’s going to the gym and
lifting weights or doing martial arts or climbing stairs. I have a few
different things I do to keep fit.
Half of them also injure me, so let’s say there are diminishing
returns here. But usually sometime in the afternoon I work out.
Often my meditation is in the afternoon as well. I often try to do it
outside. If you know anything about Dzogchen, you know that
Dzogchen yogis often use the sky as kind of a support for practice.
You meditate with your eyes open looking at a clear sky or any
place where you can see the horizon. I do like to practice that way.
I don’t always get a chance to do it, but I find that clears the head
in a very useful way.
Also, sitting outside for me is good because I have tinnitus, so
silence is not great for me now because it seems to tune up this
ringing in my ears, or at least make it something that I can’t help
but focus on. It’s not clear to me that focusing on it isn’t actually
turning up the gain on it, which is not something I want to have
happen.
Many people have asked me, many people have written to me
about questions about how to practice with tinnitus. I recommend
having some ambient noise: sitting outside, hearing the wind or
waves or traffic or whatever it is, makes it much easier to not be
focused on what is, for many of us, an intrinsically unpleasant
sound which you're worried about tuning up. So being out in the
world is not bad. Otherwise, I would recommend background
music if your tinnitus is really driving you crazy.
This is not to say that one can’t have equanimity with this sound, I
think it’s rational to worry that focusing on it too much could make
it louder in some real sense, which is to say actually increase the
activity of those misfiring neurons. There are a bunch of questions
on brain health and smart and smart drugs and related matters.
There’s one question here: “If you had to recommend one thing for
brain health and you couldn't say mediation or exercise, what
would you recommend?” And that’s from Ronin Filmer in
Southern California. I haven’t spent much time trying to separate
the hype from the real science here. The one thing that I have heard
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

about and take with some regularity, not every day, but
occasionally is concentrated turmeric or cumin I think is what it’s
called. And I take that rather often and that has been shown to have
some protective effect against dementia.
But again, I spend very little time reading about any of this and
have assumed that most of what people take in this area – gingko
biloba and all the rest – is either no science behind it or the science
has shown no effect. When I have looked, I have often found that’s
the case. And then we have these recent stories, where you can’t
even rely on the manufacturers to put the supposedly important
agent in the pills.
So you’re eating sawdust or some other crap that has been put in
gelatin capsules. So these recent reports of testing what’s on the
shelves at GNC and elsewhere have been pretty alarming. It’s
something like 40 percent contained none of the ingredients
advertised, something on that order. So you can’t even know what
you’re taking in many cases. So I tend not to take supplements of
any kind – cumin aside.
Sometimes I take Vitamin D3. But I’ve been convinced by the
research that has shown that for the most part, multivitamin
supplementation is a bad idea. It actually seems to raise mortality
from a number of causes for reasons not specified, but suggest that
no one is really running low on these vitamins in their diet and
taking them in excesses is toxic in some ways.
So I’m certainly open – as you think know – I’m a big booster of
science and I’m waiting for science to deliver all of the things we
want to bathe our brains and bodies in so as to live the best
possible lives. But I’m not aware of much in that area that has
obvious benefits. I think probably getting enough sleep should be
on the short list of good things to do for your brain. Again, there I
also fail. On one level, wisdom is nothing more than the ability to
take your own advice. It’s actually very easy to give people good
advice; it’s very hard to follow the advice you know that is good.
If someone came to me with my list of problems, I would be able
to sort that person out very easily. One recommendation would be,
“Be a little more disciplined about how you protect your sleep.” So
I will struggle to follow that. Merely having to answer these
questions I have a feeling is going to impose far greater wisdom
and rigor on my life.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I think I will answer these questions very differently a year from
now. I’ll be scheduled down to five-minute increments and doing
everything I think I should do up front. Now I’m going to go
deeper into these pages, trying to get some questions that have
been perhaps unfairly ignored.
Your first book, “The End of Faith,” featured a blistering attack on
religious moderates. Now, however, you strive to encourage
religious moderation in the Islamic world. Have you therefore
changed your mind about religious moderation?” This is from Jeff
Bak in Toronto. Well, that’s a good question. I can see a basis for
confusion there. Religious moderation has always been better, in
some sense, than religious fundamentalism. I’ve never denied that.
It’s just that I’ve argued that religious moderates, because they
insist that we respect religious faith and respect the claim that
certain books were inspired by omniscient deities, etc.
They provide shelter for religious fundamentalism and religious
extremism. They provide a context in which we can’t adequately
criticize really dangerous religious dogmatism. It’s the religious
moderates who, because they are religious in this very elastic and
noncommittal way, they are the ones who deny the link between
real religious commitment and certain forms of terrible
misbehavior. So it’s the religious moderates who say, “Oh, that’s
not the real Islam. The real Islam is a religion of peace.
Al Queda and ISIS, this not Islam, this is a perversion of the faith.
They’ve hijacked the faith.” Well, that’s not actually not an honest
analysis of why jihadists do what they do. Jihadists are as religious
as it gets and they are motivated explicitly by the Koran and the
Hadith.
And so it is among religious demagogues in other contexts. The
people who are behaving badly for religious reasons in most cases
really believe what they say they believe. So the moderate respect
for faith and the moderate confusion about what it’s like to really
believe in paradise just gives cover to fundamentalism. But if I
could turn all fundamentalists into moderates, of course I would do
that because moderation, by definition, is a lack of commitment to
the most retrograde and repellant and divisive doctrines in any
faith. It’s the moderate who looks at the Bible and sees all the stuff
in Leviticus and Deuteronomy that is more or less synonymous
with the most extreme form of theocracy and intolerance.
And he or she says, I don’t want to live that way; there’s no reason
to live that way. I’m just not going to pay attention to any of that.
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I’m not worried that God is going to send me to Hell for not
believing in it. I’ve got many other concerns beyond what this
book says that I take as foundational. So I’m just going to pick and
choose the wisdom in this book and I’m not going to spend any
time worrying about whether I have to kill my neighbor for
working on the Sabbath or stone his daughter to death if she turns
out not to be a virgin on her wedding night.
But the religious moderate tends not to honestly acknowledge that
those changes in his or her world view have come from outside the
faith. This is what science and secular politics and a notion of
human rights, just a larger conversation about what is good in life
and how we should order our world. This what all that has done to
religion. It has moderated it from the outside. And that’s a good
thing.
So I view moderation in the Muslim world as a traditional form of
religious commitment as it has been in the west. We need
moderation in some sense. But what we need even more than
moderation is a commitment to secularism, which is a specific
commitment. So I don’t argue so much for Muslim moderation, I
argue that we need a genuine and viable tradition of secularism in
the Muslim world. And secularism is simply a commitment to
keeping religion out of politics and public policy. So you contract
be as crazy as you want in the privacy of your own mind or in the
privacy of your own life with respect to religion.
To be secular, however, you have to be willing to keep that
craziness within the walled garden of your own life and not impose
it on anyone else. And so the moment you begin saying, well, my
faith tells me that homosexuals shouldn’t marry.
It’s not merely that you’re talking about yourself. You're talking
about what your neighbor should and shouldn't be able to do based
on your faith. Then you're not being secular. So you can hate
homosexuals all you want. You can think homosexuality is an
abomination. It’s the disposition to force others to live by the lights
of your religious worldview that really has to be opposed and has
to be opposed especially in the Muslim world at this point, because
the commitment to secularism there is almost nonexistent. That’s
not to say that everyone is a jihadist, but a majority of Muslims are
far less secular than the world needs them to be at this point. Then
again, if you want more on that topic, you can read my
forthcoming book with Maajid Nawaz. He was a former Islamist
and now he’s someone who argues with really wonderful clarity
about the need for a strong secular tradition in the Muslim world.
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

“Would you push the fat man in the trolley scenario. Do you think
a society could occupy a peak on the moral landscape if its
inhabitants would all push the fat man?” Well, that’s an interesting
question. This question, unfortunately, requires some explanation
if you are unaware of the fat man in question. So he’s referring to a
series of thought experiments called trolley problems, which have
been very influential in philosophy and increasingly influential in
the psychological and neuroscientific study of morality.
Because these problems are given as moral puzzles that people
need to think through and how they answer these questions says a
lot about them and we study people’s brains while they think
through problems of this sort. Trolley problems are the most used
in this research. The situation is this: you have a trolley coming
down a track and it’s on course to kill five workmen who are
working down track from it.
But you stand at a switch and you can throw this switch, diverting
the trolley onto another track where there’s only one workman and
you can’t save everybody, but you can decide to throw the switch
or decide not to. And the question is, do you throw the switch?
When given this problem, something like 95% of people say, “You
have to throw the switch. You’d be a monster not to throw the
switch.” People tend not to say that it’s noble not to get your hands
dirty there.” They don’t worry that you’re going to be a murderer
of that one person for throwing the switch.
No, you have saved a net four lives. And we tend to order our
society with that consequentialist view working in the background.
We tend to make choices where if there’s a tradeoff between
saving one live or five, we tend to want to save the five, all things
being equal. And that makes perfect sense, but if you describe the
trolley problem in another way, the response changes.
This other way classically is you imagine a footbridge over the
tracks. And now there’s a fat man standing on the bridge directly
over the track and you can push this man onto the track into the
path of the oncoming trolley, killing him obviously, but saving the
five workmen below. Now when people imagine this, they get a
very different feeling about what is entailed and something like
95% of people say no, no, you can’t push this guy to his death.
They consider it a monstrous act of evil to push this person to his
death, even if the intention and the effect is to save five lives.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

There are various explanations for this. Certain kinds of reasoning
and intuition come online here. You actually imagine touching a
person up close and personal as opposed to throwing a switch. And
that seems to change things. The question is, what is morally
normative here?
Should you want to be able to push the fat man without caring or
with as clear a conscience as you would throw that switch? I
happen to think there are certain artifacts here where people, if
only unconsciously worry that the mechanism isn’t the same here,
so that there’s maybe uncertainty about the physics and whether a
fat man is, in fact, fat enough to stop a trolley. Even if you
stipulate that oh, no, he will stop the trolley, our unintuitive
physics don’t track through it in the same way when we imagine
diverting it onto another path. But even if you overcome that, I
think there probably just is a difference between the idea of
touching a person and physically initiating his death in that way
and throwing a switch and initiating death at some distance. This,
obviously opens to other problems we have to think about – the
way we fight wars remotely with drones now is that making it
much easier to kill people?
Or even dropping bombs from airplanes, I think the jury is
probably not out on that any longer. It must be easier to kill people
– it is, in fact, easier to kill people by dropping bombs than it is by
stabbing them over and over again with a bayonet, but it’s also
morally easier to do it. You're less in touch with the details of the
death and destruction you're causing. This is a very interesting area
to think about, but the question is, the right answer is really the
consequentialist one. We should be committed to saving the most
number of lives, all things considered in each situation, so we
should push the fat man if we would throw that switch.
And we should throw that switch. So that’s the spirit of the
question. Would you push the fat man in the trolley scenario and
do you think a society could occupy a peak on the moral
landscape? Which is to say, could a society be as good as it could
possibly be if its inhabitants would all push the fat man? Which is
to say, if its inhabitants were all able to overcome the emotional
bias against causing this kind of death up close and personal? And
that’s a hard question to answer. The truth is, it may be good to
feel differently about the two cases. I think those situations where
you want to be callous for good reasons don’t extend to all of life.
I’m not a surgeon, and I’m happy I’m not one, given my
squeamishness in that area. But I can imagine that a surgeon has to
Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

have a very different attitude toward pain and suffering and the
prospect that the person on the table in front of him might die, then
the attitude of family members or that even he would have to
another person in the context of not performing his work as a
surgeon.
A surgeon has to be a little bit of a psychopath in terms of having
just a cold and calculating and purely instrumental view of the
person in front of him. That’s not to say that surgeons aren’t
committed to the wellbeing of their patients; they obviously are.
But there’s something that has to come offline and that something
is too much empathy. I think that’s incredibly useful for a surgeon
to be able to do that, table the empathy and just get the job done as
effectively as possible, but I don’t think you want a surgeon’s level
of clarity and lack of empathy all the time in your relations to
people.
So the situation isn’t bounded in any principal way. We’re often
going to be in a situation where the difference between pushing the
fat man and throwing the switch is the difference between the
contexts we’re in, in the world and to and to normalize all of them
to the same ethical standard would, I think, create a fair amount of
harm or at least close the door to kinds of experiences that we want
to have.
So it goes to the question of the role of empathy in our
relationships and in our life and where it needs to be reined in, in
the governance of public institutions and society and in areas
where we have to write laws and enforce them. It’s a difficult
question. I don’t know that I can generalize apart from saying that
we should be consequentialist across the board, but part of the
consequences of actions of this sort is that there may, in fact, be a
difference between pushing the fat man and throwing the switch in
many circumstances, and that’s not a difference we can get rid of.
So it just may cause more psychological suffering for the person
involved. Even if you push the fat man for the best of reasons,
knowing that it work, in that sense it’s exactly like throwing a
switch. The fact that you had the experience of running up to the
guy and shoving him and seeing the look on his face, etc. and you
didn’t just have the experience of throwing a switch, that may
haunt you for the rest of your life and there may be no way to
correct for that. So it is, in fact, a different phenomenon, even
though the body count at the end is the same.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

I think there may be no way to correct for that and maybe there
should be no way to correct for that, given all the other moving
parts. So, therefore, your consequentialism has to be broader than
just looking at body count. It has to account for the psychological
consequences and the lack of analogy between cases which do
have the same body count. So hopefully some of that made sense.
Anytime, Tim, I think I will leave it there.
It’s been a pleasure to be on your podcast yet again. I am your
worst student, but thanks again for everything you’re doing. I love
your podcast. I listen to it a lot and it is an honor to be on it and
until I next see you, be well.

Copyright © 2007–2018 Tim Ferriss. All Rights Reserved.

